O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear son, I have completed this book for you which is the end of the science of medicine along with its explanation, and I have made the end by its expositions and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is confined in our region and is foreign to all things everywhere, the science has perished and decayed, and nothing remains of it except small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from these (things) has come error and vanity, and intentions have been closed and knowledge has been alienated.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 It seems to me that I should revive it along with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will come together with the forms of iron cauteries and other instruments of work along with the alignment of the declaration and preparation of them as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who engages in this must be well-versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the function of the limbs, their forms and connections and separations of them; and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of joints, and the movement and resting places, and the direction of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name is not much, but with the work it is enough.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 Indeed, in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the matters stated, should take care to avoid making errors and not harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 as I have often wished for those who engage in this science, that they abandon their ignorance and lack of experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 For I saw a mad man who cut an abscess of scrofula or a woman's neck, and he cut the arteries of her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another madman who pulled an arrow from an old man's side, and the arrow was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 he took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another madman who treated the Duke of our land who had a broken leg and with the breakage had a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant madman tightened the break above the wound with strong splints, and did not allow any callus to form on the wound, but allowed it to end in this way.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And command that he does not dislocate [it] at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 and holds it until the leg is completely swollen and the feet come to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am called to come to him, and I hastened to come to dislocate his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But any corruption of the member is already confirmed and cannot be cured;
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the corruption does not cease to spread through the member until all the member is completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And a second eye, or other mirror, which collapses an abscess and then heats it through the malice of its lordship.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a boil, when it is filled with black bile, one should not touch it with iron unless it is in such a position that all the corrupted matter can be removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And because of this, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 meaning, labor where there is danger in many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in every place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 Therefore it is necessary that you take care so that the foolish do not speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 Take your weapons in your scabbard, and take care of your patients gently and firmly, and use the best way possible by the grace of God so that you may be saved and praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And leave incurable diseases with great regret.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your weapons from that which causes doubt and have faith in yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen said in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take care of bad disease, lest you be called a foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are about fire cauteries and removing the cautery of ague, and these chapters are ordered from the head to the feet.
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 and about the shapes of instruments, and about metal objects for cautery, and all that is necessary in work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blisters and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things.
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 and these chapters are ordered and show the shapes of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapter is about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the qualities of the aid, and the harm, are the longest words and most subtle science and secret responses.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and about this they spoke often by the wise ones, and agreed on this;
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 And I believe little of their words, for I doubt their length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that fire aid is universally used in every constitution where there is matter, regardless of the constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 This means hot constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In the hot and dry constitution together with matter, some spoke and said that fire aid is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 And others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that fire cautery is not good for sickness caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure a hot disease with heat or dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 and he who said the opposite stated that fire provides great aid for a hot and dry illness that comes in men's chest.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you will find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it occasionally by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And in every way, do not interfere unless those who have tested it and know through long experience the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and the outcomes and timing of their ailments.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 we have no fear of others' complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all mirrors agreed and conformed to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of cure, and of greater benefit than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not come outside the member being cooked, and harms no other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Burning medications come from one limb to another while aligning them, and bring diseases of severe healing to the affected limb.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 ...and possibly kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire for its intensity and goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 I have found this to be true through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is above the truth of things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And so I excuse myself for the length of the speech, because I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is reserved regarding fire, and the quality of the work, how it battles diseases of the body, as the philosopher says in demonstrating.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Receive [it] in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	Know, son, that they agreed on when cauterizations should be done and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm happening beneath is brought to light by the aid of cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And especially when cauterization is necessary for immediate relief, except when a greater harm cannot be delayed to come upon the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 Do not think this way, dear son, as foolish men do.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 for the disease which is cured by cautery has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say this.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 But it is not as they think, because cautery is not a remedy that changes the complexion, and dries up the humors causing pain; rather, it is more effective than medicine in terms of its speed of action and the virtue of its work and dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it is possible that the disease sometimes comes according to the constitution of the patient and the nature of the disease and its properties;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 and are accumulated in him the superfluidities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little superfluity and moisture, as cauterization for pain and similar things, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, and that is so;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that cauteries are valuable after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any disease, and they are ineffective, then we administer the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is worth noting that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not as the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are more pliable than those made of iron, and they did not say this for any reason other than the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and they said that the lead of the cautery does not cause putrefaction, but this is not always true as I have proven, and found it to be true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and gold cauteries are more pliable than iron ones, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And even when you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot be sure whether it is hot enough by the color of the gold, and it can suddenly cool.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if it is overheated.
si font au feu;	 it melts in the fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus it has enough obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use fire cautery, which has been prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered you this chapter on the head from neck to feet, because the veins will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is effective for both moist and cold conditions of the brain, and it can be used to treat a disease called "soda", as well as many humors that descend from the head into the eyes and ears, and for numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, sode (a term for brain swelling), apoplexy, and similar conditions.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The shape of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine cleansing the head 3 or 4 times, according to what the properties and age and accustomed state of the sick person can withstand.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 Then pour warm water over the patient's head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 And then make the patient sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on warm poultices;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After that place the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 And where your thumbs meet, if it bleeds, warm up the cautery called "olivar," as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And place it on its joint marked with ink, and do so while pushing and pulling your hand little by little in twisting;
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 then straighten your hand abruptly, and realign the joint if you see the bone protruding;
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 and if you do not see it, then continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 after take some silk and put it inside and soft cotton, and place it on the joint, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 afterwards place a piece of soft cotton in butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 and leave it until the burn is removed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmacon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the ancients said, when the wound is left open longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and for this reason, it helps to clean more.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said that the part of the bone should be burnt as much as possible with the cautery, and then the burnt area of the bone should be reattached and healed.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the cautery should be let rest for a long time and pressed as hard as the size of the weal that women put in their eyes because the fluids are expelled more.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and the wound should be left open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterwards it must be treated and bound up.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cautery do not seem to be good in every case, except for some men who have fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should let it drain.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 For the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to continuous solutions of nature, as we have testified in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And in the same way, when the head of the patient is weak by nature, and the first sign of cautery is more healing and beneficial for me, and from this practice I work to gather salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of old pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic and prolonged pain comes in the head, the patient should use herbs and pills called "cochineal" and purge of the head and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And if they perform the cautery as we have said before, it is not worth it.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Take care that the head of the patient is strong and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 Then cauterize below each ear bone of the head as previously said, and perform a cautery at the site called "vaselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and it is the place where leeches are placed.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 Align your hand so you cannot see to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The patient feels more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 The cauteries of the ear bones should be more subtle than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is their shape:
dou cautere dou chief	In the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When pain suddenly arises in one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the eyes are purged with medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases have been performed, but it does not help at all.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then one performs cauterization according to two ways, namely with medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cauterization with medicine is that you take an alum stone, strip the bark and place it on the affected area, and then make a small incision where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the alum stone under the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 And when it is put back in place, if it is held well and left for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then untie it and apply strong garlic oil to the wound, and leave the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then put a linen cloth soaked in butter on it as long as it can stay there.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the ointment has healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you want, do as I have written in some treatises on medicines that burn or the tenth treatment of medicines that burn.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery should be done as follows.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cauterization implement with the form given here:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 It is called "closed" because the head is shaped like a small box or barrel.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 and put it on the painful place, hold your hand and turn the fire a little bit lightly, until half of the coal's thickness is burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are outside, and let a plentiful flow of blood come out.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Put cotton on it with linen, and place it on the affected area for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then put dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you wish to cauterize this migraine with the cautery called "cultellare", at the tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this migraine which is not old.
de emigraine	Of emigraine (This line is difficult to translate with certainty due to its archaic language and potential abbreviations. A possible translation could be "from migraines" or "about migraines", but it's not entirely clear from the given text.)
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When treating migraines as we have previously said in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not suit this medicine or iron, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And in the same manner, on a line half a thumb's length deep, remove your hand once, and hold so as not to cut the artery and not reach the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And guard the jawbone that is closed when eating, and let the nerves have no sight but the closed one and let spasms not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting with great fear, especially to him who does not know, and who is not learned and experienced;
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 let the work proceed in its way;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it is found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery does not alleviate the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it in the same way as we have said, and heal the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 If you see an artery to extract, follow the instructions for the extraction of the artery with a cautery having two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear due to coldness does not improve with medications and other treatments as we have said in the division, and it persists, then heat this cautery which is called "poins", here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After puncturing all around the sick ear, or around both sides where the pain is located, move away a little from the root of the ear once you have marked the location.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 and have ten pricks around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the shoulder when it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	Torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The torture to be cured by fire is not for those that move due to fever, as we have said in the divisions of disease.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform cautery on similar cases coming from scorch and from nerve spasms.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When you cure this kind of torture that moves due to fever of the eyes and purges of the head and throat gargling, it is not worthwhile, therefore you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One in the root of the ear, and another a little distance from the temple, and the third in the corner of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make it cauterize towards the head of the ear a little below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as one finger.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 And let the cautery remain as long as half of the coal is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And its resemblance is like the surgeon's instrument that we have mentioned before, but it is slightly more subtle and the blade should be a bit larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the wound as I have said before, let it be healed completely.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 If apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauterizations.
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Two above the two forehead bones, one at the neck, and one in the place called "wounds," as we have said before, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And treat as we have said before.
de litargie	The bed for the paralytic.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 To this disease, you should give the patient large years and round pills made from the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 After cutting off the head of the patient entirely, place the mustard plaster on the occiput which is written or treated with mustard plasters.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is the method for the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If he [the patient] urinates in a good manner, it is well;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 and if he does not, you should perform three cauterizations on the head, descending from the neck to the throat, leaving a space of one finger's width between each.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat as others do, and if you see it necessary, and the patient is strong enough, perform a cauterization in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if necessary, it is to be placed between the two horns, and it is to be cured until it heals;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 and let the fire cautery, which is called "olivare", be as I have previously stated.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 The head should be cleansed for years and as we have previously said;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After the reign of the patient's head, then make the cautery in the head and on each horn, and twice on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 and if you have further need, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is outside, make four cauteries on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 let it remain until the deeper part is burned, and lower your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After the treatment when the patient is healed, apply the cautery that is called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cauteries except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to cleanse the brain with years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it's an infant who cannot tolerate it, give a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After the king's head has been boiled, apply the cautery as we have said before on the head and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 If the patient is strong and enduring, apply cautery as I said to someone with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let it be the "olivier" cautery as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if the cause of melancholy is the superfluity declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After the king (or head) of the patient.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 Make a sling from linen well made, like a circle, place it around the head (or neck).
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 and cross the patient over himself, holding him tightly from all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 Then apply the linen bandage, using old goat's butter.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 Heat it moderately, so that it is hot enough to be pressed onto him without causing pain.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After emptying the circle inside the head (or neck), let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this to the patient every week with good government, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or, if you wish to cauterize someone, make multiple pricks all over the cauterization implement.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cautery reduces (or relieves) the skull greatly.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 And then place cotton wool moistened with butter and linseed oil on it.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes begin to come first through the signs that I have said in the division, then commence and give the patient something purifying the head, and keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 Then tell him to lie down on his back, and make a fire-cautery in the head, and make two more cauteries on both temples where the defect of the eye or the eyes is, or one defect is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And apply the entire cautery to all veins and arteries that are beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And beware of the discharge of blood, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making incisions with caution, how to stop it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And sometimes they make a cautery or a hot iron under the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	The tears of the body
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed and are above the veins or have been removed from the arteries that are in the appearance of the forehead;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 And one sees that it is due to cold, fluid effusions; therefore, you shall perform the cautery that I have mentioned at the beginning of this chapter draining them:
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 Cauterize the head, and perform cauteries on both sides of the temples, and cauterize where there is pain beneath the bones;
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 If necessary, also cauterize carefully above the eyelid with small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The tears of the body within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When the medicine, as we have said in the division, does not work, then give the patient three warm cocktails.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After the king's head (another name for the swelling), perform a cautery or a mild olive oil cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 Perform two cauteries called "clavilis" above the eyelids, a little below the hairline;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery that you do not cover.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And here is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform the cauterization using this implement called "olivar.
de coi ci est li forme:	 This is the form (of the procedure):
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 If you wish to perform this fire cautery on the two warts as long as they are, like serpents;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and do not leave the hand except until the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes the hair of the eyes is converted into a gland and pricks the oil, and then one performs a fire cautery according to these two methods;
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 it means by fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are born and even, then put the patient in a healthy state.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 On top of the paper, draw a figure similar to the fennel seed cluster and mark the beginning of the sign along the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then put moistened cotton in egg white and ground pepper oil on it, then heat the fire cautery of this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 Cauterize at the figure you have marked several times, until the edge is burned.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And the signs of the operation's health are that you see the paper recede and the hairs lift at the oil's tip.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then lower your hand and let it rest for three days, then place moistened cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the ointment treatment until it heals.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And when hairs appear, and the paper is softened then start the cautery on that same spot again, as you did first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hairs have fallen off, then cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and the hairs do not prick the oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The medical cauterization is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and quicklime, one ounce each and grind them together well.
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 And make it quickly, so as not to cool it; then place the paper over the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 and if the patient holds it only in one eye, it should be treated in that one; and if in both, in both as well.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 and put cotton soaked in egg white under the eye.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The patient's shoulder should be in a good position and place your hand on the medicine showing upwards, and press the thumb and move it every time the patient feels the bite of the medicine, because it bites as much as fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the bite has passed, raise the shoulder and look to see if the paper is raised as it was by the constraint of fire or by an incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And if it is thus, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If that is not the case, reset the medicine on the place or the medicine has not worked yet, as long as your efforts are equal and your eyes placed correctly;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then put cotton wadded in butter on it until the wound heats up, afterwards cure the place of the ointment called "diaphanis" and other ones, until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to be careful about your work, keep a great distance from the eyes so that no medicine drips onto them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, start the treatment again on that place which was made soft by the paper properly, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Afterwards cure it until it is healed.
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And this is the shape of the fennel seed.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 Know that human eyes are diverse in size and smallness, according to your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And the straight path should not be replied to him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Treatment of a fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases and your treatments do not help, then you must perform cautery on it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to put his head in your lap;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 And the assistant should grasp the patient's head between his hands in such a manner that it does not move or lower its head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 Then place cotton wool soaked in egg white or linseed oil on top of it.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After heating the iron branding tool that is metal.
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 And press it against the head like the shape of a plumb bob, with the hot iron branding tool at the same time;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If it is seen, let it be pointed from one head to the other, and if it is seen, let it also be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, this which is placed at the head is moved for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After you have compressed the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus, then dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, open it, and draw out the pus forcefully;
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 Then place the hot iron cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery at the base of the nail so that your hands do not move.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 And put the cautery in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If that does not work, repeat the cautery again if you need to, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 Afterward place cotton wool dipped in butter on it, and the ointment of the desiccative cure until it is dry, and if forty days pass and it is not dry, put on a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And the king in accordance with what he will come to write in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a way of cauterizing a fistula which none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 Make an opening for the fistula and cut into it;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 Afterwards put in the fissure the camel's hair fine as this is its shape:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and they fill it with the quantity of a half-pound of pitch.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 Hold your hand firmly on the camel's hair, and let the patient not move at all, until the pitch melts over its oil.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And it is necessary to anoint the patient's affected area with oil and soft cotton dipped in egg yolk or almond oil.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The flesh should be cut open where there is a fistula, and the pus drawn off by a marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula has been healed by the cautery we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If it's not healed, then administer pepper to the newborn, and bring the fistula back into the newborn's body as appropriate in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there appear cavities in lips, which are called "hair," and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then boil a small cautery knife using this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And apply it immediately into those cavities until it reaches the source.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the wound with cerote (medieval antiseptic) until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes in the root of the throat or eye, or nose, or teeth roots, after pus production and swelling and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you cure it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not improve.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Then it is necessary to use cautery according to the size of the fistula.
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After the blow or loss of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron is hot at its source and at its base.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in treatments, until it is healed.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 and if it is healed thusly, it is good.
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 And if not, you must discover the source and remove the corrupt bone, as you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient on your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After heating the cautery as will be shown later in this manner: you place a cane on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 Place the hot cautery inside [the affected area] as quickly as possible, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After leaving your hand, continue with the cautery according to your will.
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 Fill the patient's mouth with saltwater and keep it there for an hour and a half.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this way the moving tooth is confirmed, and the softened gums are held tight, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 If dental pain comes from cold or there is cold or fever, and the medical cures do not work, then it is necessary to use cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 and the cauterization with butter and the cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 The cauterization with butter is as follows: take butter from a cow and mold it into the shape of an iron spoon or ladle.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a tent, and moistening it in bull's bile, place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And do this often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and linen moistened in cold bile, place it on the swollen tooth, and put the hot iron on it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The cautery with fire is such that you take a thick iron or steel cane, and it should be large enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, wait for its shape to come after it, and place it on the tooth, holding your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this often, for the pain will disappear from that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow hard.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And make a cauterization at the head that you wish, and according to what you are able.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When scrophulas are of fluid and cold moisture, and do not obey digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described below, and have it open so that the smoke can exit to the other side of the cauterization.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And place the hot fire cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it like that for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 and place moist cotton on it with butter until the pus is expelled;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the wound has been cured with ointments and plasters, make sure it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture prevails over the channels of the intestine, and especially when it comes from a cold constitution, then the patient must be purged first with soluble medicines;
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After the cautery is applied to the root of the throat, be careful not to approach the throat, and do it with caution but only a little bit;
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 Afterwards, perform the other cautery at the joint of the neck at the spine's head, and it is the cautery that is called "clavicle," as we have its shape beforehand.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heal the joint as we have said before until it is healthy.
de la toust	The tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all and disease of parmon are from cold moisture, and the patient has no fever or scorching, and it is an old disease, perform two cauteries on the swelling in visible joints.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 And another cautery in the worst area between the two breasts.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 And it is the cautery called "clavicle," according to the shape that has been said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see, perform cautery by pricking with the entire cautery called "point" as its shape is described in the disease of ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let the tips be up to 30 [degrees], or around [them].
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the joint as stated before, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, because you make them in two applications (copies).
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterwards let the patient lay down on their back and side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 afterwards, take hold of the curved part with your left hand thumb;
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 and if the joint is dislocated internally, cauterize it using the double pronged instrument that has this shape here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 and cauterize the wound until it pierces the chest cavity, causing the figure of the cautery to come together with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 and this is done by using a three-pronged cautery because the figure of the cauterization consists of several cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the nerves are arranged according to the subtlety of a tent and this is the shape of the three-pronged cautery;
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes, it is tied on top of this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After place the cautery over it, grind with ashes.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After placing the patient, let not the limbs be moved for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above, which happens seldom, then perform cautery above the thick part of the cauterizing iron, or many cauteries in pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture which bring it to its constitution, and many catarrhs come upon him, and in the ways of treatment customary for him, it does not help; therefore, the patient should be made to lie down on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 After that, make three cauterizations beneath the spoon-shaped depression in the amount of one finger width, on all parts of the cautery, and two cauterizations outside the two sides so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and leave enough space between one and another so they are not joined together when they release pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cauterizations should be so deep that they pierce the two parts of the wound, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without deviation:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery within the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 and he who has fear of the cautery, cauterize by pressing and holding on the stomach at the point according to the quantity that you wish.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 then cauterize all the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound has occurred, when it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When it comes to the liver, there is pain from cold and moisture and a great windiness, until it is removed from its natural composition due to excesses.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is cured of what we have said in the previous sections, but it does not help him at all, it is necessary that the patient be conscious on his bed.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 and make three cauterizations according to this form, this shape, and this quantity on the liver, pushing aside the hypochondria, where the ribs of the man come.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And let there be space between each cautery, the thickness of two fingers.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 Let the cauterization be long enough to accommodate a finger and do not press too much with your hand on all the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And only burn the middle part (of the wound) and let the patient be upright on his feet;
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 And if he cannot stand, he should lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms.
et c’est li forme:	 That is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 If your desire is to perform these cauteries with a scalpel, be careful and cautious in the art, and do not burn all the way through, because you will scorch the entire body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And let it not go up to the boiling point, because the core is very subtle there, and the wise one can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not very strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 and if it is in the membrane, he feels insane pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this cure ends, it is necessary that the patient be conscious of his head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 and then press on the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a plowshare, such as this is its shape:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 Heat the cautery until the blades are hot, and come to a boil, so that the pus is completely expelled.
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after the cure according to the cure for swellings, until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 It is not advisable to use this fire cautery by anyone who has not studied the art of medicine for a long time, as these diseases have been aggravated on many occasions by it.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it can be boldly operated, but I think it is worth leaving it alone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery of pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that plasters made from the roots of Aristolochia should be applied in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and let it be dry, as large and as long as your thumb.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 and moisten it in oil, heat it, and apply the fire cautery between the armpit and the neck, and place small cauteries a little lower in the area below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 and the cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, sloping slightly back.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And the incision into the worst part, and another on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and the two ribs outward from the incision between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press your hand, but make it open in the same way as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And some old man said that anyone uses a cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And he jumps beyond the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies immediately, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse (as we have said in the divisions of cures), and it does not help, then apply three methods of cauterization, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 Of which one method is that you make three or four incisions, in a line following the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And after that do not rush your hand with all the cautery, let the patient be aware on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the shoulder dislocation.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 and lift the incision that is towards the mouse, where the patient's pain comes from on the left side, and raise the elevations as you make the incision according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After that put the two nerves into the flame until they are heated and pierced from the other side, then pull out the cautery, and thus there will be four [pieces].
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see, cauterize entirely with the cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After it has poured pus for a long time, and this is good that the other of the said treatments be applied next.
de ydropisie	dropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cauterizing does not help for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When you treat it according to the methods that we have said in the divisions, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the belly, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the bladder, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 and let the cauteries be close to the swelling of the cure.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After leaving the cautery open for long periods to let pus flow out, do not neglect the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be united with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The shape of the fire cautery for the stomach is the clavicle that we have previously shown.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And it for the back is oleander-shaped, as it is described before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the inflammation of feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in those who are edematous and full of citron juice, it is necessary to apply fire cautery on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 And immerse your hand with the cauterizer without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep, otherwise the yellow liquid will flow out forcefully; and let the cautery be of this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After doing two fire cauteries in each leg, at the tip of the big toe.
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And let the cautery be long, one below the knee in front and the other behind, within the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 leave the cauteries open for a long time without healing, because it helps the juice.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After the treatment of other ailments as we have said.
de la menoison	treatment of edema
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When inflammation of the abdomen comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and retentive virtues that are in the stomach and intestines are blocked and cannot be cured by means of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong nature, make a large fire cautery on the stomach as mentioned before (cautery of the stomach) in the circular cautery.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and three fine cauteries around the belly, subtle cauteries all around, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, do a cautery on the joint, and one cautery on each isle, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When hemorrhoids are on the foundation, one or more, and are old and consist of large cold and moist corrupted humors, and are cured as mentioned in "divisions", but it does not help, make cauteries.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 III at the base of the spine on the back, that which is completely dislocated above Almecgate little by little in a triangular shape, and the fire cautery below the hump should be applied.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 If you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and his face swells, then the large fire cautery should be applied on the stomach as stated before, and another one on the liver, and another one all over the spleen with a sharp-pointed cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the shoulder when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnoisiteit which is called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cut Althelul, if the cautery resembling a razor is heated, then put it all over what you have cut.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, so that the wound does not close.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if there is much swelling, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 after the cures of useful ointments while they are clean;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 and if you cauterize with a large cautery on alum, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	From an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot endure cutting or opening, which we will describe in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If any abscess comes, and it is filled with pus and corrupt moisture, you must test the entire tent (or cavity) with extreme caution, and ensure that you understand the entire extent of the corruption.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After heating the cautery which seems like a razor, and insert it into the fistula according to the quantity that it has entered, and continue the cauterization until the flesh boils and corrodes, once, or twice, or three times, according to the amount of sore needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And beware not to burn the nerve that is within them, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not do anything foreign except in a charnel house, and think that it is not safe.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After healing the place until it is healed, and if the place is ulcerated and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 and if the matters are not removed, know that the place is rotten, and the bones are destroyed.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And similarly as one of these we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When cold pain comes to the eyes and from strong wind and does not take on a female form, then you must perform cautery on the eyes on both sides with the cauterizing iron as we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize it with hot metal, it will have three cauteries in a row, and they will do more good.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is weak and soft due to coldness or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a cauterization in the area outside of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, on both sides, each cauterization being as long as one's thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 and make the cauterization behind the back, if needed.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 and let the cauterizations be shaped like a nail as previously mentioned.
de la marris	of the kidney
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the womb is cold and moist, it does not allow conception to take place, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, they feel great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is necessary to do three cauteries around the boil, as we have said, or the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the cautery be with a clamp, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the wound
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the viscous humors descend into the bladder and hence move from its place, and this is shown by the fact that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together;
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 and the location of the departure is found, it is necessary to cauterize the patient above the bladder at the cautery similar to a circle, and mark the spot in front of the location around the bladder so that the bladder is within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if [the fire cautery] is similar to those from which the stomach has been cauterized.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 If [the fire cautery] is not present, make three large olive oil cauterizations, and let the cautery be as deep as all the others.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal it until it becomes healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	Of the pain of the haunch
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain occurs in the abdomen of the hernia, and it is caused by coldness or moisture, the patient is treated as we have said in the previous section, but the treatment has no effect, and the illness is chronic.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Therefore, you must purge the patient of gross humors using foul-smelling pills or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After that, make a cautery.
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 And the manner of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 that is to say with burning substances and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery can be done in various ways, one of which is:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 You shall apply fire cautery on the boil of the hernia. Three triangular cauteries according to this form, make a good and deep incision and wide, with space between each cauterization equal to the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Sometimes a fire cautery is made in the middle on the hernia's head, for which there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, cauterize with the circular cautery as we have said earlier in the dislocation of the hernia.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do it in such a manner that the circles encompass the entire hernia and all its thickness is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the haunch and does not reach either the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it comes up to the thigh and the leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says the pain is, and four on the ankle, three-quarters of an inch on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And let the cautery be a cutlery, and let the thickness of the coal be heated.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the patient feels that the pain extends to the thigh or near it, cauterize it three or four inches with a cautery called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, make more of it.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, cauterize with a cutlery or circular cautery, and be careful in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 I myself have seen more who made a cautery above the ankle on the foot and allowed it to remain until the leg swelled completely and the toes also, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach solution, he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 If the pain is in two parts together, perform cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the wise men say about the cautery of the ankle, in this way, make a nail as thick as a little finger or a bit smaller, and between cross-pieces or from one crosspiece to another of a space equal to the size of a nut.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And the joints above the two parts should be over the bones, and they should be like knuckles, and it should have one iron handle well made.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 and let it be scorched until they are all red and blistered, and then place it upon the patient's sick side, and turn it on the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 and let the fire cautery be applied once, and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 and then apply a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after the treatment with salve until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Al-Zahrawi says that we should not use this cautery too much due to fear of its gaze, and few people who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And indeed, this is one of the good cauteries, which can endure it, and there where he feels it.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The medical cautery is made by heating an instrument between the joints, and it should be of iron or steel with a long shaft, and at the top have two arms, and between each arm, the thickness of a finger joint.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they are open on both sides and above, and they join together in this way:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After placing the iron device on the patient lying on the sick side, put your hand a little above the iron device.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After pouring the hot liquid between the two circles of the heated iron and letting it sit for an hour, let the patient endure the heat and burn of it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 It burns as if with fire; [or] It bites like fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the biting [pains] have passed, place your hand with the tool and gently lift the blister from below, leaving it so for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 and leave it for three days to draw out pus.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And this will be the last aid after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that burns like the blister as you did in the blister [treatment].
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 This is the method of hot water, and I have written or treated it regarding the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and hot coals, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 If there is a small opening exposed, let the point of a finger enter it.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 Then remove that pot with another pot well weighted down, and put on top of it alum and salt and soft ash until there is enough powder above for you to grasp hold of it with your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 and leave it so until it dries up with ash and heat or sinks down or is weighed down, then take all that ash and throw it onto salt and onto alum as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And afterwards, it will become very dry and be administered in the service of medical work and in cauteries for other limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it performs the same work as fire, and if used with other medicines from which you cauterize a boil like this, with honey, acacia, salt with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 Galen tells us of a cure by which a nobleman was cured of the pain in his leg and sciatica, and he praised it highly, saying that no other cure was made for it, and that it was cured once when this cure was made, and he was bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And he says in this way that you take the fresh and dry green litharge powder, grind it very well with a bit of fat, and put it on the wound (sores) and on the thigh and on the leg where there is pain, and hold it there.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And let it stay for three hours and in the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and let him lie in it, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Know that no one should use such fire cautery medicine unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat horns, it helps a lot.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 The cautery must be done in this way.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and beat it with old oil, and put it on the depression that is between the toe of the foot and the one called the foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 Take dry goat horns, heat them until they are charcoal, and put them on flax (linen), and leave it there until it becomes stained.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And fix again thus, and continue to do so until you think by feeling that it comes to the bone, and that the pain is stopped.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 This method of cautery is called "cautery of goat.
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, whether it be from falling or impact or too much evacuation, or like the effects of cold matter spreading, none of these symptoms call for cauteries, except in the case of cold matter infusion.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 Afterwards, it is necessary that the patient is emptied of putrid pills or similar, which are made on the back, where the pain is, three lines marked with incisions, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the strength and quantity that the patient can tolerate.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 and the cautery should be done according to the cautery called "point.
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 If you see, make III or IV cauteries at the intermediate cautery in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Often this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 and you find it in the lower spine of the back and in its appearance which comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this shape.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery increases each part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointed at intervals of 2 or 3 lines and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After healing the joint when it is healed according to what we have said, ensure that you do not apply caution in a sciatica state that is in the nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	"of the pain of the joints"
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When joint pain is due to moisture that affects all members of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cures with medicines cannot be cured, it is cured by cauteries in this manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 make a mold for the cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick on the thigh, let it be cauterized all over with the cautery called "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, which happens often, make fire cautery on each knee three or four times on each side, using all olive oil.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand beyond the burnt part.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pains are in the hands, make incisions around the wrist two lines deep.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains a point of pain in the elbows, make incisions above each joint and on the hair of the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains come up to the ribs or shoulders, cauterize each part and take good care of the patient, considering the medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and purge the fever, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the nose
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When rot begins in wounds, and the bowels descend into the joints and it is newly formed, then, when you see it to be cured, it should not eat that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 and use things that relax the stomach, so that the bile descends from the stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 after doing so, make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to bear down on his anus until the bowels are repaired, and then remove them to your sides, and press under the wound on the bone of the fist, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 then heat the iron in the form as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 as long as it is white and it exudes pus.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then pull out the bowels to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 And the minister presses his hand so that it does not return.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 Work the thighs well on the patient, and put the cushion and the sergeant beneath him on the thighs, and another one to hold his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 Then put the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and keep holding until you reach the bone; if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 And be careful that the boil does not burst when you are doing the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 and so that the patient may not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 The cauteries for children should be subtle according to their size, and those for large people should be as big as them.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days, treat the shoulder with the boar's fat until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 Treat with other remedies until it is healed, and have the patient lie on his back for 40 days, so that the wound heals well.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary to let his excrement be delayed for a long time, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go to the rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made sheet and keep it for 40 other days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 Let him have rest, so that he works little and is careful not to overfill himself with drink or food, and not to laugh too much.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he performs this teaching, he becomes completely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I shall tell you next about the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 If roundworms appear in other wombs and are known, and you see that they do not grow anymore, then you should perform the cautery of the cautery according to their quantity, and burn the third part of it.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 after the treatment as we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and none of the old ones have said that it should be cauterized at the three-cornered cautery in this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the place of entry and make a line above the worm, and another below, and then press your hand on the whole three-angled cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and more movable.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being hurt, and this pain lasts a long time, and the medicine cures do not help, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its virtue and location for twisting and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if he is healthy after the first cautery, it is good;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 if that part, repeats the other cautery on it, because custom is that it should change to the member that is nearby, so you must do the cauterizations as many times as the patient is getting healthy.
de meselerie	To mix (or compound) medicine
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 These illnesses are sometimes helped by cautery with great effort, and especially the diseases that come from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Can you see the patient to perform a fire cauterization, take care if the patient is at the beginning of the illness, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and he neither sinks nor remains; if you doubt that corruption may affect the entire patient, then perform V cauterization on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I hold the head to me and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 And (I) on (them) over the two horns, and (he) behind the nape.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 And leave your hand thus that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the bark comes out of it so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 And apply the fire cautery on the swelling, as described earlier.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 If the measles have spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 And it loses [the dislocation] clearly, so you must burn with these cauteries that we have said on the head, and one cautery is the neck, and two cauteries on the spine of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one great one on the crotch and another small one, and two on the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And two on the hips, and two on the tendons of the thighs, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And protect the nerves that are under the last bone, so you don't burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 And sometimes make one cautery on the bone of the handle, and one on the bone of the stomach, and one on the liver;
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that when you do more of the fire cautery, more aid is done, and it benefits them more;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that patients feel no pain from the cautery as the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 The cautionery should be deep and shallow according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of using irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When a swelling appears in any member and is cured with medicine, oil, and plasters, but it is not healed, then cauteries are done on the member according to the size and smallness of the member;
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and let the cautery be a slight incision in the flesh.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal it with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 And sometimes they perform a cautery on the hand, foot, and back, at the nerve endings that paralyze the member, and in this way the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the movements of the nerves guiding the body.
de albaras	From the linen cloth [or fabric]
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is developed, the instrument of medicine is of no use, therefore cauterize with a shallow cautery to the extent of the deep burn until the white spot is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then cure with flour and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, blood of the colon and blood of the almond, each in turn.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And mix all together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply to the place until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	treating canker with cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When the boil starts and you see it begin to spread, if you want to stop it, you should cauterize with a fire cautery that resembles a circle around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And wisely, they would say that you perform a cautery also in the middle of the boil;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 and it seems not good to me, for I believe it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have often seen this happen.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 and it is more proper that it be cauterized around, at the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion on cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot grow
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it is slow to heal due to its excessive nature or due to the age of the patient when they are already weakened (meaning too old) and have little blood, or due to the time;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you see it hasten to measure:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then cauterize it around with small hot needles by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After that, let it be in this state.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 It will heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as shown here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 Place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cauteries have pierced the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them outside in such a way that the course of the pus is made more evident.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure until it is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	the treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than the consumption of a limb, as it corrodes them as fire dries up wet things.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place that can endure cauterization along with fire, then heat the small and large needles accordingly according to where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After that, cauterize everywhere until all the corruption is reached and there remains nothing of it, so that everything that is corrupt is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and apply soft soothing cauterized with oil on the wounds from fire and all corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the cure of onions producing charcoal.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days you see charred flesh not growing, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if that does not happen, then cauterize again on the remaining corrupt parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this wound has sometimes been healed with medicinal juice instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 But nevertheless, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the treatment with medicinal juice in the section on treatment;
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The coming pricks to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Very often a disease called "closed" (according to our understanding) arises from the feet, which is a large thing swollen that presses on the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries of this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery and water hot cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Heat the fire cautery in the same way as a feather from a goose is heated, and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can penetrate the nail completely, and that it has fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 After putting it very hot on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the root of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it in this way for three days until it begins to emit pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make a plaster of evil savage herbs crushed with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night, and the nail will shrivel and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the shoulder with soothing salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if it has been converted by the outside of the body, and this happens in many cases, whether on limbs or feet, then you must apply a hot cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 And it happens in this manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a cable of iron or wood, or a feather from the plume, and place it on the nail and the alcohol, that is to say, for treating warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 place the cable around it so that it surrounds entirely, then put some hot oil on it and hold your hand well, press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cable comes to the base of the nail, and may find the hot oil deep enough to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 let the patient suffer a little bit of the hot oil bite for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 then leave it like that, and it will fall off with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Thus, do after another, as long as you heat all those who are in the body, then cure them with ointments that soften flesh.
li cure dou trembler	The Cure for Shaking (or Trembling)
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or something else, it is necessary that you make four cauteries, or four on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 and the cautery for the genitals, and the olive oil cautery on the stomach.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 let him tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid pustules (or boils)
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes on the outside of the body appear baths, or pustules rotten, which come from large corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 it is necessary at first when they appear that a cautery be made over each head of the boil:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery made from the branch of the myrtle, so that it may be gripped by fire, or from the long root of arum lily, or to the lenticular cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when it appears in this way, and they cannot grow from then on, but the superfluous parts that come from it are broken off, and they heal.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut at the wound which penetrates through, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is a very bad thing to bleed internally.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 Furthermore, when this happens to someone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it very tightly until the blood is stopped from flowing out beneath your finger, and no more blood comes.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then place the olive oil cauteries, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then apply the hot cautery to the affected area, taking care to avoid large blood vessels, and hold the cautery in place until the flesh has been burned through.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a jump occurs when you place your hand on the vein, and the fire cautery is extinguished, take immediately another cautery that is near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue with one procedure after another until the flesh is seared.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 And ensure that you do not burn the nerve and that no further harm befalls the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 And understand that when the flesh separates from an artery, it cannot be properly cauterized if the artery is large, unless one of the four methods we have mentioned is used.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or by cautery, or by extraction when not treated, or by tightly binding with thread, or by medicines applied which have the power to stop blood.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 and tied and constricted as necessary.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings about the constriction of a narrow ligature or placing hot things on it, or similar things, will not benefit if it does not help.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens without a mirror or medicine being present, then he should place his finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and tighten it firmly until stopped above the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 and it must not be moved, but the wound should be often moistened with cold water frequently so that the wound becomes very cold, frozen, thickened, and stopped.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 and make inquiries ahead about those who need cauterization and medicine.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgeries (or heals)
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which fire cautery or hot medicine is needed, and the types of eyes [cauterized areas], their causes, instruments, shapes, and forms of the cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have placed that chapter up to the feet and will proceed in this chapter through the same path because it is easier to find what we are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And so as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 Where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you to not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of men come in treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 If those come who sicken themselves so much with their disease that they die quickly due to the fury that their illness brings, and the great severity of its malice;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And one should fear such things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And of these you give your sense to someone, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Wait, I am cured";
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 You must not easily consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly believe but wisely of those from whom you are certain, and from which you can take and lose.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients to lead salvation.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Moreover, I have ordered this chapter by dividing it into sections, according to that which is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have explained from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters from which you will need assistance.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 Know that this disease often comes to children during childbirth, and when the birth canal is too tight for the head of the child.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 And sometimes it happens for reasons unknown.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 I have never seen this disease in anyone except children, and all those I have seen, death was swift.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And for that reason, it seems to me that I should devote myself less to these kinds of treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And the moisture was so great that it caused his death, and this moisture is assembled beneath the bone near the cartilage.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And the operations are such that if there is moisture between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make an incision across the top of a wide opening.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And let it be as long as we can, until the moisture recedes.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 Here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 If the moisture is beneath the bone, and you see the openings of the mouths on each side, and it has no response when you press it from within with your hand, then:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 You must make three incisions in the middle of the bone in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision remove all the moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After straining the slits of linen cloths and powders, put vinegar and oil in it, and leave it so until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then loosen (it), and heal the wound with bandages and ointments, and let the head swell to a certain extent, and give the patient dry meat without moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incising is to look at where the abscess swells the most, and where the water collects.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 because sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes it is behind.
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes on the right side;\]
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And sometimes on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore, open the abscess or wound, drain the pus, and do what you can with it.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And be careful not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 If blood comes out, let it flow so that the patient dies from bleeding and evacuation of fluid.
de reume	of remedy
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When it happens to someone with a disease called "catarrah" in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and medicine does not help, then the last cure is the cautery on the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you see them covered, have the patient lay down on his back;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After that, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grab the patient's neck with the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look for the artery where it is visible, and the left and right ones are found behind the ears, and both will return.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then mark the joints with a sharp spatula of two parts, then strike one and the other until it reaches the bone, and this should be done through the wide part of the joint.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the sharp spatula under the artery and cut above it, cutting as you would through two.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it jumps up without ceasing continuously.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the artery does not open upon feeling, you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and strike until it reaches the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And it is necessary to force the blood out with a cupping glass of six centimeters, and perhaps a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 Then look at the wound.
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If the wound remains on the bone tip, if an abscess does not form, then hold the wound closed and bind it with a dressing until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old emigration comes and acute catarrh arrives, due to the moisture of tears and the heat in the temples, and an old foolish person becomes senile with similar things; it is treated by methods of medicine, but it does not help at all. If the arteries in the temples are opened and cauterized, as we have mentioned, it will help.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the manner of extracting them is that the patient pulls back the hairs on his temples, and listens for the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by beating, and it is slightly retracted outside except in some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 and if it is retracted, the patient pulls his neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with harsh fabric, and strokes the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 then take the spatula as shown in this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 then gently peel the skin so that you see the artery, then draw it towards the prongs and separate well the threads that are underneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the artery is subtle, turn it to the point of the unguis (or nail), then strike that part according to the quantity of the two heads (shoulders).
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut (or punctured), it will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 Draw blood from the VI c (vein) up to the III (cubital vein or median cubital vein).
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the artery is large, you should tie it with a strong double silk thread at two lengths, so that pus does not come out before the stitching of the wound, and there is a flow of blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then strike the excess between the two ligatures in that hour itself, and then, if you see, cauterize with the cautery knife up to the bone until the shoulder is severed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 This is the mature work, if the patient does not have a fever and has a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 The cauteries are helpful to treat moisture (diseases):
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 for this is of greater aid against diseases (moistures).
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place it on well-made tents.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and when they are separated (the arteries), you should cure them with dry medicines that cause healing, and tents until it heals.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 If you do not perform the operation on the artery as instructed, hasten to cover it with cautery or apply vitriol and hold your hand over it so that it stops bleeding.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 If you do not have that (the cautery or vitriol), place your hand on the area until it freezes, and rub the area with cold water continuously, and hold as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And the one who is moving and lighter during the extraction of the artery should be cauterized with this cautery cutting through it in two parts, but they should be well thick for holding the heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the thermometer is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And between the two blades it should have a thick gap, and when you have positioned them properly in the two places, and the iron is heated hot enough to reach the bone, then strike the vein in the two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And they should be separated between the two heads because it is not welded all over by this cautery.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears from the eyes are running down the veins that are on top of the head of fire, and medicine cure does not help for it, and you see the patient writhing in pain, and feel his forehead to be cold like shivering.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And if the eyes are soft and moist so that the eyelashes fall out, and the eyelids are scalded and burned by tears, this remedy is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you must do this to the patient who has this disease: shave the hair from the forehead, then make three equal incisions in the forehead according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And one of the incisions should be as deep as necessary along the forehead from top to bottom, and the other two shall be along the eyebrows, but take care not to cut the arteries that are on the sides above the eyelids.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And remove your hand from the junction of the two jaws, and let each wound be the length of three fingers joined together.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for wiping the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of about two fingers as shown here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 From the incision which is from the temple until the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 And scrape the whole core which is between the two incisions all along the bone, then do the other side from the mid-incision to the other second one, and then pull out this splinter.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision; it is well sharpened on one side, and on the other side it is soft, not sharp, and it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And cut the bone towards the flesh at the chosen spot, and the bone becomes soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the mid-split.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the veins that descend from the head towards the eyes as long as the incision is continuous until it opens the core, and then do the other side in the middle fissure up to the other side.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And then drain the blood evenly, and press the place for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 and put in each fissure a tent of old cotton, and place damp linen cloths soaked in vinegar and oil and ashes on top, and ensure that no pus comes.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And on the third day separate the ligament, and apply a large poultice of cold water, then the healing ointment of basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it heals.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When an acute catarrh comes, you usually see the eyes become thin and small, and weakened vision, and burnt paper.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And the hair falls out, and they make holes in the head with pain, and the patients cough.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Therefore, you understand from these signs that those matters and this catarrh come only through many veins, and the medicine to cure it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you command the patient to bend his head back, then make a deep cut along the forehead and another wide one at the temples.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And start from the hollow of the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 And move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move while eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 When the bone is exposed, squeeze all the blood onto a sponge, then force it apart between the two lips of the fracture and put old cotton in there, and bind with linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 then cover with damp cloths soaked in wine and oil, and guard against hot abscesses.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is removed (the bone), you must rub the bone until char becomes visible, then treat with things that are drying, which promote the formation of scab.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flower and four parts of colophony, and make an ointment.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And administer linen cloth for dressing all wounds.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earstopping
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 Everything that falls into the ears is one of the Four Things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grains, or beast, or stone from a mine, or similar things like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seeds such as lentils, beans, peas.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 or flowing things like water and syrups and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear, stone or otherwise, if it does not fit in the ear or does not grow within the ear, place the ear on the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see a stone, apply a little purple oil or camphor oil, then administer extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and make him vomit with mustard, and stop the nostrils when vomiting occurs, and place around the ear cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 stretch the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Much often comes fever by this cure;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not come fever, let it be administered the extraction of leeches, as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it jumps to leeches, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, let it be administered the extraction of the onion juice in small doses;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 and if not, make a candle of beeswax and press the head of the candle or ear tube firmly, and stop up that which is around the candle with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter it with the candle.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then draw it out carefully, for much often comes fever as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 and if it does not come fever in this way, take glue from the source and take birds, put them in any device that is sharp for this purpose, and put a piece of cotton around it.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Then press the glute (buttock) on the bone or something, and draw it out (pull hard).
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 If it does not pop out from all the things we mentioned, then quickly cut (make a small incision) in the ear so that pus comes out and there is a spasm.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the method of the incision is that you first make the patient drain the skull, remove blood according to the strength of its power, then sit the patient between your hands and turn the ear upside down, and make a small incision in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And the incision should be like a crescent moon, reaching the bone, then remove (extract) the bone as strong as you can and suck out the pus quickly with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the treatment until it heals.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 If it is swollen with grains (possibly boils), administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 and if it cannot issue, administer the thin, subtle sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not do that if you think the grains are moist from ear moisture, as long as you have made several pieces;
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then extract with subtle tweezers and the sucker, as we have said, to ensure proper extraction.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 Therefore in case of water that falls into the ear, the patient should use earwax drops first and stuff the ear with a large cotton ball.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on the same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out due to this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 If that does not work, take many small and slender stones according to the length of your finger, heat them slightly in the fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 and make the patient place one or a pierced ear on it, and press from below with his feet, and strike another stone on the stone in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 And it does not stop making them pierce one stone after another until the fire goes out completely, and thus it leaps out completely.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see it, grab the cord and push one of the shoulders into the ear, and take hold of the other head with fire until the more distant joint is burned.
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 Then make the same procedure for the other joints until the fire goes out completely, as we have said in the previous section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In the extraction of an animal with a small body, such as a flea and similar creatures, treat it as we have said in the classification.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring the forceps extraction;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 And it is easier to remove what is in the ear than what is on the body of the animal.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you care for it as we have said in the section and in treating distillations, and the patient does not improve; if this happens, you must observe the ear under the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if they do not appear, take the cane that has the following shape:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And insert the more subtle tip into the ear according to the quantity of pain in the patient, then move it completely along the cane.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Perform this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey and come out, stuff the cane with cotton as I said in the previous section.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancient ones have proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find them or treat with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you distil oil and medicine into the ear in this manner, here is the form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 Let it be made of silver or tin narrowly placed under the small openings, and covered above for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And to press within the distillation apparatus of tin well made for this purpose, and if you see take a razor and wrap it around the tip with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour in your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the cane, and the cane should be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then push inside the strainer with all the cotton, and press your hand moderately until the oil is distilled or the ear's opening enlarges.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 and feel the patient's senses inside, and heat the distillation container near the fire so that it is heated in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 and make sure it is not too cold, for the medicine would not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the earstopping
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without some birthmark in the ear.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And the same thing happens in men by ear wound or pus discharge from within the ear, and this discharge sometimes completely fills the ear, if it cannot be seen.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And sometimes the birthmark disappears, and it can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, when it comes from the font (source), if one cannot see it, is a grave healing in many situations, and in such cases, you must place the patient's ear towards the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 if you see the abscess appearing, work with this spatula of which form is as follows:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And be sharp and pointed both front and back, so that it does not pierce the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 if the abscess is of flesh or bone from the ear, hold it with subtle forceps and strike gently until all the flesh is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the swellings are entirely in the ear, take a fine razor lightly and heat it slightly with fire, then place it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the abscess from which the patient feels pain in the ear, pierce gently and ensure that you do not harm the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then put a plaster of suitable size in the ear according to the wound's width, and apply the Egyptian ointment to it.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Every day until the wound is healed, take a plaster and apply it with rose water, and powdered crushed glass on top.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see the ear swell, it is necessary that you remove the plaster and apply another damp cloth made of rose oil and wax until the swelling disappears.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there is a flow of pus, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and apply other treatments to remove the flow of pus which are either distillation methods.
de la char des papieres	of the wood from paper
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This is the method that comes on paper when the hairs are moist and dry. It is necessary that you stretch them with tweezers and forceps, and cut off their roots with a spatula.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then put vitriol powder on its place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 If not scabbed over, then cauterize with the subtle lenticular cautery and after incision is beneficial;
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times they recur, where nothing remains rooted from them. (in context of dislocated limbs or shoulders)
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are burnt with fire, the roots are burned away and they do not return. (in context of cauterizing)
de la gresle	of the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times they come in the form of gravel, appearing hard and solid, for which this disease is called "hail", and it is an accumulation of thick moisture in the paper above and below. (this appears to refer to a skin condition or infection)
li ovraiges est telz:	 The operations are as follows: (beginning a list of medical procedures, possibly related to the previous sentences about dislocations, cauterizing, and hail-like lesions)
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care to let the "hail" disappear on both sides, and this is an easy thing to know. (still in the context of skin lesions/infections)
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Cut (it) open then widely, next scrape gently from each part, then take with the forceps and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you cannot cover it without piercing a little the paper, do not worry the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if the wound is large, join it with a stitch, and treat it until it heals.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 and if it is small, do not apply any pressure, because the ointments restore it soon and improve the flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 And if the pus is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and extract the pus with forceps, and press it from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 and if the paper is moved by incision, do not worry.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when hail is struck, apply oil of salty water to it and heal the wound of those who are injured by it until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a grease that is rendered in paper towels above and it happens more with children than with adults, and it causes great pain to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh in the mornings and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this they lie on their faces right away and sleep on them, and their papers are beneath their eyelids moistened with exinach which spreads in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your hands and feel the dislocation emerging between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of work is that the patient holds their head on your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 Then take a linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size required by each part (Exirnach), then place it over him;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press with your arms from both sides so that the Exirnach (a surgical instrument) is assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make an incision in the middle of the Exirnach with the moistor (spatula-like tool) cutting a slit wide enough, but not larger than the wound made for vein opening;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and cut the skin all the way through to expose the Exirnach;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And in many positions, an extrusion comes out from the wound, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Place then a piece of rough cloth between your hands at the wound and turn your hand to the right and left until it is spread.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 And ensure that you do not insert anything into the wound, nor come all the way to the fatty tissue, nor prick it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 If the extrusion does not open at the beginning of the wound, lift up the wound slightly to make it appear.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then pull out as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water and place on it, and press down with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for such people who grind salt and put it on to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess forms at the joint, then heal it with plasters softening it until he is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hair of the papyrus (meaning: plants or fibers resembling hair)
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When paper-like growths appear on the eyelashes and are nourished, they harm the eyes and bring about types of diseases such as constant tearing and swelling of the eyelids, up until this is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 and the cure follows according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 or by a cautery combined with fire, or by medicine hot according to what is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by cutting and stitching or by blisters, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 You must place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper from the oil to your left hand.
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is turned over, that's good.
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 If not, push an awl through the hole above [it].
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and shave the edge of the paper where the hairs grow from the hairs, pull the thread to the top of the paper, and smooth it with a razor.
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 then make a groove in the part underneath the paper, under the hairs, along the entire space, from the large incision to the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 then pull the thread and place a small tent of cloth and linen underneath the paper, then draw a design on the paper of a hook, like the briar rose, but the figure must be according to the amount you want to raise the paper that is specified for all [patients].
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if it is necessary to apply a large quantity of paper as softened by them, [it should be done] thus:
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 then spread the plaster all over the area spanning two lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear down to the small one;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 and one of the cracks should be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then push the onion into one of the two corners at an angle, then peel it all;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a single awl thread made of fine wool, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess threads adhere to the blisters using any suitable substance if you wish to do so.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if this is not the case, without care, then leave the stitching and the threads for three days or four.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 Then heal the wound without stitching with drying and binding substances, as paper revives at the edge of the wound and its assembly, but the stitches are rotten (as the ancients say), and it is laborious without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 and in another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And it is that you cut a piece of paper into a shape like the fennel seed, as we have said, in three times divided according to the form below:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cut that which stands above the small sections equally according to the following form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you do not have the ability to hold pliers, and the thing is not even, then take a needle with thread, and place it within the shape.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and bring out the other thread from the large hole, and the second thread from the small one, and assemble the threads evenly between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then place your hand evenly and lift the entire skin over which you have signed, as we have said, then bring together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and heal it until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, calm it with cerate and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 Sometimes the hair of the papier is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 it is necessary that you use what we have said about incision;
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 however, the stitching in one and the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of dogs follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and it is that you convert the paper and place it within as I have said, then make two dogs by craft, and two thin strings as long as the paper and the width of the staple is.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and cut the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 then assemble one and the other subtly above where the paper is covered with oil, and press the two dogs made from the two parts together.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it so for some days, and the skin that is strained will die and rot and fall off when it rots through.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it remains delayed and becomes necrotic, then heal it as long as it is healthy;
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when the wound heals and the paper rises, and the hairs will not grow back.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 And this is the shape of the two canines that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 You take a thin needle and insert the silk thread and make it thin.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 then bring together the heads and attach one to another thinly, and let the length of the threads be a palm-length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 place the other silk thread in the canine shape briefly, and attach its head.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 then put the patient's head on your lap.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 let the patient be in the sun so that the work is clear, for this work is subtle and small. Then push the needle through the entire canine shape to its root alongside the natural hair, and make it pierce the paper quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then pull the hair up to the skin, and push the hair into the skin if there is one, two, three or more of them.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then pull your hand along with the hairs as far as they reach the skin to the paper, taking out the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the skin is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will pull the skin down to its full extent according to what you have prepared, until the skin comes out through the hole above and you see it through the eye's sight.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then you will pull the skin and the thread, close the eye and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hair adheres in its place and a blister forms above.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 If the hairs are small, let the long hair of the head grow along with it, and raise them together until they are lengthened, then shave them.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purulence of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this illness called "alecrati" or the boil comes in the eye, it occurs in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One natural, the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens due to a sudden wound, or incision, or cauterization, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the manner of work is that you split that joint, separate the lips from it, and insert linen bands inside, and keep it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the illness becomes worse than the first one;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but the work of softening things, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the rose water or ale and flaxseed should be cooked, and dilute a bit of Dachshund oil in any oil, and wrap it in a linen band, and treat this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasures of your care are such that you should take care not to suture it in its former shape;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and this work that we have said is not without the correction of this disease, so that it does not recur in its former shape.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	Of the flesh that comes into the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accidents come from wounds, cuts, cauterization and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the path of the work is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the skin from left to right so that the threads come out in two holes in the skin.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 Then, raise the skin over the whole needle, and apply the spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the bone returns as it should, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, take the rasp and place it in the gap, and turn the bone, and make two gaps where the bone touches inside the bone.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and let the ends of the two gaps at the angles of the incision you made be aligned, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape is as a letter with the name "Greek cross".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that cartilage according to its size so that it is even with the bone on both sides of it, and join the two separated parts using a piece of linen thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then apply the medicine for softening as we have said, and let it heal until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the patient's illness comes from a cut or stitch or burn, you must make a clean incision beneath the hair on the affected area, as described earlier.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 then separate the two sides of the wound with forceps, as I said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 and the work should be done according to the shape of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare tools with all possible skill to restore the figure to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patient himself, according to what work and instruments are required in various situations.
dou soudement de la papiere	under the skin of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When the suture of the skin is like the paper above is sewn with white oil and cannot move or perform natural functions, then it is necessary to insert a sharp instrument under the skin and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And hold it with forceps, until you grasp the cartilage that is near the subtletiespate, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the patient cannot suffer from the too sharp spatula pricking the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And make your incision, from which you scrape the gathered tissue, gently, so that the paper returns according to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And all the gathered tissue is healed, and sometimes in the sharp oil it becomes infected, and lifts of sharp vinegar and vinegar water.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then put a tent of linen between the paper and the oil, and above the oil place wool soaked in plenty of egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days use vinegar water and hot things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	Of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the claw is according to two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 the claw is either nerve-like and similar to hard horn, or another that is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture, when it is touched by iron and cooked with pliers, it cannot be moved.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 and both begin towards the great corner, and grow little by little until it covers the whole eye and all the light and the movement of the oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a healthy surface, then he opens his eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and you lift the paper with your hand, then press the claw with small pliers and hold it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, put horsehair or cowhair or bull's hair, and a strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and bend the tip of the needle slightly and thrust it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, tie the nail with a thread and extend it above, and shave the hair from the side of the nail where there is the pulp and the silk to the root, then chop the remaining in the root of the armpit with subtle spatula and small force, leaving the natural flesh or armpit so that by incision the body does not bring forth tears as usual.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 and sometimes the nail remains at the fingertip only, according to what we said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape off all the fatty tissue of this kind, which is the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the fatty tissue does not touch the muscular layer and break it, and that the muscle fiber is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after the incision pour oil a little piece of egg yolk beaten, and with collirium made from litharge, leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound as necessary until it heals completely.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 If the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert a needle and the unguent can't enter, many times this appearance of the nail is cured with medicines.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And as I mentioned in the previous section, when they grow out, if you see them covered, open the oil for the patient, take a little sharp fatty tissue as per this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And scrape the nail slightly above, and if you see that it does not diminish at all and the reason for this becomes apparent, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and instill the oil until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then repeat the other work according to this same method, until it is completely healed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes you in the oil, like an abscess heals, then milk it, and first heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh around the eye is harmed by the oil through great damage, suspend it on an onion, and cut a small portion, not completely, so that tears do not come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows above the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 The hairs of some men sometimes grow red and cover the eyelid, rising above the paperwork and turning towards the outside, resembling a balanced rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 and the work is that the patient places their head on a pillow, then opens the eyes, and all that red hair should be cut with appropriate scissors, and it must be held firmly.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 then cut the first red hair, and continue cutting to the end with scissors until the very end, and be careful not to prick the oil during the work.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and the incision with the spatula, as we have said in the treatment of the nail and small forces like those used to remove a splinter, according to the form after this chapter.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, use oil of rosin broken or distilled red collyrium, which resemble corrosive medicines, spread it over cotton with egg white, so that it is securely hot on the abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 If anything remains, and the wound becomes cold, and you doubt whether it is hot on the abscess, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things that soothe it.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work when it is healed, and in this way do all charms that are soaked in oil with this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But you must lighten the treatment of each oil by the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 And of the accidental way, in work with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 and not to press your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from the work.
des voines des eulz	The veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red veins that are covered with oil become visible and their work (operation) can be seen and the oil weakens completely every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore, it is necessary at first that you observe whether oil, in which the sebaceous gland is, is out or foreign, and has no other disease but the sebaceous gland.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then press your hand on it in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then hold these veins all the way along according to his wisdom, and let the incisions be subtle doubles according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two degrees of pressure in one stroke according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 Then press these veins gently but firmly, and squeeze the blood hour after hour until you see the veins move away from the oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 And be careful not to bleach the oil at the tips of the splinters, and perform this task at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not catch these wounds.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 When you have done this, if you distill green and red oil, it will heal the sores that are hardened by the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot collect everything in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of abscessing hot, then continue according to this method as before until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the oil duct
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The tool called "arissati" is:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you cure it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and if it is not healed, there is an instrument in it that you split above the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there, while the bone remains exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if it is completely in the instrument of which this form is:
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and is called "sharp head", and should be made of iron, with the head rounded like a spearhead as shown in this form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place it on the bone of the dislocation, then turn it between your hands, and press your hand slightly until you feel that the dislocation is reset.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do this once, then restore the joint with medicine-absorbing substances.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the joints are fused and char is present and the core of the bone is fused and remains so for 40 days without renewal and it is not abscessed or infected, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 if this is not the case, there is no other device for bringing the fistula to the surface according to this shape:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 and it is that you open the bone a second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is opened, take the forceps according to this shape, and let the head of the forceps have three angles, and let the shaft be narrowed towards the end as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 Then place it on the dislocated bone next to the socket, and move your hand away from the oil hole. Then turn the entire key all the way until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if he holds his hand on his neck.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 And then restore the dislocation with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh heals and hardens the dislocation, the matter goes to the neck.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When the eyes are wide open in all directions and it does not move to the neck or decrease, you must hold the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then heal it, then put on mustard or hot poultices without iron to help, then place on the oil made from acacia and aloe and incense and saracocolla, and then hold it in place, and apply ointment on bands and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 The manner of plasters is that you take soft plasters, fold each one into four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes require.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then strain it with a hard bandage form and repeat the blisters for sucking without wounding.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the blisters and let the oil remain strained day and night, and if it becomes unstrained, you must strain it strongly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after the day and the night, and if you see the oil repair, that's good.
se ce non;	 but if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not so, repeat the plasters and the bandage and blisters and the wounds until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The open wound of the eye does not heal on its own.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When dislocations occur in the ruptured eye, it opens, and paper-like substances come out like drops of resin, and it is terrible to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then, if you see it, cover [the eye] with the work being such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected part up to where it is above, then insert another awl or double thread from the lid side.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 and make it pierce through, and leave the first awl in place according to its position.
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then take the double thread and tie a part of the eyeball around it, and tighten it, then remove the awl and put moistened egg yolk oil on it.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 leave it until the threads stick to the eyeball, then heal the egg yolk oil with soothing things until the wound is healed.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And sometimes the wound is bound on each side with a circle of cloth until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 If the eyes appear swollen, pierce them with a thin splint coming from oil, and draw out the moisture and pus, then put medicine in immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then pull it out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	with a thin spatula coming from pure oil
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not foreign to one who has been assembled in oil, resembling an abscess, but it is not an abscess.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 The manner of the appearance of this disease is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair and upright, then take hold of its head between both hands, and move it until you see the abscess come to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 Then let it (the affected part) be driven in, and do not withdraw (it), and clear the opening, and show the patient the things as he is accustomed.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 And if it does not withdraw, know that it is infected, and if the dressing of the bowl is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and make a hole in the cornified tissue through the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornified tissue and the bone, as far as the bowl goes.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it (the pus) comes out, distill it in hot sharp oil mixed with honey or hot oil of fenugreek and honey, then let it be treated with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	The sharp points of oil
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have similarities with the eyes of hawks in cutting, and those things that must be pierced.
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 according to the healthiness.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from sunlight and hold the oil saint and tighten very strongly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 then put the paper of the oil on your left hand if the eyes are left, or to your right hand if the eyes are right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 then take in your right hand, if the eyes are left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 then place the tip of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a reed in that hollow part of the oil at the lower eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" firmly and hold your hand as long as it pierces the lower eyelid, and feel that almagda comes to an empty place.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 The measure of the way (should be) equal to the depth of the space which is from the prunele up to the end of the nail.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 and it's the crown of the oil.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you see the bone in this paper through the clarity of the horned cloth, then put the instrument up to it or where the sore is, and then press down along another path afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the instrument is to be applied now, the patient sees it before him and the tool in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After a little rest, if the sore rises along the second path, put the force with the instrument, and when it is firmly fixed and it no longer rises, it should be straightened gently by turning your hand slowly.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then put some small gemmed silk thread on the sore again, and remove this oil from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then, moist a cloth or woolen cloth with rose oil and egg, and bind it with clean oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place on top, finely ground with much egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter into the oil due to its hardness, since there are some men who have excessively hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit," which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 And then pierce the joint only, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in alum, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And for the completion of the work, prepare the patient, the sleeper, arriving, with him lying on his back in a darkened place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 and let him be deprived of all movements, take light foods, and not move his head to the right or left, and bind him accordingly for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 then unbind him in the same darkened house, test his sight, and make him see certain things, and then bind him again for seven days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 and it is not necessary that you do this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you reduce this, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess swells up, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and follow the guidance of those who soothe abscesses.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is soothed, you should close the wound with ointment to cover it for any day, and remain in that dark room always.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then leave the house little by little, and return to your usual state.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And know that no disciple should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from the East, who told us that in his land they make almond juice like vinegar, causing it to be sour, but I have never seen anyone do this in our land, nor have I read of it in any ancient books.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And by chance, it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the similarities of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them sees them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and they are from a specific kind of arrow:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And these are the characteristics of the heads of this same subtlety, and the rear parts in four corners sharp.
de la char sor le neis	of the pus in the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes new or nascent charms resemble various different things, of which there are some that seem like scorpions with many feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 and if there are such [charms] or if the charm is swollen of this color, and if the charm is soft of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 Therefore, in those cases of soft charms, and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and open his nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those charms, and draw them out.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Then take that which you can hold with a fine sharp spatula on one side, as long as you know that the charm is entirely extracted.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there remains something which cannot be captured, open it all with fine, light instruments so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 And if the abscess swells or boils up, help as necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 If it is malignant boils, hurry and cauterize them until the pus dries up and all the charred matter is removed, then apply oil or cold water and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If it does not heal with the application of moisture, and malignity comes up to the palace (meaning the head), know that it is healthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not pierce as necessary, know that there is pus formed in the bone above, to which the probe will not come for cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then you must put a cotton ball made from flax fibers into it, moistened with our hands, and leave a space between each cotton ball of the required size or less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 And place the patient's head through the hole in the cloth in his neck as far as possible, and draw it out while smelling it until it comes out of the neck through the cloth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 And children often do this in school, and it is easy for one who wishes to perform it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and guide each other's head in turn while we who are filament-makers do it.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this until you know that the knot has spoiled that flesh, then draw out the filament, cleanse the blood, and moisten the filament in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the neck as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Allow it to remain for three days or more, until the salve has corroded everything that remains of flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 and then place or insert a plaster made of linen for some days until it is healed, and if there is a need for drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 and this is the shape of the instrument to purge the head, by which they distill the oils and medicines and insert them.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it should be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plaster, and lead it in the same way.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 If you see, then make a closed plaster, and let the instrument be flat to purge the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the pus in the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Often, in the head of the nose, a disease named "telul" arises, which grows and becomes large, until it can be seen with the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 and for that reason, you should cut it at the beginning, completely remove it, then put the fire cautery or burning medicine on its place.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 If it is not cut immediately when it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of a dark color, and has poor sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess that swells, for when you cut it once, much harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 If the abscess is soft to touch, not of a dark color and you can cover it completely, empty the patient and cut with caution, then treat the place with things that are dry and constricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn up
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when solution comes in one of these articular cavities [joints], it benefits little, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Therefore, whoever experiences this [issue], look if the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then align the two lips to a stitch, then heal it until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 And if the lips are disconnected from one side and the other, you must scrape all the parts of them until they heal, then bring together the two lips to a stitch, bind it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and incense powder on it.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place a plug of plaster of strength or another plaster adhering to it, and leave it until it heals by itself, then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of stitching is that you gather together the solution (The way to sew it is by bringing together the solution).
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 with needles, as we said in abdominal stitching;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have told you (The method of stitching is also by thread, as I have informed you).
des apostemes des levres	about abscesses from lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 Inside the mouth, there appears an abscess hard like grains of wheat, both smaller and larger (Inside the mouth, an abscess appears that is hard and looks like grains of wheat, some are smaller and others are larger).
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Then you must turn the lips, cut on top of each tooth, and take it with the forceps and crush it in each part (Then, you should turn the lips, make an incision above each tooth, take it with the forceps and crush it in each area).
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 then apply the solution after the incision of crushed vitriol, until the wound is cauterized (Then, use the solution after making an incision with crushed vitriol until the wound is cauterized).
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply a salve to the dislocation, and treat the shoulder with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	Of the flesh of the jaws
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often a cyst grows on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 You must hold it with tweezers, cut off its root and leave the cyst or blood to flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 Then put on the wound vitriol powder, or other powders that contract and dry.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 If the cyst returns after incision, which often happens, then cut it a second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 It does not return after cauterization.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 These are the shapes of tools for covering.
des sordens	Of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes there are sores assembled at the root of teeth inside the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes teeth are black and yellow and decaying, until the corruption reaches the gums, and they stink.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 You must make the patient sit between your hands, and his shoulders be on you, and remove the teeth or the scales that appear, until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do the same with blackness, greenness, yellowing, and other spots, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 If you remove what is there at the first cause, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, start again on the second or third day and continue until everything is removed.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 Know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work demonstrates, because the one who cleans the teeth has different shapes than the one who cleans between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and others be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary that when you cure the tooth of its pain, you delay the pulling as much as possible, for it should not be done at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because it is a very high substance up to that point, so there can be no excuse for pulling.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw, you must be sure of the correct tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Often the patient experiences pain and believes it is a holy tooth, and pulls out the healthy tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 Nevertheless, the pain does not go away because of this, until the bad one is removed, for we have already seen this in holy men.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are certain that the tooth is loosening, it is necessary to score around the tooth completely. Spatula strongly to protect the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then turn your hands or subtle tweezers to the first joint and then gradually, until they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Hold the patient's arm in your lap, and keep it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After the tooth is extracted correctly to break it, and if it does not come out freely, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 If the bone is pierced and eaten away, then you must fill it with rags where the wounds are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if you hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break while pulling.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 You must cut around the gum to remove the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, or the patient will suffer greater pain from the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 Be careful not to act like the foolish lord who in haste and recklessness often breaks the cartwheel, and does not bring about what we have described.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 But sometimes they come on account of the excretion of this great disease through the roots that remain, or by breaking the cartilage, as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 And when the tooth is pulled, wash the place with vinegar or alum and oil.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 If bleeding occurs in the process, as often happens, use vitriol powder.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if that doesn't work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The shapes of the tools used to mute the tooth first should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you pull the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And should be large enough so that they do not bend when separating, and should be made of good iron, and serrated for holding onto the teeth.
de la racine des dens	From the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains to be pulled out, it is necessary that you place cotton soaked in butter for one or two days on the place until the place is softened, then insert the forceps called "algefri", which look like a beak of an instrument.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And within it should be made like a chisel, and this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must uncover the entire cheek around the root and use the instrument called "althali," which is known as plier, of which this is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And it should be long and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through it, that is good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, help yourself with all tools, so that the shapes come afterward:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And help with this tool having two prongs, of which this shape comes from it:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other iron objects that are in front of the teeth roots, and with this tool resembling large pliers, from which this shape comes:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 Let this tool be long so it cannot break, and know that many dense tools are needed:
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 And also other tools, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the wise masters skilled in themselves find their tool according to what their work and illness require, for there are some diseases where the ancients did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of ailments, and if it breaks on the cart or other bones, where it can be, seek the tools that are necessary, which I have told you, and help with gestures, so this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And they must be large and sturdy to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore the joint with appropriate medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, let the patient rest with this instrument.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth do not appear in accordance with natural form and the shape is deformed, especially in young women; if this happens, you should know that the tooth has not erupted after the dent, and it is not in its proper place, and it cannot be removed or filed.
adonques lou raie;	 Then the ray.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 And if it is outside with the tooth, take this instrument that has this shape and resembles a small beak, and should have sharp iron at its end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the tooth, little by little in many days, due to hardness of the dentin, and because you cannot move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, file it with a small steel file as shown below in form.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is as if the limb is like the mold for making needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And in this mold the tooth is slowly and lightly carved day by day until it falls out.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 Then the plane is finished at one end with any smoother, and if the tooth is too sharp and bites the tongue, then the roughness must be filed until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the tooth falls out in front, either by percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you treat them with constricting medicines, that does not help.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 Therefore they must be held with a gold wire, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And the rod should be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you want to align the teeth, take the rod and place it between two teeth without damage, then insert the head between the adjacent teeth (if there is one or more of them), until you see it clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 then continue covering up to the part where you started, and hold your hand gently and skillfully so that it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And bind the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then hold the head with the rod to tongs and assemble them, and place them between the healthy tooth, so that it does not pierce the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then leave it as tight as it can remain, and if it dislocates or loosens, pull on another thread to hold it in place.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it remains and serves thus throughout its duration, this is the shape of teeth and the form of the alignment of two healthy teeth, or two molars, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, freshly, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And do not interfere with it unless one is wise and experienced; and sometimes a tooth-shaped piece of cow bone is made, and it is placed in the place where it is missing, and held as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 At times there is a link coming from below the tongue, which occurs naturally;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or by injury caused by a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the procedure is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and pull out the tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then grasp the nerve-like link with forceps, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if there is hardness or knotting, and it is due to a sudden injury, press the incision and crush the link with forceps.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and be careful that the cut is not too deep, for there is an artery below.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have completed, raise the place of fresh water or warm water, then put a linen tent under the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And the itch troubles the patient each night, preventing the limb from healing.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol to the wound.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 And if the wound does not heal, cauterize it with the cautery of lentiginosum, which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 Then treat it with another remedy until it heals,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 And if you see a spot that is hard, black or dark, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 If it is swelling and there is moisture, pour in onion juice using a thin spatula, then release it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if the bone protrudes at your work, place vitriol powder on it until it is cauterized, then return to your work when you have drawn out all fire.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then lift the limb gently and carefully, and heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of throat abscesses
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes boils called "godath" come up inside the throat. They are properly called "two almonds," and when you treat them as we have said in the division, and they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is a hard abscess of small size and darkish color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is thick, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 But leave it until it is dead, and then you will separate it, or it would break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 If it is of white color and the root is thin, prepare the instrument for covering; but first check if the abscess is calm and soothed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be on your side, and open his mouth and take hold of him by the sergeant between his hands, and press the tongue down onto the entire instrument, so that it takes this shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 And be made of silver or thin iron like a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 Can you press the tongue onto the entire instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the probe and push it into the abscess and pull it upward more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And draw no object from the cloth with it, then grasp it with the instrument, in this manner it is shaped, like a pair of pincers;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And if the neck is curved and bent to one side, and they are very sharp, made of iron or bone;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the base with pliers, here is its shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 It is called a traction on one side and a compression on the other;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have grasped one of the nuts, grasp the other in the same manner, and after the incision, pour warm, hot, sharp, and sticky medicine on the patient, and if bleeding occurs, continue to pour warm medicine until the wound is sealed or cooked grape seeds are used, or pine needles, and similar things, until the wound is stopped.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then, the care until it heals.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And sometimes in the throat other abscesses than the two molars are born, so cut them as you would the two molars equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treat a woman of an abscess that was born within the throat, namely the abscess of small size;
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and had tightly closed the entire throat so that the woman could not exhale due to the narrowed passageway, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained thus for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had been pressed in by two fingers through both nostrils.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 Then I quickly made an incision in one of the armpits, and after that, I pulled it forcefully out, and removed a large piece of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then reset another part on the other side of the neck, and open the mouth and press the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 After inserting the lance into these abscesses, and scraping a part of it, not more than a little blood was released.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus the woman's windpipe was cut open from the throat, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting into this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 The abscess continued to grow again and filled the cavity that I had seen, becoming quite large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I trapped it and cauterized it within the throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 In this way, it stopped growing.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And may these parts be divided, and let God restore them after I am gone.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the rectum protrudes outwards and is long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is deep and round, it is called "bladder".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 If it is cured as we have said in the previous section, and the cure does not help, and you notice that the large abscess has subsided, and it becomes subtle, then you must cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And the round one which is gathered together but not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 And it is red or of pale color or black, then you must avoid cutting into it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Then, when you see it, as I have said, according to its color and size, you must make the patient sit in front of the sun and press his tongue against the instrument that we have mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then push the onyx into the eye and pull it out, and tie it with the two instruments that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And you must not cover anything that is beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 because if you cover more, it will harm the voice and the speech.
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And after the incision, use as we have said in the incision of the two arms, and treat it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 If the patient fears to be covered, then you must use an instrument for the cauterization of his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the manner of the cautery is hot and sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 The patient should place his head on your holy relic, and then press the tongue against the instrument as we have said in the chapter of caution, and bind it with hot, sharp iron, so that it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 and use the handle of this instrument, which has the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And have a head of hair where medicine is placed, like the handle of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine above the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 The patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not reach the throat or the wound.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then hold your hand on all the medicine and press on the eye for the quantity of half an hour, until you see it [the eye] shrink and the biting of the medicine is soothed.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 and if you see [something], take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and press the instrument against all of the cotton on the eye socket, until the cotton adheres to the eyelid.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 and do this often, until the cautery is complete, then let it dry, and wash after four or five days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 And if you need to start the cautery again from the medicine, then start it, and after the cautery let water around the eye, with a cotton ball in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be cooled with cold water, and let it be cured with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This cure is more effective than incision, not just the fire cautery;
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 if it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take calmant (calamint?), ysope, origanum (oregano), rue, camomille (chamomile), avronne (wormwood?) and similar herbs, and put them all or some of them together in a pot, and add asafetida, and boil it;
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 and the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot there should be the instrument of hair according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And it should be silver or gold, and one of the heads pushed into the patient's mouth until the vapors rise to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 Afterward, it often continues until the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the beginning of an abscess's opening, for many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and not do this except in the decline of an abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put an eggshell crack into the head so that the patient's mouth is not too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 because the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times it becomes lodged in the throat with bone or fish spine, or something similar.
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore, it is necessary that you pull out whatever you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instruments, so that you can see movements in the thing.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And whatever does not open and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 By chance if the thing escapes through vomiting.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 Or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 And tie a thread to the sponge, and then make him swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 And when it reaches its place, if it hardens, then you will draw it out.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 If it does not come out as we have said, then take the plunger according to this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the handle of the instrument be bent at the top so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the head up.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, let it come slowly, and do not push the bone in.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 It is better for the patient to insert the instrument, since they will move or the matter is urgent.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 If it goes down, or you pull it out with the whole instrument equally until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the saliva of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Sometimes, sulphur is medicine, as I said in the division, through the use of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when that does not help, then look into the throat of the patient towards the sun, since you press his tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 If you see the saliva, take it away with a very small spoon, or fine tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 If it is not successful, take a heated iron and put it in the throat of the sick person, then push or pull the iron up and down several times.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 Make the patient drink water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 then take a full eye dropper of cold water, open the mouth, and throw it in to swallow, and move it with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 and as soon as sulphur feels the water, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not fall as we said, sulphurize the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I told you about in the eye fumigation.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this many times, because it will require patience.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot or it has charcoal in it, and cover it with a cover made from a perforated cloth in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then pour the fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the snake in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes to the wound.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 and now the wound should bleed, and if it does not bleed, then repeat the fumigation many times;
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 The patient suffers thirst, eats salty and raw food, and drinks no water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then it will be necessary for the wound to bleed through this method.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument with which one treats the vein, is, as it can be seen, similar to curved tweezers for entry into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and it has the shape of a probe, and it is covered in lime, such that whatever it grasps, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	 here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 It has a similar form to an abscess, according to the remembrances that follow in this book, and they are various in piercing and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 and it is in two ways: one of which resembles the same, and of that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second manner is for those that are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are other than those in the base, and abscesses in the hollow part of the bone are other than those that come at joints, and each should be judged according to its work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And to abscesses, one should not pierce until the bowel is measured according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if there are some that require piercing when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses that have burst open from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When abscesses come to joints and are left until it is purged around them, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may become corrupt, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 If the abscess is burst open at the main member, and you delay the piercing until it has decayed, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 if it has burst from the foundation, pierce it while it is still alive;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 Do not pierce the abscess that is ripe without digestion completed, except for those which have burst from the foundation, it will not heal completely and a fistula will come.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 and cannot heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And you must know the hour of piercing the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and it is when the pain is eased, and the disappearance of fever, the decrease in pain and redness, and the swelling and settling of the head of the abscess, and the other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And you must make him sit with the perforation or closer to the abscess, and at the place where the wound has opened.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is in the hand or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal or without opening.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those who have swelling in such a member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a charred state, it is better to leave the perforation until it is confirmed by complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 For if you pierce before that, it will be filled with the body's fluids and full of filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And by chance, harden the lips and plunge deep into it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess pierced in accordance with the body's width, according to what the limb needs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 And you must bring small abscesses, small wounds.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the appearance of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover and cure with lard, [that's the translation].
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When it becomes like a cloth and is soaked, if necessary, do as one does with babies [that's the translation].
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if there are those which are split into three angles and those from which one cures as the furrow of a thorn-apple (mistletoe), like abscesses at joints: [that's the translation].
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if there are those where one makes a round incision and other similar incisions for curing.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who have no head (like a superficial abscess), it is necessary that you pierce it fully [that's the translation].
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 When the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but only a part [that's the translation].
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then drain the abscess until the next day, then remove nothing wrong.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do it repeatedly for several days, until the bone is fully healed.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 Similarly, if the patient is weak, or a woman, or small children, or old and decrepit men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The sphincter sometimes jerks with the discharge of pus, which may accidentally cause the death of the patient, but do not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Therefore, be careful with this chapter, and when you have pierced the abscess, suck the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 and if it is a deep wound, bring linen or old cotton.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, then you must insert one linen or cotton swab in each until they meet.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 If you have dug into the abscess a part of the skin, and you have shaved around it, you must fill it with old cloth or linen thread without moisture, and tie it for two days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, remove the bone, and cure it with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and vinegar, wet the linen cloth, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 If the flow of blood persists, apply governance and cure, and the powders I have mentioned in this book should be placed on the muscles or abscesses when they are very nervous. If it is winter time, and the area or abscess is very tense, you must place hot blankets and dampened woolen cloths on top of them.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if it is summer, and the area is fatty, you must place hot blankets and dampened woolen cloths soaked in water and oil or cold wine on top of it for two days as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then drain the abscess and the pus and heal, as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 It is necessary to understand universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Or have I told you how one should go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses coming on the head, our practice is that they are wrapped in cloths, like the one who prunes a vine, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are fat and others with moisture like boils.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And there are those who are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt that the arteries will not oppose.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the operations of the cut are that you try every instrument that is called "intermissory," from which the form comes later, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make an incision along its length.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when the moisture is evacuated, scrape everything without leaving any hair that contains the moisture, because it will return again if you leave anything.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 Then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if available;
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 if not, use water and salt, and apply it to the wound until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 and let those who are delayed by night stay on it.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 Then repeat the cotton as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it does not remain by night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the wound with suitable ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess persists without fat, squeeze it according to this shape, long;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and throw your fingers into it, and remove all the scabs from all parts, and put all your care to draw out pus from where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the arteries oppose it (the dislocation), do as I have told you afterwards.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat an abscess that is hard, and cut and heal it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 Cut through the hard abscess and moisten it, as it will be easier, for there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and among those was the abscess that I cut from an old woman's head;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough and white, and could not break it.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if one had stabbed it with a knife, it would have caused as much damage as being hit by a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses that are near the head or at the roots of the ears, they should be opened always depending on the situation, in order to help the boil come out.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And heal them as necessary.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess occurs at the neck, and under the armpits, and in groins, and sometimes they come from other places on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 Each scrofula is properly within its side, as the abscess of the head and the boil at the roots of the ears, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and some are malicious and refuse to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In that case, you see it well-placed at the neck, and similar in color to the body, silent on all sides and not pulsating in the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 Then you must cut it across from above, and strip the skin of each part, and apply the two lips of the curette to the edges, if needed, as we have said in head abscesses.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 pull it slowly and carefully ensure that you do not cut the nerve or vein, and be neither too sharp nor cutting too deep, so as not to injure the hand, and look ahead so as not to cut more than necessary.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cut the vein or the artery, and it does not let you be over it, put vitriol powder in the wound, or any powders that stop bleeding, and hold the wound closed.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let it be until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound softened, and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work, until you finish it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then look for yourself if there remain small scrofulas, and cut them off and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if there is a vein in the root of the scrofula large open, it is not necessary that you cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang out, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then use old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on the wound, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 If you excise the entire scrofula, you must gather the two edges of the wound and sew them up now because there is no room for excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 You must understand how to cover the root and draw pus, then sew as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 For boils that have become excessive, pierce where they are softened to open.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and pierce it as described before, depending on it, then introduce tents with ointment and similar things to corrupt that which remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is well cleaned, heal it with fragrant ointment until it is healed.
de squinance	If the scrotum becomes inflamed and swollen, apply a poultice to it made from crushed barley, wine, and oil. Repeat this process daily for three days.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 but I have never seen it done in our land and it is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 To those who have scrofula, it is necessary that the division in the throat called "epiglotte" be cut open.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And no help can be given through it, because all the veins and the opening of the patient's mouth are located in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in both cheeks.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the parotid gland, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the strangulation that comes from the swelling.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut beneath three circles or four, a small slit through the center, between the two circles, or by the amount of the cut according to the size of the slit, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And if the throat is susceptible to the section of the epiglottis, there should be no cartilage and the vessels are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is fearful, it should extend the skin of the throat to its entire length, then cut open the wound until it reaches the trachea.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 And shake out the vessels of blood, if you see anything, then press the syringe, as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 And it is demonstrated by the section of the femoral vein that bursts through a broken limb and by the absence of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 Leave the wound open for a piece [of time].
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour has passed where there is doubt of strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care, and stitch it all closed except for the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that cause growth of flesh, until it is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the flight has fled.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then press the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus keeping him from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 And so, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease had passed, and it had passed in 3 days or 4. And then they commanded to stitch up the wound and heal it, until it was healed.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take a dagger and stab it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I discovered the wound, and found the blood coming out of it, and knew that she had not breathed or spoken except through her throat, and the wind was flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was cured;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And nothing more happened to the maiden but she regained her voice, and returned to her normal state.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 Therefore I say, have no fear during the operation on the epiglottis.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and is a large one of a greenish color, and it occurs mainly in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 It appears in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	 Nature and accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 And an artificial remedy has no effect.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And accidents are of two kinds, one is similar to fat, and the other kind is similar to an abscess coming from the artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there is fear, and it should not be worked on forcefully except in small cases, and it must be proved and sought after thorough examination of the patient.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 if you find it like fat, and it cannot be opened in any way, then crush it, as one crushes a boil, and drag it out entirely, if there is anything.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 examine it thoroughly, and heal it as required, until it is completely healed.
des nous	from us (we)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 Many methods concerning us there are, which I shall describe all their likenesses;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that exists between knot and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that dislocation is heat and fever persisting until the ebullition has passed, and the boil has healed.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then the fever and the heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With the knot there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins in the same way as a boil, and becomes swollen.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 and they are according to these likenesses, whether fatty or moist, and their colors are similar as I said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the nose, that you examine and inquire first about all the instruments called "entromissoire", according to their shape and the chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the method of incising abscesses for us is to take the moistest place found within the abscess and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel that the pus has been pierced, then as the size of the abscess dictates.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then remove the contents, and be careful to ensure it does not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If moisture flows out of a cold abscess, let it have its natural color as I said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if no moisture comes out after removing the contents, know that it is fatty; then make a cross-shaped incision, take pincers to it and gently peel back from both sides and draw the skin or coat that you pull out safely with the knot.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot draw it out whole, draw it out piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if something remains, it comes back to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if a little bit remains and it does not trouble you, apply the wound with some corrosive powders, hold the wound closed, place warm things on the abscess to reduce it, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if it is large, cut the two lips of the wound, and treat it with lard.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the vein is beaten against you or something else happens quickly and you have no vitriol at hand, use crushed glass and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the wound festers, and let the boiling of the blood subside.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to cover what has stayed with the knot.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are the shapes of the intermediary tools, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three squares that are called "albarets", and one which is called "breb", and there are three kinds of them:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistula.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are like needles used to sew sacks, and made of citron wood, iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are worth more, and they are more skilled at closing black corborellous (a type of abscess).
et sont de III manieres:	 large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistula.
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of the holes (pertus).
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of onions are quite similar, as you can see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Large, medium, and small [objects or items]
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if the ones having three curvatures of three kinds [are present];
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if the ones having three curvatures and are also of three kinds are present;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 and if the ones having two curvatures, and the ones with one curvature only, and are of three kinds are present.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The head of these tools with which we cut are sharp, and of those who do not cut at all except from one side, from which we scourge the nerves, because one does not hit the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 and of these instruments are the stirrups held in loops, so that the patient does not injure himself when opening abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	 And they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 do not use them except in the case of swellings such as arms, legs, breasts, and wounds, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And sometimes another small instrument is used, similar to the incision of blisters, following this shape, to drain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And one applies it [the cautery] sometimes to the place that is healthy to close veins and arteries, and sometimes in this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the line b. up to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then cut the fat and apply the wound with medicinal herbs warming charcoal, then bring together the two lips of the wound to stitch it up, and heal it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the breast (mammele) slants downwards and is flattened due to its size, as happens with women, then split it into two halves above, through two similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 thus one part remains connected to the other at the end of both, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from this line 'b' to line 'g'.
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then scrape the skin that is between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary in the treatment, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 and if it is not healed or the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moist cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave it (the affected area) until it drains the remaining flesh and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses in the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses coming from under the buttocks are managed as hard scrofulas where they contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those containing moisture must be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire hole that is in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and anoint it afterwards until it heals completely.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula (scrofula is a chronic disease that causes swelling of the lymph nodes), then make an incision as we have said in the treatment of scrofula, and if the wound opens up, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	The severing of an artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When the artery is blocked and the skin above it becomes adhered, there are often abscesses, and this also happens at the swollen vein with an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if it is known in such a way that it is due to the artery, then the abscesses are long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it with your hands, pull it slowly;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 and if it is through the vein, then it should appear in front.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 and it is foolishness to cover this abscess, especially when it is under the flesh and near the joints and neck and in many other places, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore, one must use iron treatment, and for those with head problems, the same applies, and in those who have a swelling of an artery, make an incision above the skin long enough;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 then open the wound at one place and carefully separate the artery from the veins until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 then insert an awl under it and make it pierce up to the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then move the joint between the two ligaments of an intromissoir as far as the sanz isses allows, and release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 then apply the cure that induces a bough, while the ligament is shaking.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then cure him with ointment after that, while he is healthy.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 and if the abscess is due to a wound in the vein, then you must dye your hand that part of the abscess on the entire skin, then push the needle under the joint that you hold with your hand, and make it pierce, and let it have double thread, so you can draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of the two parts of the ligament with thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the thread has gone in fully, push another needle all the way through under the abscess at the incision of the first needle and hold the thread in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 then squeeze the abscess until the pus comes out, then squeeze the hard part and leave what is connected;
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply remedies of poultices and liniments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	Of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come in the artery and vein, they come on nerves when wounded, or from too much labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 This happens more often in the shoulder and the thighs where there are joints, and it is severe abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is in various conditions with pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is being reset, the patient feels pain, but not fully within the body, but beneath the skin.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 And it should be completely immobile in all directions, neither forward nor backward, nor beneath nor above, and the one in joints should not be covered by iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 It may contract by chance.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And if it is at the head or forehead, make the skin with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and strike its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it is large, suspend it at the incision, peel it, then extract the bone and close the wound with stitches, and let the cure continue until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Hanging large lumps
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" because of its resemblance to mushrooms, and the roots are subtle, and the heads are large.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and there are some small ones and very large ones.
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 and I have seen a man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were cut open, and ran moisture continuously.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I weighed them and found one weighing 18 ounces, and the other 6, and the work in the incision shows that if you look at the patient, the article (the affected part) is white and moist and has a subtle root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the head (of a bone) is fractured widely, have the fire cautery ready in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For in the thigh there are often excessive bleeding, and if it escapes without you, hasten therefore to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 and if you see the patient frightened and afraid of iron incision, take a well-made thread and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 then release, and do not stop tightening the thread of the ligature until the artery throbs with pain.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 and if the roots are thick, be afraid to break it with the belly, but you can break half of it, then cauterize so that it does not come back.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then treat the wound, and make sure not to cover the yellowish, weak-smelling, and milky-looking substance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess enlarged, and I will come to treat the scrofula hereafter.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the belly is filled [with something]
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the pus comes from the cautery of a wound or incision in the belly and is on some of the boils, as it happens in other routes, or blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described above, or wind-inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And if it is due to the rupture of the siphon and the exit of the bowel, the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the rupture of the intestine, then it is more diverse; and when you press it with your hands, it returns, and then it comes back, and by chance if it is sutured, it greatly enlarges at the opening of the wound and due to great labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 If it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and easily opened when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is due to blood, the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to ventosity (gas), it yields to the touch, and the work is that you examine whether its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary that you let the healing be.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, regarding the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you should command the patient to lean his backside, and be fully extended straight, then hold around the abdomen.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command him to push gently between your hands, then go around the area that you have held with a small spoon, then spread half of the abscess above on a large unguent.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord made of strong silk firmly, and let the nose be bound with linen.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 then open half of the extended abscess on the cord, and insert your finger, and search for the intestines.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 if you find it seized by the cord, then undo it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find the boil, take it at its base, and cut off the superfluous part of it;
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery makes it contract or the vein, go around it gently, then return to your work and take two needles and insert two sharp wires through them, and place the two needles around what you have made in a cross shape so that you can pierce it;
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 then hold the abscess for three inches above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the place until it is ready, and let the dead flesh fall off by itself;
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 or you cut it when it is tender and can be pierced, then treat what is necessary, and let the abscess heal as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the joint as necessary, and bind the joint.
dou chancre	the boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have said in the previous section the resemblance of scrofula, and how it should be treated with medicine, and how to remove the iron cure.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And we say the boil arises in the groin area, and great caution should be taken in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are present where they can be shaved like a common boil, and in the thigh, and similar places, it must all be removed when it is at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 and when they are large and old, do not approach them, for I never know anyone who can heal them.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 no one ever heals them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the works, when they are in places where they can be removed, as we have said, is that you purge the patient of black bile once.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 Then make him purge if there is obvious fullness, then prepare the patient in good health for the procedure.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 Then throw your onions or boilsores, and all the hairs from every part, and the bone from every part should feel nothing left;
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And let the blood flow freely, and press well the place with your hand or any object, and if the bleeding makes you oppose the incision of an artery or a vein, then cauterize it until the wound is coagulated.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it from another healing until it is healed.
de ydropisie	dropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of edema, and in what way the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the medicine that is used for it, and the one that is healed by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 It is split (or broken) only.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and one must not use iron in these two cases:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanites and yposarche (or epaschar), for it is deadly.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 therefore, when treating this case of edema known as "eclites" in medicine, and the cure does not help, look to see if the patient is weak or if he has another disease besides edema, such as abdominal distension and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 do not use iron because there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 and if you see the patient with great strength, and he has no other disease besides edema alone, and is not too thin nor too old, then do as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Lift the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the stomach pressing the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the pointed spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through from the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 and it should not be so pointed that it can reach the intestines when inserted, nor should it pierce.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 then look to see if the urine is diverted towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 it is necessary that you make an incision below the bladder, 3 fingers' breadth right below the navel.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 and if the urine is due to liver disease, then make the incision on the left side of the bladder 3 fingers' breadth.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 and if it is due to obstruction, it should be on the right side, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that excess fluid does not run to the weak place.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then pierce the entire skin with an instrument, push it, and pull your hand with the spatula between the skin and the bone to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the bone as far as the spatula reaches, which is the lower jawbone, then pull it out and insert this instrument in its place:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it resembles a silver chain, thin, and is of fine wire or light arsenic, and there is one at the part below the little piercing.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and on one side, three piercings.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and two on the other side, and one on the other.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 and the head is cut like a quill, and it has the shape of the incision that scribes make on a quill.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 Above the head is the anale, so when the instrument comes to the anus, hold it now above the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 Then empty the anus, that is, either half or one third, for if you see more than what is appropriate at that time, by chance, the patient may die due to the resolution of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall flat, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 However, according to its potency and depending on the patient's condition and pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 Then draw the instrument and hold the juice, it is retained now due to the cauterization that stops the perforation that is on the siphac, as I have spoken about, that you pierce in this way.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then use the instrument again on another day if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small amount of juice.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do this every day, but do not let it become excessive until it neither grows nor there is a small amount of juice.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you have doubts about the patient and let too much juice accumulate, heal it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating, bathing, and sunlight, and apply wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And the medicine for drying should be administered until he is clean, and cauterize on the stomach, the liver and the spleen after extraction of the water as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	For stopping the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who do not have foreskin at all, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to immediately pierce through every spittle very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then put soft cloth of linen and tie it for three or four days until he wants to urinate, then remove the cloth, let him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And in case there is no need for this, because the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 The patient with a small purulent wound is to be treated with a cloth of plunged linen, as we have said, and it will swell up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the cloth in their place are bleeding, because no one is born who has the cloth on the head of the penis, which means they cannot urinate before tying their penis up.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot heal because the matter cannot reach the sore, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 The manner of work is that the patient lies supine on their back, with the head of the penis and its tip as flat as a feather's shaft, so that the testicles are in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And take care to prevent bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, compress the area where blood is coming out, and heal the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Often this almond appears in the penis, and it is an ugly sign of sickness.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are both harmful and harmless ones.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 It is necessary for you to take them [the things] in one continuous motion, strike and clean them all, then put soft cotton in an Egyptian ointment on top.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 If the ulcer is malignant, purple in color and weeping, you must apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have struck it [the thing], and the bladder is in the middle of the wound and has both parts inside and outside the skin, it is necessary to remove the bladder that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it [the thing] is sealed, heal it from the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you heal it together, there is not assured that the bladder of the wound will not be pierced, and there comes blackness and corruption in its wound and wherever.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to burn everything that is black and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour made from the peel of pomegranate rinds and leaves, then treat it with other treatments until it becomes healthy again.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding comes out, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery helps in the following combinations:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 This means "It is concerning blood circulation, decay.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 And if the head of the penis is decayed and retracted, then you must drink or lead a cane from the penis, and make the patient urinate.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 And when the skin is torn at the tip of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then you must shave it with the instrument of hair removal, until the ligaments are separated, and release the testicles from the penis on all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 And if it is painful to discuss this matter, then you must shave it with the spatula a little bit from the tip of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then carefully press them together, and place a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them, so that it does not dry up immediately.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not the same as continuous wounds like other injuries;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 However, when we perform this work of our own accord and intentionally on infants, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for healing.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 For I have wanted to gather the greater part of masters and healers who were performing circumcision at that time, and their methods, and a newborn.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 Since there are two layers, one of them could be cut, and by chance the other could remain below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Or the recovery is covered, and there is twice the pain, and in the healing of which from below the member is not assured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And in the shaping of the nail by chance, the iron may slip and spoil the work, and it often happens that it doesn't need mending and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the amputation which is done to all the chains of thread I have found the goodness of experiment, for the forces cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, equalize the nails evenly at all times;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but ensure that the nails are well narrowed around the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the method of the first work is that you make the child understand, if he can, not to make him tie the thread around the stick except only, and then let him enjoy it in all ways you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 then make him put it between your hands straight, and force the fingers between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see, nor any instrument.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand on the shoulder and blow or cough, and pull it upwards until the head of the shoulder is in.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the dislocated joint with a double thread, then tie it below the poke to another ligament.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and hold it with the second ligature at the pouch and index finger, and press between the two ligaments, then remove the cough quickly and pull the head of the shoulder.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 then let the blood flow freely, for that is the remedy.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and put powder on it and above the powder place a layer of egg white cooked with a little rose water, mixed with fresh rose oil; let it stay there until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of strengths for purification is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The two shoulders should be slender and sharp, and the same size as the wrist equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 the error in purification is when the intestines within are incised;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 then you must stretch it with your nail, so that the flesh makes an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 and cover it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then take tweezers, and press it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if it lasts more than three days, and what is below the penis swells, let it be until the abscesses calm down, and lightly scrape off the scab.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 if you press it as much as you can move, and take care of the penis area, it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Cure therefore the dislocated joint with powder for closed injuries as we have said in treating powders, and if one applies it excessively, it will go above but will not help.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 keep the dislocation, as we have said, until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 Retention of urine is caused by a stone, or frozen blood, or pus, or rotten flesh, or similar things as we have said in the section.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 and if the urine is not released, and you see it is retained due to a stone in or neck of the bladder, then the patient must be bent over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 and place the feet on the back, extend his abdomen from above the loins, and hold the patient flat as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then the bladder's neck is compressed towards the stone above, which causes the urine to be expelled;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer an extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its shape:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And it shall be of subtle silver, light and thin like the feather of a bird;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And the cable (or thread) shall be a palm and a half long, and fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the way of urine discharge is that you take a double thread, tie its end to a wool or cotton wad, and push the thread end into the syringe.
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 Wrap the superfluous wool and push it to the tip of the syringe, then oil or butter and egg yolk the syringe, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with oil moistened with oil and water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the rod until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod above towards the butt.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then push the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and make the patient feel it coming to the empty place, and this is not done according to this order except for when the guide of where it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then wind the thread around all the wool strands little by little, and let the urine follow the thread, then pull it out, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	Diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scratches or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything using the instrument called "clepsydra", and its shape is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and if it persists for three days.
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 One on one side, and the other on the other side, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 and the joints placed on both sides in such a way that the medicine stick closely to the shaft without addition, so that moisture can be drawn out, and pushed when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 and when you see the medicine thrown into the bladder, place the head of the couester in the moisture, and draw out the trail that is inside;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 if you draw out the moisture from the couester, then push the trail forcefully within;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 the moisture will enter it (the bladder), and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient feels it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 and this is the shape of the subtle suppository with which you administer a suppository to the bladder.
si est ci:	 If it is here (the case):
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or iron, and the head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and underneath the chest or the liver lies.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to soften the bladder, then tie it between two breasts with a strong thread, and heat the bladder on fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 then insert the head of the bladder into the anus, then press your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make it into a circle, and poke a hole in the center.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then insert a strong wire into these holes, then gather the circle as one gathers the needle, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 and do as you have done with the bladder, pressing on it with your hand until the moisture comes out of the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone (arrowhead or projectile)
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have said in the division the ways of stone, and extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 and I have said the difference between a stone caused by rain, and all the signs, and in which stone one must work by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 and in the bladder, and in the vein.
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine jump from the bladder resembles urine in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 and it opens a hernia, and greatly injures the patient's penis, and he suffers many times, and then binds it up.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 and of these jumps the foundations are destroyed;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 and the healing of children is easy until they are four years old, but it is very serious in elderly people, and it is somewhat uncertain for those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 and the treatment of large stones is easier than that of small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it often obstructs the search for stones.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet, and push down and move under, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and does not move upwards.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make him sit between your hands supported, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 then touch it and probe inside.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 if you feel the stone in the cavity, hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall out with the touch, moisten your right index finger with oil if the patient is an adult, or moist your thumb, if the patient is a young adult.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 and push it into its foundation, probe for the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it at the bladder neck.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 then press with your finger and push it to where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and also command him to stretch out his right hand towards the top of the testicles, and his left hand to open the skin that is beneath the testicles in the area where incision is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then insert the spatula-like tool, which has this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And make an incision between what is between the testicles and the bottom, not in the middle but along the left side of the scrotum.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And the right side should be on top of the stone, and your fingers should be close to or against the bottom, and make the cut across, so it is wide at the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 By chance, the press must be applied to the base, as its foundation, so it may jump out of place.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 and know that there is always stone or angles and edges:
si est griés a issir;	 if it is to be extracted;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 and if it is swollen like a plum, round, and the point of exit is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 To that one therefore where there are angles and edges, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 and if it does not jump out, you must pull up with the pliers that are like a file at the tip, to push the stone so that it does not escape;
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or you drive under the instrument curved at the tip.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot deceive it in this way, you should make a small opening with a lancet, and if the edges are not cut, you should draw it out with a vitriol-coated probe.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 And if there are more than one arrow, push the largest one first into the neck of the bladder, then strike it, pull it out, and afterwards the smaller ones, if there are any more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, then it must be cut open more widely.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things may happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 or he dies, or urine comes out immediately through the place where the bladder cannot be sealed.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 but you must make every effort to draw it out or dissect with pliers until you pull it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 and when you have completed your work, smear the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, press it together, and cover it with a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rosewater and cold water, to cool down the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 Then hold the patient on his neck, and do not undo the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the rope, wash the wound well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of diaphinecon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 If abscesses grow in the wound and there is corruption of blood in the bladder and the urine is retained as if without leaping with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Therefore, stick your finger into the wound, and draw out that blood, for if it remains, it will cause the bladder to run and urinate.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Lift the wound from pus and inflammation and purulent matter, and help it in all ways you know, as long as it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that all the herbs you use in the cure, you bind the two thighs together, and place the remedies on top of them.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 And if the stone is small, and it is conducted along the penis, and inserted, and the urine cannot flow out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 if you follow what I say next, you will cut it many times, you are excused from the cutting for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod of this shape and sharpened at four angles on one tip:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take the thread and tie it around the rod under the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 then push the awl gently into the rod until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 and turn the awl slowly in the stone, little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 It will soon be broken and shoot out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie the thread around the stone both below and above, then bend the rod towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let the [patient] heal when he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	From a woman's stone (or pelvis)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 It happens that stone should be inserted in women, and if it ever occurs, the cure is painful, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 The first reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second is that no skilled woman can be found who uncovers herself before mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 The third manner is that by chance no skilled woman can be found in this craft of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 The fourth manner is that the woman's stone (womb) is deeper than the man's, so it requires more profound cutting and causes great fear. If you need to perform such a procedure, then you must take a skilled midwife, although it may be difficult to find one, and if you cannot find one, do not hesitate to use a subtle chaste maiden;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 and present a wise bailiff in the knowledge of women, or a woman who knows some part of the art, and he commands her to do whatever you command regarding the examination of the stone (womb).
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look carefully if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then you must press your finger or probe and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 If she finds it, you must hold it beneath your finger and advise her to press with her left hand on the bladder near the uterus.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 She must move it gently from the bladder's entrance towards the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then you should strike the stone at the root of the thigh near the middle bone, where it moves and feels the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 Do not move your finger above or below the stone, and make a small incision at first.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then push the hand (or implement) into the small of the back, if you feel the arrow, open the wound so that the arrow can exit freely, and know that there are many types of arrows.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 it means small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with feathers.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the forms to understand the cause.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the arrow avoids you (or "does not come out"), place pulverized vitriol at its location and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work when the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you for the extraction of arrows in men to help you with your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 and if the arrow avoids you (or "does not come out"), and it is an artery that has been cut, place powder on the location and hold with tents and bindles, and do not start again, and leave the arrow and do not draw it, for there is danger of the patient dying.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has been relieved and the wounds have healed, then return to your work until the pain subsides.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Grind aqous is not anything else but an assembly of moisture or white soap, which is beneath the cartilage of the eyes, containing the yolk.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and it is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the egg white, if one thinks that it is another yolk.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 and it is the skin of the cartilage between the white soap (syfac) which we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 and this only occurs in the toe nail.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the cause of this watery hernia is weakness that comes to the testicles, and the matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from striking the eyes, and this moisture may have many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is a yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white fluid, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and soft as we have said, it is an abscess, which is long like an egg and does not open the eyes, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the very fabric [of the abscess], it is an abscess like a part of an egg, and for that reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if moisture is between the hide of the shoulders and the white flesh, one feels it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, to know the color of the moisture, you must probe deeply with care, as its form has been described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that follows.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we treat it with iron (cautery), the patient should be bled as much as our power allows and the state of his body requires.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then he lies on his back on a small elevated object and covers him with many cloths.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then he lies on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit at his right, and extend the yardstick to one of the two shoulder blades.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula in your left hand and cut the hide of the shoulders along its length until you reach the tip, making sure the incision is straight when cutting the hide of the shoulders up to white flesh, and carefully peel off the skin according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then pierce the syphac fully with water and let out all the water, then put your fingers in, and hold the syphac up.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 and only touch the cavity of the bladder, but not the kidneys.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 carefully break or in pieces the ribs of it entirely, for if you do not break it well, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 and if the egg jumps out of your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the bladder.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then assemble the two bellies of the kidneys in a stitch, then treat it like other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 and if you find the egg corrupt with another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are hanging, suspecting the discharge of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then pull on the cords to their full extension, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the ail is assembled in two parts together, know that these are the branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 Then pull the other part equally as you did the first, then squeeze out the blood, and put linen moistened in rose oil into the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and place another linen moistened with wine and oil on the two cords, and put fabric doubled over them, and tie it above all the cord that is in this shape.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take the fabric and use linen straps in this manner and sew them together into a girdle for the thighs. One of the cords should take hold at the base to the back, and the other at the handle part.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other two bones above the two angles, and let all the restrictions meet at the loop of the bridle.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 And sometimes this ramice of cautionery is medicine in a place where the iron-sized wound is, and it is that you take the cautery knife, touch the skin there, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water comes out.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 take the cautery according to this shape, pierce that pus at once, and scrape off this thin cautery hot.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And press in all ways as you can until everything is scorched.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 and know that this work is more salvific.
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And guard against disorder of blood, and move those who have cuts.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 If anything happens contrary to this, or if there is an abscess or bleeding or something else, then cure what happens contrary to this, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is afraid and does not want to wait for this procedure due to its horribleness, then perform perforation as I tell you, and it should be that when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that the anus is in the right place, then make the patient sit on a raised surface.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 therefore pierce the abscess in the part below the entire spatula-width wide and place the perforation along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp edges protrude.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton on the wound, bind it, and allow the rest of the sharp edge to protrude, then heal it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 If the white cloth does not allow the sharp edge to exit from the wound, then you must stick a feather or an instrument used for treating the sharp edges of abscesses into it, as described earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 And stretch open the wound, and know that the sharp edge returns, and it is assembled after six months or a little more; and when it is assembled as described above, then the patient will pass their days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of an abscess in the cheeks
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Know that in the cutting of this graft there are many positions to be feared, so it seems that it is better to leave it as it is.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you the work and the appearance of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 Many abscesses come from the body or the kidneys.
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And it happens frequently.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It is caused by excess acidity or heat that spreads to the intestines or from blows.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 The color of the abscess corresponds to the body's color.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 And no pain is found, but the abscess is severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 Sometimes an abscess is hard and stony, with this color, and occasionally it comes from the artery or vein swelling.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 If it is due to the artery, it can be recognized by the hot abscess swelling when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 The one caused by vein swelling can be recognized by its response to the touch of fingers and it is easy to make an incision on this appearance, as well as others.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut the yolk of the egg, then place the egg upright, and pull the white part from the yolk, and free the suspensiony membrane of the egg from all parts around the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already boiled with these shells, then you must therefore remove the egg and break it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is in the white or in whatever is within the vessels, then you must free all of that soft part and break it completely.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the navel is located behind the back, you must crush everything and extract the afterbirth as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, apply the wound with damp linen in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of an abscess in the cheeks
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapper resembling the boar's bristle, with softening of the yolks, and the patient becomes weak when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the cure for this disease is as fearsome and dangerous as that mentioned earlier, yet we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then bring the support beam under his buttocks towards your chest, with all the ropes close to the penis, and tie them tightly, stretching them out.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 then cut the sharp pointed bladder-like object wide open along the vein area, until it is exposed, and then peel off from both sides as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 then insert a double-threaded needle where the vein has come out, and tie it at the first end where the blood has flowed, and then tie it to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 then press them evenly directly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then treat the wound as one would treat another, so that no patient's head leaks into one of the cheeks.
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 for if this happens to all patients, it is necessary to drain the eyes of all the patients.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 so that the eyes do not lose their discharge due to the incisions of the patients, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	of the breaking of the nose
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The consequences of this remedy are due to the section that causes feces or air, or the extension above the abdomen in the area of the anus, causing the intestines to descend from that incision to one of the eyes.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 and this incision is either due to feces or extension, and these two forms come from two sources of causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 or of blow, or jump, or break, or lifting of heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 and the signs when it is due to the stretching of the sinew, it happens gradually, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 and the abscess is equal in size up to the full, because the sinew follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is of the section of the surgical incision, which makes sudden pain appear at the beginning, and the abscesses are various appearing under the skin close to it, and this is due to the release of the intestines and the body's reaction to the surgery.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	Sometimes the intestines come out of the circle and are retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, therefore it is advisable to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to draw the intestine into their hand inside the wound if they can fit it in;
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 then press on its neck between your hands and lift the legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 then stretch the skin above, and strike all the hide of the buttocks with length;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then push the ribs of the waist upwards, one by one, as needed to open the wound, and let them be so positioned that the hands can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then flay the skin that is beneath the bones of the hips, exposing all the white fat until it becomes completely exposed on all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your index finger into the area where the bone of the hip is located, between the white fat that is beneath the skin of the egg (the pelvis) and the second layer of fat, and between the second layer of fat and the area behind the egg, and between the second layer of fat.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move your right hand inside the pelvis and raise the white fat to your left hand, lift the egg towards the abdomen with all the white fat.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And command the minister to stretch out the shoulder blade upward, and disconnect that which is forward behind the joint.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And if your fingers find the intestines rolled up or hard white lump, and if you discover anything like that, push it into the abdomen below.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with thick thread made of 10 threads, and push it into the back part of the lump, which is after the skin of the bladder.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the head that appears with threads, until there are four threads left;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape and tie the lump, which is after the skin of the bladder, with a strong knot of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then, wrap the shoulders of the fingers, and join them by two bands, so that none of the servants who nurse them can enter, except for a bandage covered abscess.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 and tie the rope according to the first rope length of two fingers wide, and after these two ropes leave some slack which is under the arch of the knees far from the great one by a finger.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 and after that [the bandage], according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 then cut in the part that is under the skin of the knees, as far as the bones protrude and bend, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 then bring moistened wool in oil, and put it on the wounds, and bring the rope that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white parts as we have said are cauterized after incision, due to fear of blood flow.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For it happens many times, let the ligament stay until it chooses to loosen.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 and if it delays in falling, you shall apply warm water and place that which we have said upon it until it loosens.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 then treat the wound with another medicine until it is completely healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never seen anyone dare to perform a cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the old ones said that it is made like a splint attached to the bone, in this manner you bind the tendons, after cutting slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 then press together and treat the abscess with that which works it, until the tendons loosen;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heal as we have said, until it is completely healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Sometimes rot comes in the groin area, as we have said, and open the joints.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And do not let any of the internal organs spill from the anus, and if they do, it is a small amount, and repair them every hour;
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or sores may develop, until the internal organs continue to spill;
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 And this happens by the extension of the sore which is in the ulcers, as we have said, because it is extended, then the surrounding tissues are softened and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 and the cure is by cauterization, as we have said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 The patient lies down on his back between your hands, then strike the inflamed wound's side with a flat iron of three feet wide according to its size;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 And then extract the sinus that is beneath the skin, then take the lard and place it on the apparent surface of the sinus;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 And press to the full depth of the abdomen, then sew the two apparent surfaces of the sinus on top of the lard to the head of the fat. and stitch one and the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then take out the fat head, and do not cover the sinus nor extend the egg or any other thing, as I told you in the treatment of the hernia of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 then treat it like a wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, if they become soiled and heal the wound, until it heals completely.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The cloth is compressed, without appearance in the wound, and the cauteries are more effective in this place and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin on the buttocks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often the skin of the scrotum becomes soft in some men because the testicles within are softened, and there is milk visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 It is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie down on his back, and strike the softened skin over the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and if you see, stitch the superfluous softened skin in three or four places firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then strike between the stitches, and the wound heals as other wounds do, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	the punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that cauterization is considered in our law, and therefore I would not like to speak of it in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 and is necessary only for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 one is that the patient in cauterization answers when asked, and in cauterization receives the cure.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other, because we often need to tame certain beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 I therefore say that taming is done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Or by attraction, or by fracture.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until its bones are softened and during.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Then press it with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 Of the beating of size:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 You must dye the beast and press the skin of the bones with your left hand, then tie the stirrup, and strike above each bone where you have scoured them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave no gap too large or the subtle gap that is on the vessels.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this method of beating is better than that which is done by attraction, because at the time of traction, something from the bones may remain, so the beast desires lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditus follows two ways among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 One is when between the two openings there is an opening as in the female figure of nature with hair, and sometimes it discharges urine in court.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way it is in women, and there is above the navel as a rod, and they coit.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment of man and woman is when you cover the private parts together, and treat them as other wounds do;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second way, men whose urine jumps through the skin of the openings, have no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the tenor (modern English)
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 Tentigo is a private part on top of the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And some women have them as big as a hand, and that is their treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary that you stain the excess of the tendon at your hand or fingertips with it [a substance] and lightly strike it.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not go too deep, so that no blood flows out, then heal it with another treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the anus, apply it and cover it, and in case it jumps up, it will be similar to a cowpox, and for this reason they called it by the ancient name "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If you must cut it (the shoulder), as we have said before, and cure it until it is healed.
de erratique	The erratic growth is a hardened or stone-like tumor on the surface of the body; and it is called "erratic" because it cannot be removed by simple cutting. When this kind of swelling arises in the body, it should be cut open with a knife until it is completely severed from its base; then take a hot iron or an emetic and cauterize (sear) the wound, so that the bad humors do not remain there and cause more pain.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 Erratic is when the nature of a woman is not perceived or if the opening is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 and it is by birth or accident due to disease that it comes about.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it is by hot iron, or sharp needle fine or thick, and it is made completely in the marriage [operation], or in the chest, or under, or wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 and prevent conception, childbirth, and, by chance, the flowers to grow;
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 and the knowledge of these things is by the look of the woman's face.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the swelling is close to appearing, it may be at your hand or arm.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a sharp needle that is near the liver, go quickly and pierce it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 place your two index fingers together, and the woman is above her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 then spread the two livers fully, so that the fine sharp needle is round and over the incisions.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 then take wool, wet it in oil, and place it on the wound, and let the woman lie at home every day so that it does not heal [over].
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the soft place is hard and thick, you must cut it with a tool resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the swelling is of flesh, suspend it at the onion and strike (it).
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 and have the bleeding remedies, as caraway, dragon's blood, incense, and together with plenty of egg.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then bring a wide bandage of linen, so that the wound cannot heal.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and thus let it be for a long time, and bring a dry tent of linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when snow falls in marriage (meaning winter), it should be covered in this manner, unless the abscesses are aggravated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an aggravated abscess that occurs during winter, one should not intervene with fire.
des emorroides	1. Hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without cort (cortex) treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into a scab.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have said in the previous section similar things about them, and their symptoms, and I will say here the ones that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and ulcers, when they are completely in winter and cannot be felt, should not be cured by fire.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those which are at the mouth of winter, can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then heat the iron at the tongs, and strike its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as cinnabar and dragon's blood, and similar things;
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then press her feet to the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And when bleeding occurs, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and apple peel, gall, and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply it as a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If that doesn't work, make her breathe inflated bladders on the back and the breasts without cutting them;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take flax, wet it at the end of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess rests, heal the wound with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red and resembles a sharp head, if it needs to be covered as I have said in the thelul;
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then heal it until it is healthy.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses in the womb
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come in the marriage (procreation), such as boils and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore I must say in this treatise about the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not one of those abscesses that are collected with a clamp;
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you want to know the work of iron, look and see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not rush to puncture, but let it heal until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 And then make the patient sit on a chair or two small chairs where he leans, and support his back and gather his legs to the opposite sides of the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 And spread out his thighs, and place his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a good rope.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then bring the ball to the right side, and introduce the tool used to open the mouth of the bladder, from which comes the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 And it is necessary that when you introduce this tool, that you pierce the right side first to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters within from the tool does not go further than it should, and does not prick the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 If the wound is larger, it is necessary to cover its depth with cloths so that the wound does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 It is necessary that he puts the horn of the instrument on top, and that he stains the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscess is opened and softened by hand, it should be covered with linen cloth.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the bladder is emptied, you must put in the wound wet linen soaked in rose oil or dry green oil.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 Place the skin of the wound over the cloth, place the cloth on the inside and outside of the wound, and on the end of the arrow place a clean wet linen soaked in vinegar or wormwood.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then cure after two days of ointment application, as long as he is healthy;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And sometimes one raises the wound and the sore with clysterium of water and honey, and then with water or liquorice roots and Aristolochia longa should be cooked;
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then return to the ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 If the wound is healed in a marriage (union), it is necessary that you abstain from iron cooking, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 First, the midwife should recognize the figure of natural birth, and signs if you see the woman pushing in the lower part, and desiring to smell the anus;
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then hasten the child to come out with force.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Then recognize that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and it is the issue under the head, and the second one follows with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen so that he defecates quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 For when he defecates on top of his head, the second one should follow with him and clean the husband of his superfluidities through good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 And this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For it sometimes comes on his feet, and the body or chest, hands, or stomach erupt, or it turns around his neck, or in other bad forms.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 Therefore it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skillful in these things, and to guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the forms in which one should help him.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child comes out of the head naturally, and a woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or let women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and anoint its nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the pledget (or small spatula) between its two fingers in the shape of this model:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and split open the second incision, and press on the nail to force out the moisture that is inside.
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and tie the woman's belly tightly until the child is born, and if it does not come out, you must cleanse her with a poultice of fenugreek with camomile oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then make her take and expectorate condusi (medicine), hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Straighten the intestines now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 If both hands come out (of the body), it is necessary that you gently reinsert them little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot enter, put a woman on the seat, and raise her legs.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then tilt the seat onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not move during the procedure.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hands cannot enter, and the intestines are dead, strike the hands with the knife that is placed before you, extract the child, and reset it (the intestines) equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the issue of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the intestines come out onto the feet, you must push them upward;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then twist it little by little, until it is even.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take the pieces and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 Can it jump up to the hips, if commanded, and make it vomit of condish? (In English: If commanded, can it jump up to the hips and cause it to vomit of condish?)
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 if it jumps away, if God wills. (In English: If it jumps away, if God wills.)
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it [the dislocation] is not as we have said, turn it gently until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Here comes the translation: Gently turn it.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not jump away as we have experienced, say take musk-garlic of high altitude, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar. (In English: And if it doesn't jump away as we have experienced, say take musk-garlic of high altitude, oil of sesame, melted gum, and grind everything together in the mortar.)
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and put it inside the woman's nature and anoint this ointment, then make her sit in a cold sweat below the ribs. (In English: And put it inside the woman's nature and anoint this ointment, then make her sit in a cold sweat below the ribs.)
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when it is softened inside, make the myrrh collar and place it underneath, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make him sit on the seat, then make him cough and hold his mouth and nose, and press lightly on the belly because the infant is about to come now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	From the birth of the child on its thighs
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the child comes in this form, place the bailiff's hands near it.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 Then lay it on its neck, and hang its feet downwards, and let it lie on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 Fold its hands near each other, then press on the hands on its belly, and push out the cushions underneath, until it is delivered.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 If the child does not jump out, take its feet and move it, then move its belly upwards, and push your hands inside.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And pull the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 And instruct the woman to take care of herself until the children are born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The newborn child coming out, one hand holds it from above.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to devise a way to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If it cannot be returned, make her rise and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, bend her legs properly;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then bring me the mustard poultice that I mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study on how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 Pull the child according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and instruct her to take care of herself until the children are born.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	For the delivery of the child on its neck, have her spread her hands and turn her face towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is required that the bailiff grasp his hand, then turn it little by little, and pull gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when it is equal, place the natural muscle balm of althea and oil upon it as we have said, then instruct it to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on the seat, and command that she takes hold of herself.
et la fai esternuer.	 Make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In the same way, administer treatment to all those affected in turn.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When the feces come in this manner completely from the anus, you press the rectum with your nail until the moisture is emptied.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 If the infant's head is pushed against its face and neck, you press down from the buttocks so that it is not held back, and the infant dies.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Push the child inside, as far as necessary, until it is properly positioned; and command the woman to take hold of herself once.
adonques si istra legierement.	 Then slightly move him from side to side.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the twins' birth
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born at once.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And it is not strange, but it happens occasionally.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Twins are strange things, and they do not live if they can be named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that they multiply excessively, and are driven by the siphac, which is connected to the uterus.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And sometimes they issue naturally like an animal giving birth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 If they issue with difficulty, then the cure is as we have said, and let the midwife be skilled, and do quickly and gently whatever she does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And do as is fitting for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children  --> multiple children (in this context)
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Sometimes they form in the marriage from the first to the second or third or fourth or fifth or sixth or seventh, or more up to fifteen, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the wise man. The bailiff should know this, because by chance similar things can happen;
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 Follow as required.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When treating a woman with a stillborn child or an unborn child, as I mentioned in the division, and it does not come out spontaneously, and you are forced to work by hand;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 then you must know whether the woman is of good virtue and has no accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 The woman should be placed on her back, her head inclined downward, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And the minister should hold her by two parts or tie her to the bed so she is not treated for the delivery of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then anoint the mouth of the mother with moist oil mixed with myrrh and comfrey and flax seeds, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and this myrrh.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then push it gently into the socket, then look for the joints where it can be repositioned and take care that the tendons are not torn apart as they stretch over its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the tendons are driven into the elbows or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or wrist or near the sides, and if there is tearing of the tendons, drive it or push it towards the mid-rib.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And you must grip the tendon with your right hand, place the crook between your left fingers, and push it gently to its full extent, and drive the tendon into any of the places that have been mentioned above until it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 And this is the shape of the scythe:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 Then point against the other scythe, or whichever one you need to extract, so that the extractions are even;
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 and then stretch it equally by moving from one side to the other so that the scythes move out, and let the teeth of the scythe hold them, as shown in the shape:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if there remains any part, then press one of your oil-soaked thumbs against it and push into that part, pulling the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if there remains none at all, then place this scythe or higher up and continue until it comes out completely.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by pressure, then you must wind around the fabric until it comes out completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then hold the heel at the joint of the foot or toe, and similarly you must do with the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 If the child's hip is fat and narrow at the exit, or if it has a sharp point assembled, you must insert the pointed spatula between your fingers and push the sharp point and draw out the projection.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 or you will rotate it with the instrument called "almidach", from which the shape comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 and similarly do so if the child naturally has a large head.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 Then pull the bones apart with the tongs, and if the hip jumps out and it is tightened in the socket, it should be cut, as long as the moisture that is deeper inside is.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 And if it cannot come out, you shall chop it into pieces as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if it is inflamed in the belly or under the ribs, then it must be pierced until the moisture escapes.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the swelling is on top of the feet, the attraction is slight, and the reduction to the mouth of the bladder is easy.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is strangled in the belly or under the chest, then it must be opened with the glove enveloped over the hand;
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And the belly or chest should be cut open until the moisture which is there escapes.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if another member is separated and the head remains, then put the thumb of the hand into the opening of the wound, and pull it out to the mouth of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 Then insert the finger or two and pull it further.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 And if the mouth of the sore is narrowed by abscess heat that has come, it should not be worked on, instead it should be provided with moist and fat things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And apply ointments, and let them bathe in warm soothing and moistening liquids.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the bone is on the ribs and can be leveled, provide what was said earlier for a live infant.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if there is no ability to do that, break it into pieces and leave nothing of the secondary part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, provide what was said earlier for abscess-covered sores in the sore.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 If blood flow occurs, it should be stopped by warm compression and other treatments provided.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman whose womb had killed an infant, then consulted another about it and revived the other infants.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess came to his armpit and swelled so much that it opened and started to burst.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, but I thought for a long time and could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I put on strong plasters with great adhesion, and an bone came out, and after several days another one.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvel much, because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	It seemed to be the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I probe the wound, and with my hands I touch the bone until the woman is in a better position.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 and let the woman lie there for a long time, and thus slightly bend her leg towards the side.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I have not encountered this chapter except when masters find something strange that they know how to help with it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring back the dislocated shoulder to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here comes the form of the press, to which we apply the books.
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and turn the heads of the two screws.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Moreover, the horn should be finer than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 and the mouth of the cylinder should be wide, and the edge of the tree should be even, and a half palm long;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And between the two limbs there are two shoulder joints of the same bone, which are joined firmly in both, half a palm length or a little more;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the socket to open when one turns the two horns (or limbs).
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, with a more subtle and lighter appearance, is made of ebony or boxwood, resembling pliers (or tweezers);
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 and let the size of the two joints, as you see, be one palm length, and two fingers wide;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 and when you see opening the socket with all the instruments, make the woman sit on a bed, her feet hanging and legs apart, then push the two joints together into the socket, and hold the head of the instrument between her knees.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand with all the instruments as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the anvil, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 All these instruments are covered and multiplied in their similar forms;
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the blacksmiths have prepared them, it is more eagerly worked and higher above men because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not hastily prepare the instrument without first arranging it, as its necessity is not easily excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the secondine is confined in childbirth, you must command the patient to hold her anus, and then make her strain with contractions, and hold your hands at the mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 If she jumps because of that, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If not, it takes a pot, and makes a pot or lid, and places herbs that can open the mouth of the wound, such as calamint, rue, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 then place a cloth or lid on the pot, and hold the other end in the mouth of the wound, and press until the vapors enter the wound.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 then make it vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one jumps quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if it remains after this treatment and does not fart, instruct the woman to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk oil from aloes, and then insert it into her anus and press gently.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when she has found it, take and stretch it little by little straight, so that the muscles do not resist the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 but it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pull.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 if it comes out and detaches itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the muscle is stretched wide open, we have said the treatment for purges and fumigation with herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 and if it is not any of what we have said, make sure you do not force when pulling.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 but it must be that the one at the mouth of the muscle, you tie it to the woman's thigh, then clysterize with an ointment formula four.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If it [the dislocation] can be restored and returned, it will heal.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 But nonetheless, when it [the dislocation] cannot be restored, if it comes out badly, it puts the patient in danger.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 Therefore, it is necessary to use appropriate fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 Any of the ancient ones have proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used for fumigating a woman to retain flowers and afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is to be observed that it resembles a piece of glass, and the head is placed delicately in its natural position, and the larger parts are heated over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And let the fumigation be on the embers, and the heat until it is destroyed, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To drill the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born without the foundation pierced, but it has been plugged up by a subtle substance:
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 Therefore, it is necessary for the patient to pierce that bone at its proper place, and not with a sharp splint, and ensure that the ligament is not touched.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then put soft linen soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with salve until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it does not recur, put or place a plum stone there, and leave it for many days, and it should be removed when the patient is seen to go to bed.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And sometimes there comes this kind of swelling of sudden wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	 it is necessary to cover that swelling.
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 If it's a wound, treat it as we have said with the solution of lead.
de la fistule dou fondement	From the fistula base
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come from under the foundation are knotty and larger than those that come from above the foundation, or in the space between two parts, either one fistula or more.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 And when that knot is old, it works again, and moisture awakens white or subtle pus, and sometimes they become Persian fistulas.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 They are known by those who have it, either excretion or flatulence when the patient makes excretions, and occasionally leaps one sidewards.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if it is fistulas that penetrate up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 They reach up to the knee joint, and up to the knuckle of the cow.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus, one knows a Persian fistula by its foundation, not necessarily Persian.
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And you press your finger or foundation into it, and push a thin needle of copper or iron into the fistula when there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 And if it has tortuosity, push a tent of thin plank or horsehair against it until you feel the tent or the hair at your fingertip;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 and if you do not feel it, and it does not produce pus, inflammation or worms, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it does not pierce.
si te haste dou curer.	 hasten to cure it.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula penetrates up to the bladder or leads to the conduit of urine, if it shoots out urine and cannot be sealed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it pierces up to the knee joint, the tendon is coming out at the level:
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is no tortuosity and the pain subsides around it, then it is already bowed, and no medicine or treatment with liniment will help:
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 and in these Persian blisters, there is no cure but hard work, and the vain efforts of foolish people who meddle with it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In one who is not a Persian and is not old, with hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 and lift the legs up to the thighs, and bend the thighs towards the stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 then insert a tent of linen or of willow if there is curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the base, then you must insert your index finger there, and if it feels as though the dislocation has been pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and expose where you feel the dislocated joint or bone, then know that it is dislocated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If one does not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 One should however know that one can heal some, but this happens seldom;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And the aid one gives to it, it is that one heats the cautery gently according to the width of the wound, as has already been said.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 and push everything hot into the wound until it comes out from the base;
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred pieces are burned, which resemble the quill of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 and then treat it with moistened tents in butter until the charred pieces are gone, then treat it with a healing ointment that is warm and soothing.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it can be healed well, that's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If the head cannot be made whole;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and if it tries to enter but does not pierce to the point that is its foundation, and between your finger and the head you put a thick covering of flesh or gauze, and you see the fistula at the head where the covering had been placed;
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 if the tip of the fistula starts from the head and advances towards the shoulder, and then the cautery is applied afterwards until it reaches the base of the shoulder;
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 and the shoulder will be released and will heal.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Cut off the fatty tissue that resembles a bird's feather, and none should remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the bone breaks through [the skin], and pierces you, either burn it with fire or apply a medicinal cure.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For fire cauterization has two good effects:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 This is to know, the arthritis of these disjointed joints, and the draining of blood and removal of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 then, treat wounds soaked in butter or in crushed cheese, until the flesh is boiled in the butter, and let the joints be submerged in the butter.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 then, treat the wound with onion juice mixed with hard charcoal, and use dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	When it is reset, it heals and does not dislocate again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes up to the surface of the foundation and is separated from the body, push your thumb or the foundation into it and probe it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the wound and between it is fabric or leather or joint that is about to burst, there should not be fear except for a way of faith and hope, by the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you cauterize it as we have said, or you push it to the bottom, or if it is filled with pus, apply hot compresses and treat it as first.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And do not go too deep, cover the holding device that holds the foundation, and the evacuations come by their own will.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 then heal, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 If by chance it becomes healthy again, remove that covering and clean it when it is removed from the foundation, either by force or with some other tool.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 Then mold the charrue (plow) in the wound as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 Then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula on the side away from the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes there are fistulas in this manner.
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 When you force the tent into the fistula and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above, take a pointed tent in its head according to this form.
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And put .i. thread twisted in .ij., and push the tent peg through the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is perforated on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread of that pierced one, thus you press your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulders, and press one against the other, and leave it for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 and do not move it at any time, until the threads heal the sores that are between them, and close.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not open by itself, make it open in all possible ways as you can, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to cover a wound with a plaster while it is healing, as previously mentioned, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of a spiked splint, from which a fistula is made, is very sharp at one end and notched.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and not on the other side, because you should not touch what you should not touch, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids   (medical condition characterized by the swelling of veins in the rectum and anus)
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Emordizes are of two kinds.
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 They are within the foundation, as in a lump of resin, and there are both small and large ones, and on the surface there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they are displaced from the foundation and at the base of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those that are displaced have little moisture, and there is either a small amount of acidic citrus juice or a small amount of blood, and they have the color of flesh.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 and the treatment for those that have them within the foundation is to command the patient to strain in order to relieve themselves in chambers, until the foundation settles, and this can be felt by the fingers.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 if you hurry up, hold it with tweezers, or grasp it with your nail, then strike at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the shoulder joint cannot be held due to moisture, take a cloth or linen, or a piece of silk;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 and straighten it [the shoulder] with your hands, then strike it [the dislocated joint], and powder some hot powders in place of cautery over it.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 or you can cauterize it as mentioned in the "cautery" chapter, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 and if the foundation cannot come out [of the wound], then apply a biting and harsh enema to the patient to cleanse what is in the foundation, so that it can come out easily.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 if the patient washes himself and the thread [of sutures] comes out of the wound, then the treatment is simple.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And it is that you grasp them with your fingernail or tweezers, strike them, then heal as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 It is necessary to apply the suturing in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take the twisted thread, put it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread below the needle, making sure it is wide enough.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 tighten the thread, then knot it, pull out the needle, and do the same for all the others, leaving the excess blood to flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 then place a moistened linen cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on the wound foundation and place it on top, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let it drain until it stops, and when it has ceased, treat it with salves and other remedies, until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	With the drying of fevers or foundations   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "dou sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often there is a drying of fevers in the intestines and due to natural constraint; and when the disease is old and medication has no effect.   (It seems there might be a mistake in this line as "sechement" doesn't correspond to the context provided.)
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 You must puncture the bark of a willow or your fingernail on top to prevent it from getting wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then treat it until it is healed as required.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 If it cannot heal, you must shave more forcefully than before, until it heals and is barked.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat it until it heals.
dou fremit	The trembling / shuddering
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A scab is a small appearance on the body and it goes deep.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And sometimes the scab breaks open the skin, and it feels like death trembling, and spreads throughout the body, more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the cure is that you take a cane from an ostrich feather, or a strong bird's feather, and place it on the patient's pulse, so that the purple circles surround the pulse completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand around the whole cane so that you cover the pulse entirely and insert it deeply, and stiffen the pulse from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a cane made of iron or wood in the following shape, and be thin underneath and wide above:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not pierce it, but hold it tightly and press it.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see that the pulse needs to be cauterized as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the clyster (enema)...
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes one does a silver or pitch cloister, or melted tallow or honey.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And sometimes these small and large instruments are made according to those for whom they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, it is applied in the treatment of children who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cluster is either small or large, where the belly is bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And it has an opening where the abdomen is sewn, as you can see, and the shoulders are pierced within.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And it has one wound on one side, and another in the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 and the abdomen should be filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and pierced all around with small wounds, and have an interval of one space between each wound, then thread thick yarn through the wounds in the shape of an X or square, and sew up the abdomen like a goatskin.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then apply a clyster.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head with caster oil or egg yolk ointment, or something similar, then gently apply it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the attendant should press the patient's ears between both hands until it becomes visible, then remove the ointment, and make the patient lie down with his legs exposed, if the medicine comes out, wipe it as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps all night, it is more helpful.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster the patient with a belly disease of discharge, and the medication begins to heal quickly, continue to treat it until he is well.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 If there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, let the ointment be as thin as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and this is the form of the subtle ointment where the skin is tightened:
des plaies	wounds  (plural of "plaie")
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have said in the section on treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 You will be told about treatments for hands and medicine, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and of what kind they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made are by thrusting with a spear, cutting with a sword and knife, or lance or fist or arrow, or similar objects.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 Or those wounds are made according to the laws of the body, such as when a wound falls on the neck, or head, or chest, or abdomen, or liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 And I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with simple head wounds, for it will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound comes to the head and the bone is not broken, take care if it is from being thrust with a spear or similar objects, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the formation of an abscess, clean the wound hot:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 If he quickly cleanses the head itself immediately, if a little blood comes from the wound, and the cleansing is contrary to the injured part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 and the patient should empty his repleteness of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if he does not want to cleanse it, let his meat be reduced, and drink no wine, nor eat flesh.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 and put on the wound, if an abscess grows there, moistened cotton in rose oil only, or in vinegar.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 and if there is no abscess hot, put on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, powder, as I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the arm has moved it, place some hot poultices on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by stitches, then bring them together by suturing, as I will say about wounds in the abdomen, by suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed of the bone, and gaping, and does not hold together, close it (the wound).
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then heal the wound with medicine, and restore hard skin in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large foods, such as roasted meat, peas, cabbage, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find a rotten flesh or skin that is not on the bone, remove it all and let it fester, then heal (the wound).
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery or vein in the wound or near it that cannot be stopped without cauterization, and you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if that does not help, cauterize (it).
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if the wounds are small and simple, the treatment is easy:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 and it is that you put this powder which will heal as soon as the wound has moved (healed).
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 And the way of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense a part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 blood of dragon 2 parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Calf live in three parts, and the powder finely, and apply it to the wound, and press firmly until it drains well and joins with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 Then bind it well, and let it heal on its own if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 because the medicine is not taken out until it has healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And at times this is done only with coal when neither incense nor dragon's blood is available, but the wound has not yet healed.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has been opened by fire, most certainly do not put this powder on it.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but put some digested ointments or barley flour made with water and honey on it until it exudes pus.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it with other treatments until it has healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 And if a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And I shall tell you after the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	About the wound of the neck (or throat)   (I am assuming that 'col' here means 'neck', but it could also mean 'throat'. The original French term is ambiguous in this context.)
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes or affects the neck and it is simple without any difference from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are cut.   (The original French term 'col' is ambiguous in this context, meaning either neck or throat.)
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is the nose, there is no other remedy than to let it heal naturally, and not to apply anything binding, because it hurts the nose and causes it to retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And not to put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of noses is cold, and their continuity is with the brain, which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But if the medicine is warm, as boiling water sweetened with rose oil, boiled and washed with gentle warm water in the same way, and other stones of that kind according to this manner, and always kept moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then heal it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and pus-filled and swollen, pierce or lower it.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 If the artery is cut, and blood flows out, then tie it off, let it lie still, and cauterize if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 If the spine of the throat is cut, or the veins, and the conduit is kept, so that the flesh goes through it, then raise the vein above the throat and do not touch the throat but put it back according to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then, apply pressure and let it be for some days, then heal it with infusions of dissolved herbs until it heals.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 If the wound presses into the bone, pierce it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 If there are bone fragments, pull them all out if you can, and those that you cannot, leave until the wound discharges, and align and seal the exit.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 If the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, cure as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from spear or knife.   --> Of the spear or knife wound
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a spear or knife wound and the injury gushes air from it, look to see where the air escapes from the wound:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Know then that the wound is fatal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it due to the blood that it may dissolve entirely, and return to the heart, and kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day.
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 and if you do not have an ointment, place old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 if no spasm, nor a bad tremor of heart or strange alien symptoms come.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the good alignments, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then cure the wounds and other remedies, as long as he is healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot heal, then open it, knowing that there will be a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	 Cure it as one should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 If the wound is from a sword or knife incision and it's simple, or worse, or at the back, then cure what is in front of it.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, stitch it up.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 If it is small, use powder, and if it has entered the bone and there are fragments inside, open up the wound and pull out the shards if they are exposed.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 If they are not drained, let the wound fester, align the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And regarding other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The dislocation of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The ruptures in the abdomen are great and medium-sized and small.
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From a large wound, the intestines may jump out once or the nerves of the intestines, by which the insertion is made.
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the sewing is more difficult, and sometimes it is worth less to close a small wound than a large one, because you must be more careful with the intestines when closing, if not sewn carefully from inside out.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel pain, and therefore it is necessary to be more careful with them, and for this reason, a medium-sized wound is preferable because you are more careful to move the intestines back in place than with others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four kinds:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common kinds occur in the abdominal hernia, and the other kinds of hernias in the other body parts have their own specific kinds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And indeed, they are more proper with the abdominal hernia, and I will say one kind and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the hernia is small and nothing of the intestines protrudes, and it is easy to replace it, this is one of the two kinds:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 either because of the small size of the hernia, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, warm it in some way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Moisten a sponge or a cloth with warm water only, or cook in hot wine and cypress and spike, and anoint the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And sometimes make this wine-based restraint, and it is mixed with sulphur to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the inflammation spreading, anoint the intestines with warm or hot water, because this stops the entry of anything to a great degree.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used for treating hemorrhoids;
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first treatment is mixed with resin, and we should not cut it unnecessarily.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the instrument for breaking:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 It should cut inside the hump and not pierce through, and look at its shape here:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines come out, put it back in its natural shape in its proper place, if you have the power to do so, for this is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the belly, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and raise his legs higher than his head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If it is in the lower part of the belly, then put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and thus when the wound is in one of the two sides, pay attention to the fact that the affected side should be higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And it is necessary to do what I say in large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 In small wounds, use what is appropriate, then take the minister who has anointed all the wound with his hand and press the lips together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 and this is the common method of stitching, and you should take one needle or more, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave some space from the edge of the wound, and sew with a strong threaded needle.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 and pierce the two shoulders of the skin with the two needles that are beneath the skin from this side, until you make a hole through that part, and join the four edges of the skin together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 then tighten a double thread around the needle from both sides, then join the two edges of the wound together, and leave some space, and sew another stitch.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 then tie the thread as you did with the first stitch, and do not stop making these stitches according to how many stitches are needed, until the entire wound is closed.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And let the needles be of medium size, neither too fine nor too coarse; for fine needles pierce all the flesh, and those that are too thick cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 because they should be of medium size;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and it is not good to insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 and then bend the heads of the needles so they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and place stoppers or cloth on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is sutured.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 and this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, since it requires only one needle.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second suture is common, and it consists of joining the two shoulder blades and the two breastbones together with a needle that has a strong medium thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 and when you have pierced all four of the bones together, remove the needle from the part where you began, in the manner one does with linen.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 and put some space between each suture using the thickness of a small egg.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This suture was done to a man, and I sewed up a wound that a knight had on his stomach which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it exposed the intestines by two palms, and the wound was inside the stomach.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine after it had been out for 24 hours, and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And they had judged him to be dying, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine;
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and put cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I shall tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 take the needle and thread from the outer part all the way to the inner side;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 when it has pierced the skin straight through, if the end of the seam or stitch where you put the needle, and make it pierce from the inner side all the way to the outer side;
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew it as furriers sew fur, and that you leave one opening at a time, and close it from the other side, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second way of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is like anyone who brings together two parts naturally, and applies one end of the seam to the other end in such a manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 insert a needle or point of the mirror nearby, and pierce only that place, and leave the two ends of the seam;
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 then turn the needle and pierce from the outside to that inside, through the two ends of the seam;
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then pierce one and the other from the outer part up until inside, in the two shoulders that are on the opposite sides.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 and this is the twisted manner of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said this word, and no one denies it, one should sew the abdomen with two needles, or have thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 and one must insert one needle from one side, and the other from the opposite side, in the manner of those who sew leather.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 And know that when the wound is within the abdomen, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgement of a wound is such as the judgement of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then reset the intestines and stitch (it).
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then put the warming charcoal powder on it, and if the arrow has moved it, then put any available ointment on it until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and sew the threads together, and the ligature (sifac) and miret (a type of dressing).
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then treat the wound as others do, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 If you don't have medicine, put old cotton on it as soon as it begins to heal, and move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 You have no need for other medicine in most cases where the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 and if you doubt that the wound will infect the main members, then you must dampen light linen in warm oil or rose oil, and place it around the joints, and under the buttocks.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 and if it causes pain or putrefaction in the belly, which often occurs, then cleansing with black wine can help, and especially when the putrefaction reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 and pierce it from within, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The "youthful" intestine cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the inflammation of veins that are present there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the worm jumps out of the wound, put it back in the same way as the intestine, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is old and turned black or dark, you should cut away the black part where blood does not come out, because there are veins and arteries there.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then cut out what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads suspended from the part beneath the wound to align the extraction when the flesh falls off, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, because I have seen that a man was pierced or stabbed with a spear through his stomach.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 And the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became a hernia and turned into a fistula, and in it was the excretion and wind.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I treat him according to what I know, and I did not stop refining until he was healthy, and the bones were healed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I saw the bones heal, I feared that the patient might have something wrong in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 But he had no ill, but stayed in better condition, and dieted and drank.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 And the experimentalists said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 Take large forceps, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the forceps have opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches the mouth.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 And then hold the head and keep it so that it cannot be released, then place another forceps after in this manner as before until the wound is completely seized.
et cout la plaie.	 And dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the head adheres in the intestine and causes no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a thin thread made from the intestine of an animal in this manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 take the head of this thread from intestine and make it smooth, then tie it to the head of a thin linen thread in a twist, then insert the thread into the needle, sew the intestine and draw out the suture.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 and this method of stitching hernias is not without fear and hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the large intestines, there is no help or healing, but only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of a fistula or when it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it develops, is universally called "fistula", and likewise when it opens up and becomes hollow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And a fistula is similar to a hard, white nodule that does not cause pain, and it is as hollow as the quill of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 and sometimes clear and loose, and other times firm.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 Sometimes narrow, and other times wide.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 And I have spoken of it in the section on wounds, that any wound which is not healed and there is no flesh, this is not without one of the nine causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 This means: by smallness of blood or body.
ou por sa malice;	 Or by its corruption.
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 Or because there is hard flesh within and above the lips that does not allow new flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 Or it has too much pus.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 When the joint is dislocated, and the matter is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 and the medicine is not good in treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 because corruption is a kind of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 because in the region, digestion is slow, health slows down, and it swells by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 and I have already shown all these causes, the signs, and the remedies of medicines in the divisions.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I must tell you the remedy for a fistula made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Know that fistula occurs in all the limbs of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, arteries, nerves, or the intestines, bladder, ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And if it comes to the property of the main member or similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 All these fistulas of this kind are of grave healing, and there is but labor and ignorance in it.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula which does not come up to the level that I have said, and you are confident of its cure, and you know it, then take a tent of linen or iron, if the fistula is straight, and sew it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is twisted, then search for a thin tent of lead, because lead bends with the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many holes and you cannot search for it with tents, then clisterize (cleanse) it through one of the holes, because moisture is short from one hole to another, and clean it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then feel carefully with your power if there is bone or nerve, and if it is broken in full, ask the patient clearly about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 and when you truly know the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint or nerve or artery or vein, or in any of the places that I told you, if the fracture is transverse, then cut off the damaged and corrupted parts within.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 and then cure it as long as it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply draining in the right place, then you should cut it through completely, as much as possible, then put dampened tents filled with hot medicine into it, and push them to the top of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluity that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then apply salve unguents on the affected healthy flesh, until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it is not healed by this means, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupt from the fistula, strike it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If a vein or nerve does not hinder or affect the main limbs as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if the bone is exposed and there is corruption and blackness, strike it until all corruption is removed, then apply salve unguents until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it is not healed and it breaks again as before, know that you are not going to the fountain:
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 expose and cut until you reach the bottom, remove all corruption, then restore the joint.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it [the shoulder] is thus healthy, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 And if it [the shoulder] isn't like that, know that the corruption is too advanced, so you cannot fix it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other remedy but to let it rest by nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a little corrupted bone and you can extract it with pliers, take it out if the instrument is suitable for that, and if there are multiple bones, take them all out, do not leave any one of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 And if the moisture opposes you and there is no mistake or fear, press and heat and bandage the wound, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove the bones within an hour, put something irritating pus on the wound and leave it until the flesh grows around the bones, and then the bones will be easier to remove.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, like the leg or thigh, you should only cauterize the decay until all the blackness has been burned off, then heal the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 and if there is extensive decay, reaching down to the bone.
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 it must be cauterized and covered up to the decay, then healed until it is closed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in the leg near the joint, so you can take it as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg from an internal cause causing matter to come to the leg, and he developed a large abscess that could not be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the fools with their folly overdid it so that the abscesses opened up, and they became filled with matter, and it turned into a fistula, and much pus came out which caused the body to be full of wetness.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and they applied many remedies for two years without any skilled hand in the art of medicine, as long as I was called upon, and I saw his leg and the medicines they used to treat him, and it ran pus with great swelling.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And the youth's body became red, and he had a citron-colored complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent (stitch) in one of the wounds, and then I searched all the wounds, and found that some were coming towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 So I hurried and inserted into one of the sores until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I appeared to me that the bone was corrupt, and I thought there was no other corruption except that which I left.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 And I began to treat the wound with salty medicines for a long time, but it could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 Then I began again, and opened the bone as before, and found that the corruption was continuous in the bone, and I removed it, and then left it alone, and tried to heal the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 But I could not even cover a palm of the bone, and it was torn away entirely, then I treated it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 And it was healed and strengthened quickly, and there was no need to begin the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and due to my fear of death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the blood evacuation, it often became healthy entirely, and grew in the bone a hard cyst, and was of good condition and had no harm or contrary effect in any way, neither at its side nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take a splint and bind it to the open end of the broken bone, and instruct someone to pull it upwards:
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and place another thicker bandage over the first one, bind it above the skin away from the bone, and pull the rotten flesh downwards to expose the healthy skin where you want it to be, so that the new skin does not puncture the old:
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and place fire or a hot iron under the bone to heat the rotten flesh:
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 it is necessary to be patient until one can see and feel the rottenness has subsided, and be patient yet again:
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, uncover all the flesh.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place the iron under it, and then sew from one part to another the corruption, and let the iron tip be as long as the length of the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in the joint, strike the corrupted joint, and let the bone be from the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 and if the corruption is between two joints, there is no remedy but to cover it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the corruption is at the knuckle of the hand or foot, it is a very serious matter, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption and how to open it.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And clean it in all ways you can, but make sure that the vein or nerve do not oppose you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And know that the cutting instruments and saws for covering these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their size and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore, you should prepare each type of work with its appropriate tool.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the tool you will need, according to your knowledge of this craft and the signs of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you consider the tool that you require according to what is necessary.
dou feu	the fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The head may dislocate either from within or due to displacement;
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 and when you have applied the corrosive cure for that corruption using medicines, but it does not help, then it is necessary to cover the affected limb up to the level where the corruption occurs. This way the patient escapes death from this or from the greater evil, which is the defect of the member;
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 and the signs are that the limb turns black, as if it were burnt by fire. Afterwards, blackness spreads from one member to another, gradually taking over the entire body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 if you hasten to cover [it], and it is due to the bite of certain poisonous animals such as scorpions from the sea, snakes, and similar creatures; if the corruption is at the head of the penis, then cover it, but do not allow space for the venom to reach as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it reaches up to the hand, strike it at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach as far as the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 and if it reaches to the elbow, strike it at the bend.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 and if it passes the bend, it is death, and there is no help but in the quantity of its power.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 and thus do as when the corruption comes or pierces.
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 if it comes at the first joint, strike after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it pierces, strike all the way through.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 and if it moves into the leg, strike at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy but to wear out the patient with pain.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 And the method for covering or sewing the limb is such that you tie it above and below, and extend one of the strips downward, and another strip upward, and you pull the flesh which is between the two strips apart with a spatula wide enough so that the bone is exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then cover or sew it with linen on both sides, so that the stitches do not touch the healthy part, and bring other harm to the patient in the form of injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs during the operation, cauterize the area immediately or place some powders that restrain it on top.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a strong cord and heal it until it is healthy.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you what happens to the man lying there:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 a man lying there had a blackness that seemed burned by fire, and the rotting began first in his foot, until it took all of the leg.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 and when the man saw the rotting, he covered his leg with copper, and became clean.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 A long time later the rotting returned to his hand, and it came to me, and I put him on remedies after cleansing the body, but the rotting could not be stopped.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And it is clear to me that I will amputate the hand, for I have no hope of healing the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 And I also feared that if I cut off his hand, he would die, for the strength of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he gave up completely, returned to his earth, and struck his hand with a spade, and was healthy;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 I have no knowledge of this story except for the fact that it is told in order to do something else if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 An abscess never comes in a charnel house and remains for such a long time that it causes a great gathering of flies;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 And then they run and pierce and fly away, leaving the place visible, just like a servant;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 The skin that is on top is as thin as woven fabric that has been torn apart, and it does not penetrate to the bone or to the nerve, and such an illness is called "sain," not "fistula";
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 but if it is long enough to reach the bone entirely, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 and the care is that you pierce the skin all around, and likewise when it is subtle, as a linen cloth;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and not for its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you have faith that the skin has become hard and corruption is not in the entirety, and the skin is thick with pus, cure it with clysteris thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look if the breasts are large, and the boils that are in it have a strong smell, then cleanse them with Egyptian medicine made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 take aloeswood, oil, and pitch, equal amounts, cook them in a pot over fire until the medicine becomes red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 and then take some of this according to your need, make it into water and honey, and cleanse the breast, and apply pressure on the sore.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 leave the medicine for two hours, then strain it through a cloth;
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 do this several times until the breast is healed and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 and occasionally cleanse with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and you take vine ash water, pour it on, then let it cool, and apply, until you know that the breast is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor water of ashes, then let him be cleansed with water and honey or have a small amount of crushed litargyre mixed in it.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 or cleanse him with honey and sweetened wine, so that the honey has the property of cleansing and washing, and the wine strengthens the blood.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this and you are sure that the breasts have been well cleansed, cleanse them with what causes growth in them, and take a diaphytum root, grind it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 or cleanse him with various medicines and ointments, as I have said their properties for treating sores.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the breast ulcer is small and the probe of the cupping glass cannot enter, enlarge it with a bit of iron and put on an Egyptian ointment or basilicon until it is opened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too large, let it heal on its own or allow the cupping glass to enter, and if there is a breast abscess above it, press or lower it more.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the abscess is full, do not let pus drain.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cover the breast with a bandage as desired, arrange it in such a way that the abscess descends to the lowest level possible, for when the abscess is full, do not let pus drain and if you cannot cover the breast with a bandage as desired.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 The bow string runs smoothly downwards, and do not let anything slip from the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 and take consolidating medicines to put on the wound, and place it on a linen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 then press the forces towards the wound in a hole larger than the first one, then oint it with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it on the wound of the bowel to align it, and do not remove the large cloth until after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 and the one who is on the wound of the intestine, frequently removes it to remove the bowel, and knows what will come out from the bowel, whether it is poison or too much or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see the nature that rises above the wound pus, then know that the breast will certainly open up, approach the healthy.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you unbind the wound, change another bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts are swollen and do not improve after several days, know that they will not swell further.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisonous worms crawl for a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men who delay applying lard in their wounds, and those who do the opposite of this;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 and if he swallows food improperly from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not open up.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 If the breast takes a long time to open up and is swollen, apply drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, as ointment of this kind, for there is great need of vitriol, and it is the last medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take the unguent defined, and make it with rose oil, and mix an equal amount of old wine in substance.
puis le confit et en use;	 Then cook and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 and the same thing, cooked more thickened, when the unguent defined is not present, or you take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind it, and powder it on the honey when it is above the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 and then apply it to the cloth, and place it on the breast, and sometimes an astrologer long is given, and roots of celestial lily, which is as flour of bread and cinnamon.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 and use of simple or compound medicines:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 grind them, make into powder, and put on the honey I said, and use.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the limb is long and not treated by this cure, then know that corruption has spread throughout it, and causes pressure on the bone or in hard members or ligaments.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the treatment for fistula (which we have previously mentioned).
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess at the nailbed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Paranaris is an abscess that arises under the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance it appears in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 And when it (the abscess) is neglected and no care is taken of it, if the abscess grows, it will spread and run along until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all of it.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 And the corruption comes up to the bone, causing a stinky pain, and the toes are large and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, followed by cauterizing the wound.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is intact.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 If the nail penetrates the skin and starts to swell, and begins to point, you should place a reed beneath the nail so it does not pierce the skin, push it upwards, and gently and softly strike the swelling, and apply the remaining char of corrosive and burning medicine to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 If the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw out pus, because as the bone becomes more corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If you see two bones corrupting, strike them with force as mentioned before, then heal until it heals.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is wounded, struck, and causes great pain, then you must first let it bleed.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula from the side and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh under the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if it happens, put something on it to soothe.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain of the deaf man's hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The patient must cauterise who is born with a growth in some people's hands by chance, which is entirely flesh, and sometimes it has bone, and occasionally it has nail; and one of these never grows from the joint root or the growth emerges from any of the fingers.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 The one born inside the egg does not close its mouth, and the one born at the egg joint may or may not close its mouth.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The incision of the fleshy one is easy in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 The one born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat.
si te tien dou coper.	 Keep yourself covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one born or should be in the little finger, it is necessary that you cut round the flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The same sores that come at the joints come together by birth, or by injury of a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 You must suture that wound, so it should repair according to its natural shapes.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 then put between two tents or damp cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not adhere.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you put between two thin planks until the flesh is sutured, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	In the same way, if any of his hands comes with the palm, then strike that joint as necessary.
des vils	 of peasants
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are large veins swollen with melancholic fluids that come in many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And it happens more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry things, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must sometimes administer purge of bile, and then let it flow from the basilica (biliary duct).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment with iron is according to two methods.
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 one is by striking them and drawing out black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And another way is to open the vein and pull it all through.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The incision is as follows according to this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 First, the leg is incised deeply with very hot water until the large muscle is softened, then hold the patient's leg above the calf to the part below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one of the three places, with a large incision, and separate it and pull black blood to your hand from one end to another until as much blood comes out as the patient's strength can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 then tie it up and instruct him to bind himself with black vinegar-soaked meat.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And repeat the evacuation and cleaning when veins are full, it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The swellings of them are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Raise the leg of the patient if it has much hair, then put it in water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red, and inflate the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you don't have water, heat it with fire, then apply it to the vein along the length of the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then scrape the skin with a sharp edge, and peel off the vein from each side, as much as it appears when you feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 And one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Push the probe beneath, as long as it is raised from the skin, and then cut it at an angle, then strike it in another place three inches away.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin above the vein until it appears, then remove the probe as before, and cut it at another angle as you did before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then strike another size, or more if needed, then remove it, and strike the tooth at the second incision, then pull it out until the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then pull it out by size, until it comes out entirely, then strike it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot draw and lift it, push an awl through its entire length, bind and pull it, and push it under the skin, then turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And be careful that it does not tear, for if it tears, you cannot draw or lift it, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have treated it all, place on the wound a linen cloth moistened with wine and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And keep treating it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 If the eye is contracted, twisted and rolled together, not straight as we have said, you must cut it carefully but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And pull it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not cut, but should pierce it.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 And is of thick curvature because if it was thin, it would pierce the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the common vein (civil vein)
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is located in the legs, in warm areas where no grass or trees grow, and in dry ground.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And by chance it may appear in places other than the legs, and this happens due to a pustule that comes from under the skin, just as it appears inside the body of snakes and eels, veins appearing between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg, then the limbs change and the vein begins to burst out like a root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the shoulder is opened, it is necessary that you wind around a piece of wood from one and a half to two feet long, knot it, and leave the wood by the leg, and every time it comes out, you wind around the wood again and knot it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 And if it is too long, you chop off a part and wind up the rest, but do not cover it in its root, until it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 for if you chop it, it will go back into the flesh, causing an abscess and pus or a bad illness.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 Therefore, that thing must be treated little by little until the head is reached, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And sometimes this vein, when treated, becomes of such length, either 5 or 10 fingers, and once a man came to me whose it was 10 fingers in length. When you open it, push the nail or finger against it and pierce through to the end, so that everything comes out;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 and empty the matter that is inside, and bring healing medicinal ointment to it for three days, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And sometimes this vein swells up and more so when it opens at the joint of the foot or leg, and it bleeds profusely and often bursts, causing it to jump.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called on our land "malady of ox", because it often happens to bulls, and it is a small worm that is born between the skin and flesh, and goes throughout the body, expanding and contracting, and it hurts greatly in one member after another until the skin or where it goes breaks open;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 and it is infested with corruption of some humors, such as worms, snakes, lizards, or roundworms in the abdomen;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 and there is doubt about its malignancy, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and it may enter the eye, perhaps destroying the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 and such things happen frequently.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you see him to cure and drain, it can only be done when he goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 Then you must lie him down on a hard surface with a strong and narrow rope both above and below, then strike above and drain the blood out of it completely, if it empties in full into the flesh, and you cannot stop it, then cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 and the greatest harm that it does, is that it will cause oil to run, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold a bellows under him in form, then strike above, and drain the blood out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 it is necessary for the patient to use a cleansing of the body with soluble medicines to remove evil humors and wash away stinking foods.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and it is a pain that comes in some members, and then spreads from one member to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 and I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm;
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 and later on, I saw it rise like a worm at the shoulder, much faster than anything else, like a sharp knife when cutting from one place to another;
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 the pain left that place and dug into the shoulder, and then a little later it ran through the whole body, until it came to the other arm;
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then I told him it was turning again around the body, as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly surprised how it moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this kind of disease in such a manner before.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Furthermore, I wanted many that they had moved pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw it in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 and I thought that it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and because of this appeared that constricted breath.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And it did not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if she opens as we have said, lay her down quickly and then press on it until that constricted breath leaves that place.
et cauterize le leu;	 And cauterize the joint.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 and if you do not see it in your eyes, then treat the one who protrudes the windbags (hernias), as with fetid pills or serapion pills, and similar things.
des saiettes	 Arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows or needles come in different types, depending on their shapes and the parts of the body they pierce.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The differences among them are that some have large points, small ones, thick ones, and sealed (closed).
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 and those who have two angles, those who have tongues, and those which have pieces.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and the one which falls in any member falls according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in the principal member (the brain), like the head, heart, liver, spleen, stomach, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it falls [the shoulder] into any place of these members, and the signs of death that I will tell you afterwards will appear to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 Then it is necessary for you to remove this arrow, as death comes after in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and if this bad sign does not appear to you, and the arrow is not fully in, pull it out, and heal the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And the sign of the brain when the arrow pierces the bone and there is a discharge from above the brain, is when scotomia and soreness and swelling and redness occur in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And sometimes without force from the nostrils, or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 And sometimes the speech and voice are lost.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 And jumps from the wound white matter resembling cheese, and also as if it were bursting with boiling water.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And if this sign appears, you should refrain from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sign of the arrow when it falls or pierces the heart is that it is near the left breast, and also as if it were embedded in a hard thing, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And sometimes the arrow becomes silent like cheese, and there is black blood in the wound, followed by coldness, cold sweat, and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Therefore, the patient knows for certain that death is coming.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that pierces the body is when a scab does not rise from the wound and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, breathes heavily and seeks warm air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 And if an arrow falls in the bed of the sick, it should be extracted along the sides (of the body).
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and produces a great discharge, a great pain, and heavy breathing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And all the limbs of the shoulders are moving.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrowhead or stomach falls out by chance, anything from the undigested flesh may jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If the arrowhead or abdomen falls out and something from the intestinal tract jumps out, there is no hope in the treatment nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 If an arrow falls into the bladder, and it jumps out and comes out, and the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 The patient knows that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limbs, such as the hand, arm, neck, shoulder, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and those similar, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery and it is not poisonous, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason you should do something else.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 In a house, an arrow or spear fell into the root of the nose.
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I pulled it out from the other side beneath the fat of the ear and he was healed without injury.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And draw out an arrow that falls into the oil fat beneath the paper, and the arrow is stuck, and cannot be reached except the tip towards the skin, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, to the light touch, it touched the ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And the game was safe, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And draw out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow had Arabic ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I was the bearded ones, and I became subtle until I drew it out, and the Christian was safe.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And draw out an arrow from the man who was wounded or in the belly, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 And when he has passed XXX days, his dislocation does not change its position;
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut above the arrowhead, trapped it, and pulled it through without any mishap.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow lodged in his back or a wound closed over it;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 and the arrow remains inside him, and does not disturb his natural positions or cause any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And you wish to treat another man who has an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound is closed over it;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 and it remains in this way suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And pull an arrow from the man of the kings who had fallen among the snow, and was slightly sloping to the right side;
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 And the arrow was completely withdrawn.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was summoned to treat her after she had fallen for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I felt her entire body with a delicate probe and did not feel anything.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 He feels sharp pain below his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was an arrow tip. I applied a poultice with attracting and digestive properties because the wound did not inflame.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And the arrow point appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I applied the poultice for several days, and healed the wound immediately, but the patient remained ill for a long time, feeling the arrow within his intestines.
et il le me dist.	 And he told it to him.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I apply the wound medicine that is corrosive to the arrowhead for many days until it opens, and then I test it, and feel the head of the arrow adhering to the place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then, I align in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow appears visibly.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And it passed the limits beyond four months, and then I cut open the wound that I had sewn with the pincers, and pulled it apart from both sides, and could not pull it out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then, I did not cease to refine and devise means of tools, until I took the pincers well made, as described at the end of this chapter, when I pulled it out and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And the mirror judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored.
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I will then restore it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 I have told you the quality of the extraction of certain arrows, but place your care on this that I am not saying everything, for the books cannot cover all.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 but the wise masters compare themselves on very little things, and on what is present and failing, they discover nine works, and nine tools, for the explanation of foreign things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows do not come out of the members where they are fixed except according to two ways.
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 By the joint where they enter, or from another side.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which exits from there is an arrow passing through the flesh, and jumps out at times now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is healed around it, and let the exit be clean.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And if it is stuck in the bone and cannot come out, leave it thus for several days and move it every day;
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 Then it jumps, and if it does not jump, pierce around with all the fine iron until the bones are loosened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 If the arrow is stuck in the skull bone and goes to one of the brain ventricles, and any of the accidents I have mentioned occur to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 do not pull it out immediately, but leave it even for several days, because if the arrow reaches the sinuses, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrowhead is not embedded beyond the bone but has not been extracted, and the patient suffers for some days with bad condition, try to extract it.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 If it is very stuck and cannot come out by force, administer remedies around it as I told you.
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure the joint while it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 And if the arrow has been placed within the body and cannot be seen, press as hard as you can.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 And if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow because there is no bone, nerve or vein in the way, make an incision as wide as possible.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 And pull the arrow out if you can, and if there are ears attached to it like a fish's spine, cut away the flesh that is stuck in by two parts as much as you can, then break or fold the ears of the arrow so you can pull it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 Carefully make sure not to break the arrow, rather pull it out more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it once, pull down the leg to the joints, then draw, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 If bleeding from the wound opposes you, introduce what we have said in its chapter for the cure.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And protect yourself from cutting the nerve and vein, and use an instrument as you can safely pull out the arrow, whether quickly or slowly, firmly or gently.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 Place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that there can be; and if you cannot, place it as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow coming from another direction pierces something of it, or the skin is swollen near where we can see or feel it.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Cut then above, as long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it falls out now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it [the dislocation] is held within the bone, you should turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot fall out, leave it for a while and then continue the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 If it is from the arrow shaft, push it all the way in.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 If it falls out and you wish to give medicine, if there is a wound, administer the instrument, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the hair of the wound.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 Then push it again, and if the arrow is covered with hair, push the instrument to its tip entering in, to ease the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrowhead is touching [the body], it is necessary to cut around the affected area where the poison is, if possible, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 If the arrow falls out of the head or side or abdomen or bladder or chest, and it is near, and you can cover it over, do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And guard against cutting the vein and the nerve, then pull it out, then make the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And treat it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The form of the tweezers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do it:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the buttock hair is similar to the feathers of a bird, for pushing the point of an arrowhead, as shown here: [no further English text provided]
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tweezers for pushing and extracting is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	Incisions of the common body cavities
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 Of the veins that heal are thirty-one, thus it has a head sixteen, which means:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 The beating which are after the ears, which are called the twins "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the two arteries that are in the two temples visible;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and the veins that are in the two eyes of the ears, which are called "aspirers";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 and the vein that is under the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 and the vein that is at the neck of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 and the two tendons which are on the neck;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins which are called "augheiriches";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins which are commonly called five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 One is the cephalic, located on the left side of the ribcage, and common people call it "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 The middle one is called "fast", and it is made up of the cephalic and the basilic, and common people call it "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 And the basilic is located on the right side of the ribcage, and common people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver, and it is the one from which blood is let, which clearly opens up near the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the savatalle is the vein that is between the ulnar and the annular, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 One is under the ribcage on the left side, and the second is the shoulder blade which is at the wrist of the right side.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "nasal," which is in the wrist of the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And in the other leg are three veins beneath them.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The blood of the veins that are after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 and the qualities of the bloodsayer, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and wipe the area or veins with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 then tighten the patient's neck with a noose until two veins appear behind the ears in two places depending on the head;
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 When the finger joint hurts beneath your thumb, press on it firmly.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lance, and push it under the vein up to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein above, and strike and the skin and vein well two strokes through it, and make blood come out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then hold it tightly until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is good for migraines, headaches, and eye diseases, and for corneas with dry eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the qualities of the healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it is that the patient stretches his neck, until both veins appear clearly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feel the pulse at the base of your throat, then press firmly.
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then cut the vein above your throat index, and insert the needle beneath it, and draw up the vein, and seal it, as you have done in the other two veins, and stop the bleeding according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put cotton on it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and then fold it and let it heal until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 and we have spoken about its sealing and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The sanitation of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the sanitation of the skull for the diseases of the face old and new, and migration, and redness.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And the quality is that the patient turns their neck while twisting it, until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 Then take the instrument called "fosseur", which has this form:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is healthy and never use fire more than once.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 Moreover, the flames should not be too sharp;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And the bone is broken obliquely, because it is close, and by chance, the flame breaks when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The sawn of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps the eyes, and at the tear-duct, and at the conjunctiva, and at the oil duct in the eye, and at facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 And the quality of their saw is that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some cord, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then the saw, and it should be the sawed bone, a little long and wide, for there is no cartilage.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flame is fine, by chance it may break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make a dressing of blood, as much as you need, and then sew it up with cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The cleansing of the vein from the nose is effective against headache, smallpox, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that appear in the face, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the qualities of cleansing are that the patient should tighten their neck, then hold their nose with your left hand and take subtle flame long, and push it into the space between the two nostrils because the vein does not open well, and the pus will start to flow out.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 and do not go too deep and let the blood flow according to your need, then leave it for a night because it recovers quickly.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the form of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The salve of the two guindges helps in the straightening of the ankle, and at the beginning of the fracture, and in mixing wounds, and in many diseases, and in stopping inflammation, and in corroding, and in herpes, and stomach ulcers;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 and the quality of the salve is such that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 and the master being above the patient's head, and the patient lying on the seat, then open the vein long enough a little widely, then draw out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary;
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 then tie up another vein, then untie the ligature, and hold the veins moderately so that the patient does not strangle;
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And let it (the wound) remain until morning, so that it heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the livestock health
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The treatment of mouth boils also helps with cold in the mouth and corruption of the gums, and cuts and sores around the mouth.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 Then the quality of healing is to make the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have said.
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the jaw, and look at the two holes, one is at the right jaw and the other at the left, and they can be recognized by being black, and by the small black veins surrounding them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 Hold one and the other, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, hold the larger one of each pair, and the same applies to the two holes above and below, for it is done in the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the livestock health below the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The punctures below the tongue help after the puncture of the head and are for the stretching of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the qualities of puncturing are that the patient should sit between the sun and open his mouth, and look down on each side for a black hole.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Keep both [shoulders] healthy then, and do not go too deep [into them], because underneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins in question are commonly healed in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 Or when pricking everywhere with burning myrtle large, or olive oil subtle as you can pierce through, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 and are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirror is very renowned, and it is as wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary to open swollen veins full of thick blood, and containing large and turbulent blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 and this is the shape of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps with diseases that are beneath the throat, and neck, and stomach.
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And the lord must drain it in a clear way, and empty the artery that is below it.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 And if it touches the artery, and bleeding comes out, you should compress it, as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And it must not be pressing the flame, but cutting it like a pincer.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 If the bladder does not open manifestly, you should incise it and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Or you wish to drain anything from it, or you open the vein in its place on the arm.
elle apert manifestement;	 It opens manifestly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And press the flame with pincers, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 If you wish to locate the place of bleeding, then you must also incise the arm, so that you touch the vein as much as you know the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then sign the joint with a hot iron, then bind the arm, and press the vein with fire.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 Also ensure that you do not injure the artery when you see the joint swell, as it is an artery:
eschui la donques.	 cut it off then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 If you see it protrude upwards like a child's urine and the limb is red and thin, know that it is not an artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Therefore hasten then, put your thumb on top for a long time, then cut off your thumb where it becomes pale, as this often happens:
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 bind the arm and leave it alone, let the patient not move it:
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and be careful, let it not move until it is drained.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the artery is not stopped and it escapes, and the medicine is not present with you, then cut the artery open, for its head will recede.
et estainche li sans.	 If the blood does not flow (back) from the wound, and it bleeds, then stop the bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a strip of willow bark, cut it and take one half and bind it on top until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 If the blood does not flow (back) from the wound, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If it does bleed, heal it as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the stopping of bleeding should not be excessive in various positions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the bandage on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 and it is necessary for the surgeon to pierce along the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deep, and he discovers the nerve, and it swells and the patient becomes sickly, and in case it does not heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in any man due to his subtlety, then you must anesthetize the patient with the instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 cut the nerve as far as your power allows.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The vein of the cephalic helps, which draws blood from the head and assists the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is necessary to cauterize by pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, for it is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 Furthermore, seek the easiest joint, and do not hurt anything the first time, and repeat if necessary.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And by chance, the joints swell in some men, where you should seek first, but do not hurt anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of urine is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you need to know about cautery is that it should not be done except for maintaining health and avoiding future diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And the cauterization should be performed in one of the three veins that are called:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 This means "It is to know, cephalic, fasting, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And it should be bled at the beginning of the springtime, during Lent and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And it should be bled every other day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The bleeding administered for diseases has no set time, but whenever need arises, day or night, in all hours and at any time.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it is not necessary to bleed children until they are 14 years old, nor women in childbirth for the first four months up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	Old people over sixty years old should not be treated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And whenever anyone wants to be bled, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that they empty the intestines with a light enema if they have retained much filth, so that the veins do not release superfluous waste into the main organs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 A person who is overly salted with foods or drunk, so much that he becomes intoxicated, or urinating excessively, should not be cured.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 If someone is sick after suffering from colic, vomiting, stomach upset, multiple intercourse with women, heavy labor, staying awake and fasting, or anything related to the body or weapon, they should not be treated.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then refine the humors if the patient is obese from foods and drinks and medications, if you have that power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then immerse or bathe him if nothing prevents it, to refine the blood, and heal the wound around the third part of the vein as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And keep oneself from work, and from pain, and from lust, and from similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And bind it and tighten, and let the laceration be higher than the one being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the thread above halfway, for if it is too tight or loose, the wound will not heal correctly.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And then rub the wound with your hands until the veins swell, and feel for them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then moisten the bandage with a little bit of old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein under the wound where you want to lance it, so that the vein does not break or tear when lancing.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that run like cords in the body, and some of these have become filled with pus, so that when you place fire upon them, they shrink away from the flame and cannot open the vein, and such is one of those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 If the vein opens, the wound becomes too narrow, which is why the one who draws the cord must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 But if the vein opens for the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not, start again a little below that place or immediately above it, if the joint is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the joint is swollen and the patient is afraid, let it rest for a day or two and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 Perhaps abscess pusules will come.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 Do not immerse or bathe, then clean the wound if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if the wound is small or shallow and you doubt that it will not bleed much as you see, trust in that very wound itself completely with direct fire.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 Open a little quickly, but only when the joint is swollen;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the wound swelling, do not start draining pus, but put a little oil of linen on it, for it cools the body from the blood, and the linseed oil heals in this place where the oil is applied.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 and administer the linen oil to each wound that you drain pus, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and this same thing is made of three parts and a bowl from them when it is applied to the wound.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if the pus is too thick, strain it when it becomes too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 If a large abscess comes, which often happens when the wound is not drained until this time or when the opening of the vein is small, then hurry, and put on the wound a wet sponge with hot vinegar and oil, and hold it for an hour.
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you make this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in its place for some days without any blackness or greenness, it does not harm.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh beneath it in the cavity, poultice, or similar thing.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And many times abscess and appearance at the opening of the basilica occur.
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Place your hand on it then, and if you find the place soft to the pressure of the hand, this is a bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Therefore, do not place anything from what we have said, because by chance it may touch the artery without.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But make a dry plaster to harden the place, then cure it with other remedies until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw out blood from each person according to the quantity of its strength and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 If the wound is black, let it drain until it turns red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 and if you see a swelling, let it become thin;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 For the person who is full and open, and needs bloodletting, make a larger wound, and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the weak one, do the opposite, and it must be drained little by little and often, and it must be drained by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this method of drainage is safe from contamination of blood and compression of nerves, and it is more effective than long draining rather than wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And to the one whose body needs draining, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in grape juice beneath.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If he is burned, let him be bled three or four times; and if he has a cold complexion, let him fast before the draining, with soft bread soaked in sweet syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if the wound is bleeding profusely after dislocation, it is necessary that you apply a paste of charcoal and sweet-smelling subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on fainting, for blood evacuation.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If you want to dislocate someone's arm and then relocate it at another time, when it has been weakened by much bleeding, it should be done little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to dislocate someone's arm after the first bleeding, and has a strong heart, should wait 9 hours after the first bleeding, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to be bled from another part, should be bled on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 There is much blood within the body which has become heated, causing fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 It is necessary to draw out a large amount and widen the opening until it can pass through a funnel;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 then you should follow all the conditions of health, and place your hand on top of the feet when it is healthy, so that death does not come in its place, and this happens often when the healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm and draw blood again if the opening is closed, but you should press firmly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 If it is bent, extend the arm as far as possible, for that would be wrong;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but let it remain healthy a second time.
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 If you burn at the tip of the flame until the vein which is frozen opens up, and place the piece of linen soaked in vinegar on it and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if a vein has burst, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	If it requires drawing blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is safer to use instead of the one in the neck because it is composed of different vessels.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the way to heal is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 Then bind it gently, so that the vein is visible, then pierce it carefully with a small needle, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 and make the incisions wide, and prick the joint of the hand carefully, and if it does not bleed, then immerse the hand in hot water, and let the blood come out into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 if it is cold, do not immerse the hand in hot water, because it makes it colder rather than warmer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 and the pricking of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there are neither arteries nor nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The pricking of the thumb of the right hand is useful for all liver diseases, and this is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Hold the hand, and push it into hot water, until the vein has been opened, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 and if the artery is cut through entirely, and you cover it all over, it will not hurt at all.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 and do not go too deep, because the nerves are bare beneath all the skin there; then replace the hand in hot water, so that the wound does not freeze, and it cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as much as needed, put oil and linen over the wound to heal quickly, and do this for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purification of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of paralysis, and it should be done in the same way as I told you concerning the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The incision of the saphenous vein is beneficial for all the diseases that are under the body, such as diseases of the marrow, and retention of phlegm, and disease of the kidneys, and the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of its artery is such that the patient must press his foot in hot water and rub on the vein until it ruptures, and tie it above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And if the vein is at the ankle, then you must go upwards along the leg a great deal.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Treat the wound with a larger reed or at the ankle, if necessary.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 If you treat it on the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and treat it through as when sewing;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And let the flames be quenched.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the leg cannot be extracted, place it in the water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 If the wound requires sainying for the first time, then start the second one a little above, because the flesh is salty.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the tendon of the other limb equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The salted area of the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the foot, and its blister is worth the pain of the heel when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his healing is that the patient immerses himself in water or a bath and strains above the ankle for four fingers while turning, because otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 And if it opens, let him heal in all possible ways and by crossing over (it).
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 It is better to cover it, because the wound is exposed and very sensitive to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you do not treat it, no remedy for the wound will open or close at the back of the foot, and beware of the nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 Make as much pressure on the blood as you can see, then undo the bandage, put cotton on it and tie it again.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of blistering sores
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Blisters are made of horns, or hare's foot, or glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 and blistering is done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 To draw and attract blood, or to not wound.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this venetization (or cauterization) which is called "not wounding" follows two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 or it is with all fire, or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 And venetization (or cauterization) which is done by wounding and bloodletting is made in 14 parts of the body, so that the one who is all head is completely in the upper part (of the body).
et li autres est emmi le col;	 and the others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and the others in the two sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and the veins below the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and the veins of both shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and the veins above the ankles.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and the veins in both arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and the veins in both legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 And the blisters of the two shins;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 And the blisters do not bleed, unless of small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason should not be opened, if one does it as with the lancing of a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 and it should not be administered, neither with fire nor hot fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the whole body is evacuated.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 And if by necessity of diseases it is necessary to blister, or for custom, then we will administer it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in between and at each time;
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 because there are some who, when they have to blister, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, in their face, neck, and darkness of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth, and the tongue has swollen, and they are spitting blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there are those who faint, see blood in urine and nosebleed and other similar symptoms.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	When we see these signs and especially when it is in the month [of the disease], we order to bleed after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The pain of the mouth helps with the pain in the head ... which comes to the eyes, and it is not advisable that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 And this ventilation is in the place of mouth pain, and it should not be used by those who have a cold constitution or diarrhea, because it does them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And therefore, it is not advisable for those who watch, or have a cold head disease, to use [the treatment].
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become obtuse, and for this reason, the blister should be placed a little lower due to the risk of becoming obtuse.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The ventosation (ventilation) is in the location of the sinuses in the skull and base, and for this reason it is beneficial for the narrowing of the nose passage, and for fracture of the nasal channel, and for swelling, and for congestion.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 It should be pushed gently, because if it remains too tightly closed, it causes obstruction of the throat or stomach and heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosation in the ribs of the neck is good for headaches, otalgia (ear pain), migraines, strangulation, and tooth root pain, and it is in the location of the sinuses in the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 It is necessary that you command the lord to press his hand for insertion, not to hit the artery, and there should be no flow of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 Ventilating beneath the chin is useful for mouth diseases and for corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 and it is in the location of the sinuses of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations of the shoulders are good for disease that comes from heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 Ventilating the ribs is as much as three veins in the arm, because it attracts blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Command the lord not to pierce too deeply, because the flesh is bare of skin, and it knows beneath black and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 Ventilation above the rump is useful for hemorrhoids in the root and diseases beneath it, and the ventilator should be large and made of eagle feathers, as it needs to draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And possibly, if it is delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 and causes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The leg ulcers open widely because they draw blood from the whole body, and are like the old aches of the kidneys, and the bladder, and the scrotum; they destroy the flowers.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 They are in the region of the hip bones and the wrists, and yet they weaken the body after long usage, and cause pus to appear in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The method of applying the ulcer is to first empty it, then moisten it promptly, and apply it quickly, moving it evenly, and not stopping until you see the region turn red and swell, and open the redness of the blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then heat (or cauterize), and apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 It is necessary to strike only once, and it is necessary to make wide wounds, and one deep puncture.
et suce legierement.	 Suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the flesh is thick, it is necessary to strike twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time is to make a passage for the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the flesh is very thick, it is necessary to strike the third time:
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 When we want to draw blood drop by drop, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, we reward it often:
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the bone is thin, it should be pierced entirely, and the wound should be closed so that the pores are perforated; for those with thick and hard skin and narrow pores, you must anoint the joints of the blisters with stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it is thin, use violet oil, sweet almond oil, or the oil of seed from cucumber.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if it is in a vein, use watercress oil, lily oil, chamomile oil or other similar oils.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluidity is large and cold, take amat oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others like it.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the one whom you are treating has tender flesh and wide pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morello cherries, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or some similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And one who has much moisture, if he rises from bed, should do so with asafetida or myrtle water, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those with excess fluid should rise from old wine, or juice of blood, or the decoction of dill or chamomile, or other similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 And it is not necessary to use a cupping glass before bathing or in bath, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And one must not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he should be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 Keep watch over the one who is being bled, for he is choleric, and if he lacks it, he becomes too sharp and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 He should take cold things such as pomegranates, endive, lettuce and similar items.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And eat lean meat, veal from a castrated bull, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And the one who has a cold constitution should take honey syrup, sweet-smelling wine of moderate age, and eat coarse bread, lean meat and small birds and sparrows.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 And on the day when he will turn himself, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 It is necessary to give some men sometimes tricolor or musk to the wind, or after, for strengthening the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let it be subtle, but one should not drink it if he is hot.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The wounds placed for cutting are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach and bowels, back and loins and haunches, since these limbs do not bear being cut upon or pierced except to draw blood from one member to another, as we do with the mammary glands when they swell;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 to remove the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place wounds on the stomach and bowels to reduce the limb;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 And alleviate the pain when there is an obstruction or arrow, if possible, draw out the obstruction by its attracting virtue, or dislodge the arrow from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 Similarly, it is done when placed on the liver and spleen when there is retained wind, and these winds are treated empty because they are sucked dry only.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And sometimes they are treated with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in pleurisy diseases, and in this way the wind is filled with hot water or water in which healing herbs have been cooked.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the blister to be treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 It should be two fingers wide and half a palm long, and it should pierce the middle of the wound near the muscle, as with an awl, and it should be made of linen, soft in front so that it does not irritate the patient when placed on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 And take in the middle of a plowshare or iron bar a yard's length for putting a candle-stand in position, and make them big or small according to the diseases and age of those who use it.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 For the swellings of children are different from those of the old, and those of the thin from those of the fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And this swelling should be placed thus on the member.
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 Take the candle of wax or linen thread and place it in the swelling across the rod that is in the swelling so that the light is at the bottom of the swelling, so as not to burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 Then place it on the member and your hands should be over the hole as we have said, so that when one looks, if there is steam, remove the swelling.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And wrap it with linen as before, and renew it often if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the cupping of illness caused by pleurisy in all its acuteness, it should not have a prick or puncture, and it is only applied when it is full of water. It is placed on the affected body part only for a short time.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Blisters are applied only to the parts where cupping cannot be used due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 and in open areas of skin, such as fingers or toes, and similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 The quality of the blister user is that when you find blisters in clear, sweet, and healthy-looking water, you should take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 And place them in a soft warm bath until they are familiarized, and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 Then let it be drained of blood and bled, then rub the limb until it is red, and apply leeches on it.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and warm, if there is a place where leeches can be applied, apply them, for it is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, lift the arm (or limb) high and then let it hang down, do this well, and then sprinkle it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the arms are too far from the body by the leeches, wet a linen cloth in cold water and put it on, until the leeches are dried.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if there are no bones, place it on broken glass, or similar things, until it is boiled.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 And you place half-peeled beans on it, and leave them until they adhere to the place, then it will be healed now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 and if you need more, take other soothing herbs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the soothing herbs do not want to be taken, you rub the place with fresh blood, or stick a needle there until pus comes out, and then put them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they will adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they are weeping, sprinkle some powder of aloe and of crushed silk or ashes on it, then they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures (breaks)
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with setting fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Learn, dear child, that the foolish man should avoid this chapter, as he will never see any ancient books or read a letter from them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 and for this reason, the knowledge is foreign in our land, as I never found anyone good at it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 and I know nothing about it, except by the knowledge of ancient books, which I have studied so much that I have practiced medicine based on them, and by experience, and by the habit of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 and I have described for you in this chapter what is contained, summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary that we explain the summary of this book's content and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain comes to anyone, it is necessary for you to straighten the patient from one side and the other, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or old people;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 and do not eat cold food, meaning raw meats, or drink wine, or eat fatty foods, and do not fill oneself too much with meats that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of abscess heat, or expansion of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 if the patient returns to his former government as he used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that the patient be fed on foods that cause thick stools, or have viscosity like cooked barley in water and peas, and beef, and pork, and veal, and mutton, and eggs, and fresh fish, and large wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this thick stool, the healing of the fracture is quicker.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that the broken bones of old people and weak ones cannot be well regained nor sutured according to their nature due to the looseness of limbs, not those who are too tender as the bones of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but it has no cure, reset above the broken bone and hold the member together firmly, until it heals as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not let him work at all, and therefore nourish him with thick meats as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head (skull) is different from that of the foot or leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture which goes towards the elbow, and another in sharpening, like the tip of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small split.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And in each way he should have his device, and his equipment proper for the restoration according to what memory comes to him.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And the fracture of the bone is recognized by this that the joint is twisted and opened widely, and sounded with the probe, and pressed with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when there is no twisting or damage [to the joint], and the patient does not feel great pain, there is no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 but it may have twisting, crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand at all, but place medicine on it that comes afterwards, and then hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And know that the breaks that are in the joint, and the two parts separated, you must now put them equally together, so that abscesses heal quickly.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 and if an abscess heals quickly, let it be left for as many days as the abscess is subsided.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 then put it equally in the muscle that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of this is easier than the restoration where there are fractures.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Then hold, as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 If the bone is broken into pieces, let it be set with two parts, whether it is hand or foot, or at your hand if it is one of the smaller members, or with two cords, or with one cord and at your hand.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And set the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disjoined, if you can, reset all the additions in their places with every means possible, and make sure through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And adjust well the two joints of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be quite right.
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 Straighten it well, but do not strain it too much, nor press it as those who make it swell and contract the member through their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the member is set straight, restrain the patient from moving it, not paying attention to him neither sleeping nor waking, not turning or in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and you must put it in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And ensure that it is placed correctly, so that it does not become twisted when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 The qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members are diverse in smallness and largeness and form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members such as fingers, thumbs, and others.
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 You must wrap soft and thin linen cloth around it.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 For those that are large, such as the thighs and legs.
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 It is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the wide bands embrace the entire large limb, and they hold it equally from all sides so that there is no leak.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then wrap light bandages around it, three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, so that the break is held but slightly less, then move the break away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 soften the bandage gradually, as you take a large part of the healthy flesh, then take another bandage, and wind again directly over the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 then return to the part below the break, and hold it moderately, not too strongly nor too loosely, as we said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then put between the joints soft linen or cloth strips that are all even, then tie it all together with a bandage, and then place well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 If there is swelling or an abscess, put on top soothing substances for the abscess and one that reduces swelling, and leave it like that for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then tighten the splints, and they should be half the width of a thick cane or pole used for splitting wood, or reeds of palm, and according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but it is necessary that the splint placed on the break should be a little larger and wider than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 And let it be as long as is necessary for the limb, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then pull upwards on the stitches as you did at the first joint, then tie it with thread coming from above, as in the first joint when breaking.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 The gap is too narrow now, make it wider.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 It must be that the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, and it should be of flax thread.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their knots with twisted flax threads, and that is a great error, because the knot will not be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is pierced by the limbs of the ribs after setting them in healthy bones, place linen or flax padding beneath them to prevent swelling.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is broken and the nerves are torn, I will tell the treatment below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to hold bones of broken members all day long on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 For when the limbs are large, no needles should be inserted before five or seven days, or more, according to your certainty of the abscess healing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And here is the method for ancient plasters to restore fracture, dislocation and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix with enough egg, and put this mixture, neither too clear nor too thick, and apply it, and this is the common method for plaster restoring fractures in various ways, and equally for women and small children, because it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another method for plaster restoring the fracture, dislocation and twisting:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take [the following]: abrasive and lardanium and vinegar and asafetida and Arabic gum and myrrh; mix them, according to recipe X.
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Myrrh and aloes, according to recipe V.
alechil VIIII З.;	 alum VIII, [according to] recipe IX.
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 and make it into powder, and mix it with egg yolk.
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the constitution of the man is hot, use this plaster because it has good composition and quickly restores broken bones and benefits many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way to make a plaster that helps with twisting pains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 take myrrh and lardanium, according to recipe X.
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 Myrrh and aloes, according to recipe IX.
acaice VI З.;	 The dislocation arises from any displacement of its place; therefore, it cannot move, and the limb is malformed. (This sentence seems to be a continuation of the previous one)
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Pound well, and crush and mix with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it. (This sentence seems to be giving instructions for treating a dislocation)
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to treat a dislocation and swollen joints, and to relieve the pain that occurs, is to cut the bone with a tool, and break it. (This sentence seems to be giving additional instructions for treating a dislocation)
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen, wet it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the joint. (This sentence seems to be giving further instructions for treating a dislocation)
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating abscess pain and bone fracture pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another way to treat dislocated bones is: (This sentence seems to be introducing another treatment method for dislocations)
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves, and leaves of common pauper's knotweed (also known as common nettle), grind them together to make a paste.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster for the healing of the broken bone and for promoting the healing of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take the root of mallow, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, each in equal parts;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind, and boil together with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, boil it with moist coriander water or broth, and apply.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of amputation stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take equal parts of the roots of mallow, flax seeds, wild sage, horehound, and meadowsweet, as well as flowers of violets and chamomile;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 grind them together, boil in salt water or sweet water or wine, depending on the heat of the limb and its rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance besides a mixture of beeswax and oil should be applied to a broken limb for restoration, and it should neither be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen states that for restoring a broken limb, one should apply warm dry substances such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way of applying the plaster is useful for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Take a handful of crushed human copes or goose feathers, and equal amounts of resin and wax, and grind them together to make the plaster and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 And then remove a small amount after that, ensuring the patient does not feel any pain and that the bones have not moved from their place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If you do not remove it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 And if pain or itching occurs at the place, without rest, swelling or inflammation, hurry and remove it immediately; leave the plaster off.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 and take a light cloth, sea sponge dampened with water, dip it in water, lift the place, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Leave the member to rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, dampen it with vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up tightly until you are certain the abscess has been heated.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 Remove the inflammation from the member and alleviate the pain, then begin wrapping again subtly, a little plaster, and do not strain it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has burst, become red, painful and swollen, and if you need plaster and linen, then suture it as you did before evenly.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if no improvement occurs in the member as we have said, do not remove the wrapping for more than 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 And never leave it for 20 days, as we see, until the fracture heals and the wound approaches the skin.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then hold it more firmly than before, and swell the flesh, as I have said earlier.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 If you see the joint become dry beyond what is necessary, know that nutrients cannot reach it.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Therefore, immerse the joint in warm water every time you dislocate it, and do this three times a day, and slightly loosen the bandage.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 By this work, then cut off the nutrients from the limb and heal quickly what the foolish doctor leaves twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 This is harmful, and it is a work full of fear, and I see nothing but laziness and working incorrectly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	diverse methods of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many ways to break bones, and various shapes, and the reasons for them are different;
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 For there are fractures that are made by sword blow, and the hilt strikes the whole bone up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, just like a wedge or a ram.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And this kind of fracture is called "haichure".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 When the sword strikes the bone from above and pierces through it, this kind of fracture is called "absolue".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And the wounds caused by these two types of fractures can be either large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a bruise filled with blood, or a wound or arrow wounds, or falling upon a stone, or similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	If it is a swelling that approaches the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on the bone and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if the wound is repaired in the bone as thin as a horse's hair and the crack is small, then this kind of fracture is called "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by striking a stone or falling or something similar, and it drives the bone fragment downwards, and the ends of the bones are even like smiths when they make pots over fire.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If the arrow enters within (the body).
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more often with those who have wet or soft bones, such as in children;
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it occurs in all these ways of fracture where small fragments are separated, as is the case with shattered bones;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And I will speak about its place (the bone).
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all manners of breaks by the drawing on them, and the testing inquiry, and through the corruption of flesh that is above. (line-by-line translation)
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The resemblance of the capillary is known by those who, when the bone is exposed and scraped above, if the break appears black. (line-by-line translation)
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a break, take care of the patient's circumstances, and if you see any bad accident, as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, stretching, swelling, fever, the hairs coming out and reddening, and other symptoms in various dispositions, it cannot heal with doubt. (line-by-line translation)
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an overwhelming accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the splinter first comes to you in winter, it must be removed before the fourteenth day at the bone's mouth.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue under the bone does not rot, and the accidents we have mentioned come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut the divided part as follows:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 And it is that you grab the patient's head, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and above the wound as much as you can, and if blood comes out to expose the bone or an abscess boils up, help with whatever is needed, and it is that you fill the place with dampened linen soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 and make the wound rest until the abscess boils are calmed down, and be sure of the flow of blood.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 then start around the bone to cut, and this is done in two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 One method is that you make a narrow cut in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then insert another, larger incision.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second method is that you have a variety of sizes, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 and work lightly, lest you pierce the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 If the bone is protruding and hard, it is necessary that you pierce around it, in such a way that you provide sizes with tapers, but not so deep as to go beyond the bone of the skull, and above the point there should be a margin or circle that does not let the point go beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 and you must have more of them, so that each one comes in its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have tapers for all cases.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 And this is the form of the three ways of lancing:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality for piercing around the broken bone is that you place the lancet on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone has been punctured.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 Then move the lancet to another spot a little after, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fractures, and do this more subtly than you can and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone into your hand, or any of the instruments that you have like pliers or tweezers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 And be careful not to touch the brain nor the sinus.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 When you have punctured and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the sharpness of the bone to any other instrument resembling an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than the other incisors.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if there remain any small bones, no scales, lightly separate them with the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 then heal the wound of tents and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And the other way of work is that which Galen said, which is more secure.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and he greatly commands it, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture moves open; so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place it under the head of this concave incisor, as shown in the following figure:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut from one side, but the parts should be equally on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is beneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 if it is hard against the bone, break the bone lightly, for one breaks it too much and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is only split from above, and there are small fragments, then after smoothing it, remove the scales with a sharp rasp, having different amounts as necessary, in order to provide the most suitable amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Start with a large rasp, then proceed with finer ones, and do not stop until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other hairy growths or subtle fractures, you should apply a remedy according to its nature.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 and this is something not easily answered by one who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is exposed, you should take linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 then take another linen cloth doubled over two or three times, moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 and do this more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer another thread on top, but do not tighten it any more than necessary to cover the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And let it remain for a day or two, until the abscess subsides, then release it, and administer medicines as with lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, Aristolochia, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 And from these things make powder, and apply it to the wound, and administer immediately medicines without harm or bitterness.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And watch that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or clotted blood on it, for when clotted blood accumulates on the brain-cloth, it will rot and corrupt, causing great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 For if anything bitter is applied to it, it will rot from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Then take care, if any harmful event befalls the patient as we have said, it is full of doubtful meaning.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness does not come violently except for the medicine that has been put on it, which possesses such power, then you should take a part of honey, and 3 parts of rose oil, and mix them with linen cloth, and apply it on the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then you should treat it according to the methods of treatments that are necessary, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above can be broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 and the one beneath is cartilage, and does not break, unless it causes a blow or twisting, and then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or thumb into the nose, and align the break within your index finger's tip, and at the back of the nose, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, so the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the neck and the thumb cannot reach its place, you must align it with the head of a ruler, a little bigger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 If the fracture is in two parts, then fix it in the same manner, and hasten to restore it on the first day if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then bind the end of the wound with linen cloths if the fracture is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Or you bind the other side if there is a fracture there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And let the bandages be as thick as they fill the openings of the wound.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any remedy that one must moisten tents with butter, and churn every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem good to me, but it is necessary that they be moistened with egg white and flour powder mixture.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then let the tendon remain tense, until the bone hardens, and the cartilages become hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes feathers of goose are used instead of tendons, and if it is soaked in wool, held with a bandage, and the break is kept, then blow on the wound while the patient breathes.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 or do what you think is best.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses come to the new (opening) while you are working on it, put either beeswax or cotton wool soaked in rose oil, or a small piece of lignum aloes, there.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 And if an abscess does not come, apply plaster on the outside with flour from wheat and powder of incense, mixed with egg yolk, then place light compresses on top but do not bind the feathers.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 and if the break of the feathers is small, and it breaks into small pieces, take them with suitable instruments, then stitch the wound, and treat it with things that are appropriate for the purpose, such as plasters and ointments.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no wound within nor in the nose, treat it with tents, and place plasters of wool until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured below and there is no wound outside, and the break is only displaced and not broken through to the inside, but rather bent within, this can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 If the fracture is in the right side, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth:
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 And if the fracture is in the left jaw bone, insert your right index finger and gently push the fracture inside, adjust it to the other side with the left hand and hold it steady:
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is dislocated in two places, then you must administer extension of two parts, equal in size.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 If the teeth move or are broken, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then place a collar on the fractured jaw bone and put a double cloth on it:
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 Place a wide and long bandage or piece of leather on the jawbone, securing it above the muscles that you can reach, and tell the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see the figure changes, dislocate it on the third day, then reset it to its original position.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 and place a plaster on top of it, with powder from the mill along with egg or flour of sesame, after you have removed the sore.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 and place a thin linen plaster on top of it, and if the plaster adheres to it, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 it often heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess comes, bring what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 and if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 use subtle tools for removing the straws suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, you should widen it with fire as necessary.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and none remain, close the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for that purpose, to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	From the lock (or fastening)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The forceps break multiple times before, towards the shoulder, and these fractures are in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 or it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is in several fragments, and is the easiest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 or there is a fracture with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the work [procedure] is when there is a fracture with an open wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder which feels the forceps are broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other extends the neck towards the affected area.
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then make the fracture equal to your hands, so that the shape is as required, and there should be no protrusion or appearance of deformity.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend more, place a round ball of fabric or linen on the patient's shoulder, and it should be as large as necessary for your needs.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And you shall stretch and lift the limb, and hold the shoulder with your hand, so that you align the fracture as necessary.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out of the joint because it comes in completely, then the patient must lie on their affected side, and a small pillow should be placed under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder downwards until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then direct the break to your fingers, and if there are bone fragments, it is necessary that you cut above them;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 and remove the fragments gently, and if the bone cannot be joined by any means, strike it at one of the incisions you have made.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But place this instrument under the limb to support it;
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 and have two handles, as you see, with one wide and the other narrow, as the wound of the injury that you made when treating the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if it opens, and if the wound is small, or you doubt the abscess being hot, then apply cloths and bandages to the wound, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	If abscess heating comes, wet linen in rose oil and asafoetida and vinegar, then place on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The splinting of the bone when it feels painful and has wounds or cuts, is that you put a bandage made from milled powder and egg yolk over the bone, place light strips on top, and put a sphere under it if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide bandage of one palm's width, then place two cloths on top of the strips, and apply it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a narrow strip of three feet long and wide, and wrap it around the bandage so that the end of the bandage hangs out.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the steel upon the breakage, and turn the bendil above the neck, and beneath the saddle healthy, and beneath the saddle sick.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And reset from each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the breakage well, and clearly see that the steel does not move above the broken bone, if it moves, then hold it every day, and when the ligature slackens, constrain it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie on his back, and place him when he sleeps a small pillow under the saddle, to lift the shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 If you align the breakage with the forceps using the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it except for a bad accident occurring, up to 20 days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Continue the traction, if you see that it is necessary, and hold it and let it stay in place until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it is restored within 28 days, and in less to some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder dislocation
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It rarely happens that a broken or dislocated shoulder heals by itself, and it should not be left without treatment but touched.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 The armature is prepared according to the shape of the fracture, and it is reset according to its natural form in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 Then put on the place powder from a mill with egg and soften gently, and cover it with two cloths.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 Then place a large and fine pillow under it, a little larger than the shoulder, and if there is any hollow space under the pillow in any part of the shoulder, fill it with soft linen padding so that the pillow becomes even.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 And then bind it all with a strong great bandage, so that the limb does not move from its place, and observe the swelling every day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And whenever it softens, bind it, and make the limb even if it is out of its place, and have the patient lie on their side;
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 and the shoulder should be restored within 20 or 25 days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful because it is not the bone that moves easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not below the skin, lift it up, remove the bone, and do as we have said in the fracture of the fistula to treat an abscess by heating.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture of the fistula
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The thighbone is sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 And when it is broken at the joint, it declines below, and the patient feels great pain, and lack of alignment, and immediately, and sometimes vomits blood, and the fracture opens in the bone broken, and he feels it all over.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 And the restoration is that the patient lies down on their stomach, and puts the cushion between the shoulders, then presses the shoulders, and assembles the ribs of the two sides to your hands, and carefully adjust it in all ways possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then lay on plasters and bandages over the thin stem of salt or another light stick, and wrap it in a cloth, and place it above the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 And turn the cord tightly around the back and hold it fast, and check every hour whether the bone has set, and if it softens, tighten it again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to undo [the bandage], due to corrosion or itchiness at the site, or pain or abscess, then hasten, undo [it], remove the plaster, and treat the area with remedies.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the plaster and hold it in place until it heals.
de la brisure des costes	of a broken rib
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that the fracture of the ribs occurs only in large ones behind the back and at the chest, and do not bend only because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 And it feels well to the investigation as required.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the treatment is to set the break as necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then apply a splint and tie it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 If the fracture of the ribs is inclined downwards, it causes the patient great pain and shortness of breath, like in pleurisy, for the bone pierces the covering.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And it pushes at the tips, and immediately and vomits a large amount of blood, which is a serious illness, and the ancients have put great effort into treating it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the break outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot poultices come, unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have arrived, then heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And they said that one should put bellows on the wound to suck out pus, which seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Always, there is doubt about whether the ventouse (something like a cupping glass) will draw out superfluidities to the place due to its weak positioning.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And they say that someone should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put bandages between the ribs to even out the swelling around it; then it should be treated with the treatment for pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 If the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which does not break the cloth, and doubt exists for the patient, then it is necessary to cut through the place of the broken rib and put an instrument under it to hold it in place.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then it is necessary to cut the bone and draw gently, and afterwards sew up the two lips of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 If an abscess has come up, place damp cloths soaked in rose oil on top of it.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And apply the remedy to the shoulder that needs an abscess, and let it lie on its side facing the affected area until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes there is a fracture of the neck of the bone, and it may bend.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And likewise to the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when it happens to anyone, and you wish to know if it will heal or not, take notice if the hands become softened, swollen and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick with a needle, he does not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if the joint does not move or feel when stretched or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and the patient should be cured, if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 If it appears as though the spine in the back is fractured and you wish to know whether it is healed or not, watch if the bones are softened and if there are accidents that are in hands, and if the back jumps with involuntary movement.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it is laid on its stomach, it jumps involuntarily.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is brought onto its stomach and it wants to lie down, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 It means fatal.
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Do not labor at all in the treatment [of the dislocation].
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this incident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is that you reward it if there is an abscess hot, placing on it oil of rose or oil from egg yolk until it is calmed;
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 then place upon one of the soothing and drying plasters and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest;
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 and do not sleep on the part where there is pain, until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone should dislocate, then cover it with wax.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Remove the bone, then close the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, then treat it with healing salve, until it heals.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the shoulder blade (the "shoulder of the cow") is broken, you push your left thumb against it and hold it even with the other hand as much as possible, then apply a splint and a wooden stick, if necessary.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Next, you pull it together, and if there is bone protruding, raise it up, remove the bone, and heal the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the ankle bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It rarely happens that the shin bone is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction in the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And it is made long, bent into a curve, and applied to the painful place where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the resetting is such that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the break;
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and learn what is the break and its shape.
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the break is only at the head, set the break equally, until it is of natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along the length or it bends inward, make the patient lie on his stomach so that the healing of the break comes to your attention.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have set it equally, place the splint on it, then place a rod or wedge above it and hold the break so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and apply the limb beneath the ribs, until the alignment is equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to lie on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if an abscess swells up there, do not touch it, until the swelling subsides, and place what we have said before on it.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to restoration, hold it as necessary, if there is no adverse event.
et c’est li maniere.	 This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the fracture of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The joint (adjuntoire) is between the neck and shoulder of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it must be restored according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One method is that you take a thick paste (fust) filled with larger grain, in this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 Tie the joints with two strings, and place them on top, and hold the patient on the chair.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then throw the broken arm over the paste, until it slips out, and have a mound of paste in the middle, then place something heavy or the assistant extends it downstream.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then place the mirrors in equal position to each other at the patient's hands, until the breaker returns as needed.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that you lay the patient on his bed, tie one end of the rod to his neck and command two assistants that one holds the part above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds both ends of the rod, each pulling in their respective directions.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament beneath the break and above the break, and extend each of the attendants to their respective parts.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, it is necessary that you put a splint underneath the joint, and the other one towards the side, under the break.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And similarly, if the breaker is towards the side, it is necessary to place a splint lightly, without labor, so that the breaker is even on the joint and on the side.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then make the break equal, as needed, and hold it steady if an abscess does not come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if an abscess comes out, do not hold it back for more than 7 days, put wool soaked in oil on it and let it be until the abscess is calm.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then hold, and the method of holding is that you place the arm on the dislocation, then assemble the shoulder to the body, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 and put the cloth, hold on the shoulder, and on the arm, so that the arm is in place, unless something prevents it, or the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the dislocation, and have space between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the dislocation 3 fingers on each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then hold firmly on the joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter about breaking, more strongly and less in moving away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the position of the joints and the tying, as we have said, during the time that you are restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then look every three days at the suture, to see if pus does not swell or appear in the place, or that the scabs do not come too close to the limb.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such accidents occur, do not remove the sutures before three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back and have his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And put a bandage of evenly-spun linen under the shoulder, and look at every hour of the day or night that the shape of the broken limb does not move, or the tendons are not softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if the advice is by the virtue of medicine, and he is given the meat that we have prepared before, in such a manner that the meat is first made tender.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 and when it begins to heal, let it be thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be healed within 40 days of everything.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 Then you must loosen it and administer baths and medicines made from camphor to direct the healing.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the structure is deformed and swollen, it remains to dissolve (or loosen) for days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	on the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called "fosciles," one of which is small and it is the one that follows the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the others are large, and it is this one that is under, towards the little hole.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 By chance, only the large fossa (a cavity or socket-like structure in the body) is broken, or both the large and small ones together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small fossae are broken, the restorations (the act of returning to its original position) and healings are easy.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when only the large one is broken, the healing is difficult and more painful than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small fissure that is broken, it should be slightly stretched and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 If it is the large fossa, it must be pulled more strongly.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 And extend it on the bone, grasp the hand pocket higher than the others, and let the small ones be lower than the others, and let the patient cross himself over it, and the bone should be in front of him higher, so that the patient does not suffer any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or to the elbow, and another minister at the other end above it.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then equalize the shoulder, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it breaks into pieces, put each one in its place, and if there is no dislocation that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut off and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And regarding breaking into a wound, I have spoken about it in the singular chapter.
si pren la cure.	 take care (of the wound)
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 If, at the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear, apply the dressing made of rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 and securely attach (the dressing) above it subtly until the abscesses are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 And then remove the beeswax, and apply the poultice of the mill powder with egg white, then place the hot irons, and let the iron from the wound be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that he must have six ribs or arms in multiple positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 either the break is in one bone, or in two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and hold the break higher than other parts, and less when pulling it apart, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 let the bandages that are above the break be soft and moist, not hard or rough.
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 let the thread, with which it is bound, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And keep the limb and the joint immobilized for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 and if any bad incident occurs in the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is alleviated.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And let the limb not be tightly rested.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then resume the immobilization, and if the joints are weakened and the bones dislocated, as in similar cases, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member due to it being too narrow, then you must soften it with oil for a few days, until the urine passes through, and then tighten it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have mentioned happen to the patient, do not discharge them for twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 Wrap his hands around his neck and ensure that his neck is even. Watch for movement and displacement. Let him sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And know that this break is restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and by chance in twenty days, according to the mixtures and complexions of the properties.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	For at the back of the hand and the fingers, there are few fractures, but it occurs repeatedly many times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the hand's plant is broken or bent, the patient should cross his legs and sit straight in front of him evenly.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 Then place the hand on a cloth and extend the broken bones, aligning them with mirrors until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 Apply the poultice and compresses, if there is no abscess present, then place a probe according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And let it be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 If the breakage is at the front end of the limb near the belly of the plant, make a splint from cloth, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken limb.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then bind it with a long strip of cloth, and let the splint be as thick as the palm of the hand, and bind it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is at the edge, you must place a splint above and another beneath in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight; then tie it all around the hand and stop the flow of blood between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 If the breakage comes in any of the fingers, if they are bent, make it straight as necessary;
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 and bind with the palm, and if you see that it is set, place a small straight splint to lift the breakage, and do not move it.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the break is at another joint, like in the index or one of the others, align it, and place the healthy bone that is next to it.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Tie them all together tightly, as in a bundle, or place a splint over them, like a thong.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And be careful in the treatment and placement of the abscess heat, and heal what comes to it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The leg bone is often broken, and one sees this when it twists forward or backward;
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 and the treatment is that one ties a splint above the break, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies on their face, then each minister extends their linen equally to their part;
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And this is when a fracture occurs in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is close to the root of the shinbone, it is one of the ligaments towards the joint, and the other ligaments on the side of the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 If it is near the knee joint, then dislocate the ligaments from the knee and extend it downwards.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then place the mirror on the bone equal to two hands, in accordance with its natural shape, and then apply the plaster and the strap, if no abscess comes.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 If there is an abscess hot, let it heal first then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The binding is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 You must wrap over the fracture in thick double bandages and remove any excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the neck, and insert a long thread between the calf and the leg, under the knee, and bring the head of the thread above.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then turn the leg and thigh together, then place the splitter on the fracture, and put an arrow on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Use fabric of soft linen between the leg and thigh to even out the fracture, then begin to bind it firmly 3 or 4 times on the splitter.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 and as you go up above the splitter, gradually release the pressure.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 then pull the two ends of the thread you inserted between the leg and thigh, tie three splints above them, then go back down to the base of the thread, pulling it until the knot is loose.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 hold it in place so that it does not move from its position, then leave it as is, ensuring no abscess or inflammation or other similar problem develops.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it happens, dislocate it, and direct that which comes out, as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 and if there are bone fragments that prick (or protrude), they should be cut off if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 and if not, it must be broken and the humour drawn out.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 and heal as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 Sometimes the thigh is broken so that splints are put on it, as in the shoulder or arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Nevertheless, such a restoration does not always please the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored within a few days, either less or more, according to the various complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the street of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the groin region, there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not so much a fracture, but rather a crack or perforation, and it causes all kinds of pain and injury, and this is felt very much.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is that which equalizes the limb to its opposite, until it is assembled as much as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then put the splint, and if needed, place a round stud, and hold it as necessary, then check all the arrangements that we have mentioned in other breakages, such as an abscess or something similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then apply whatever is needed to each case until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the broken leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that there are two bones in the leg, of which one is correctly called "hammer", and the others are called "tarsus".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And it happens just as with a break in the arm, and for that reason the restoration is the same as for the arm, and the treatment is the same. If the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the thin bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well.
et torne desoz.	 and turns beneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the joints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 However, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 align it according to your ability.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two pieces of yew wood that will splint the leg from one side to the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee down to beneath;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap them in two layers and bind them above and below, and tie them in the middle so that the leg will not decline to the right or the left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And they do not administer any berse to the long part of the leg, and it is supported, and the leg is placed for restraint from movement, and properly made is what they do at the fracture or injury.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but there may be fracture of the bones in the foot and toes, and it has no cure except for compression in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 If it happens at the foot of the fracture, and you see these bones rise against each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if he is walking, and then put your foot now on his, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then place the pillow and stopper on top, and put below it the stomach of a sheep with a small table for two flat bones, then pull it towards the pelvis, then when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, remove the splint, because you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the hand bones.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then place a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone and it should be slightly larger, then put below it the table I mentioned and pull it towards the pelvis.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 And if there are two or three, or more broken bones, place a splint on each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth and pull the table below the pelvis.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 And let it be standing on top of the tablecloth with the belly facing up, so that it can be treated well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things that I have said about broken bones, when we have spoken of them;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 Treat each case as required.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the wrist bone
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of the female body is broken, make her sit upright, then incline her to the lower back and hold her from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then fill the hollow of the patient with cotton and put as much as necessary in it.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then straighten the woman, and pull the lower back gently, then push the cotton until it comes to the opening of the bone, and the broken end returns with the cotton.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, put it back, and do this for 7 days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 The break will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder of a sheep, attach it to the wound opening with a string, and push the entire bladder into the bone.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Blow into the hollow of the neck until the bladder is full within.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 The nature will heal the break.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then fill it with cotton and leave it like that for some days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the bone of the arm is broken, either in a man or woman, restore it as we have said in the thighbone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And these breaks should not be hidden from those who study and practice this art; read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For breaks indicate in many ways the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	 Therefore, let us proceed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In a spear, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the spear into it.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap cloths around it, and leave it for 3 days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	with break (or fracture) and wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For that person who has a fracture with a wound (or break with wound), especially if it is large as the leg bone or shoulder blade or similar, it should be cauterized now, as the cauteries that we have mentioned bear witness.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, it should be sealed with vitriol (a disinfectant), if you have no other option, then begin to restore the fracture in that same hour, or on that day, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess bursts, allow the healing to continue until the ninth day, as long as the abscess is appeased; do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will cause a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks open in the hollow of the cavity, you must set it gently and slightly extend it.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the dislocation does not appear to be set correctly for you to put it back into place with your hands, then align it with this instrument that is made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long, and the width is according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4 fingers, according to what is needed in each breakage treatment.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 and be round and slightly larger than a thumb, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member for your work, and be sharp in front, and large in the middle towards the wound.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palancha," because the curved shoulder should be placed on top of the prominent bone (of the skull).
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and press it once, until it returns to its place, and that it is even on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 If the fracture is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, then cut the head of the bone so that the instrument can take hold.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, strike it with an appropriate tool, either a chisel or a saw, to your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then remove what remains in the bone with sharpness and small shavings.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 Make it return to its place, then moisten the cloth in black stiff vinegar and, if it is in summer, let it be clean.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not put any greased cloth or other thing on the wound that may cause rot and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then apply the splints when you have set the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not tightened with the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have fools done this, and have brought harm to the patient or death or sometimes corruption.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 and the binding should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 If the wound is bad or large and you doubt that a bad accident may come about, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put splints on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But wrap it around instead of splints, with hard cloth, and tie it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And after a day or two, if you see pus boiling at the wound, take away what you have put on it and put healing ointment on it, such as tetraformulation and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be prepared in such a way that the splints slide downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if they pass many days without healing and continue to swell again, know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must carefully open the wound and remove all the dislocated fragments causing the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula comes to the site, or any other kind of corruption, you must treat it, as he said in the chapter before this one.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and opened above a limb, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder, do not treat it at once, for many times death comes, but let it be until it can heal.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 perhaps it heals by itself after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	broken bones that come on the suture (joint)
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 Often health comes after the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a terrible sight to see the appearance of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 And perhaps the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Therefore be careful, lest we perish.
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 administer stiffening medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocolle, acacia, and similar substances, so that you take any one of these things or all together, and grind them with a stiffening wine or with egg white or oil.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And place it on the neck in a poultice, hold it tightly, and do not remove it for many days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then dislocate [the shoulder], and start again until the nodes are removed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or hold it with a well-made piece of wood.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the property of wood is that it removes all swellings on the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the nodes have hardened like a stone and must be removed, hit it with a blow, making the excess appear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or you scrape [the hardened area] with any sharp object until it is removed, and cure it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb that is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the fracture of the bone has healed, and the limbs remain weak and fragile after it, this happens for many reasons.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 Because one [limb] was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 because there were too many bindings, and the nutrients could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to dryness, it cannot be put back in its place without pain.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 For too great movements, do not rush hourly;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 For because he has little blood in his body, he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the remedy is to make the patient eat and make his body stretch out, until his blood is increased in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and administer baths, and give joy and pleasure;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 Then apply tar to the member, so that the tar attracts great heat and causes it to often swell with hot water, until the heat goes to the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and return it to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration and the bone is broken open, and the shape of the limb is deformed, yet it does not lose its natural function;
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 Do not believe the foolish who say that a limb must be broken anew, and many fools have done so in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and this procedure is blamed, and great harm comes of it, and possibly death by chance.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Nevertheless, if the swelling and tortures are fresh, they should be aroused with hot water, or softening herbs such as comfrey leaves, roots, and medlots, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 and you make a mollifying plaster, as dayquillon often does, and take the comfrey oil and mix it with bear's grease or camomile oil, and apply the plaster.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 You take ripe figs that are oily, grind them with wheat bran, and similar medicines that alleviate pain.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes, the dislocation is opened by continuous and prolonged rubbing with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 If the spasm is aggravated and hardened, like stone, and iron treatment is required, it must be cauterized to the bone, cutting incision gently with a sharp instrument.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And apply bandages and study in its care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	If dislocation occurs in anyone, it must now be repositioned with care.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if delayed, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset improperly.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 Therefore, it must not be moved when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Many times brings spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 In any case, when it happens, make the patient purge, then leave him, until all abscesses are healed.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then immerse the limb in warm water and oil, then gently reset it, and heal each member as healing arrives at its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters of shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	of jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 The dislocation of the jaws sometimes happens in two ways, and the dislocations of both are according to two methods:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are somewhat dislocated from their places, and softened a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 When they are completely dislocated and hang downwards, and the spittle from the mouth drips uncontrollably that it cannot be held, nor can the mouth be closed, and it wraps its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is small, it can return in various positions more often.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is complete and entire, you must reset it immediately, without delaying;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 And in such a way that the minister grasps the patient's head, and presses the fingers of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And the other hand must be spread apart, to place evenly;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 Instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And bring the thumb equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 If it is dislocated again, then exactly if both jaws are dislocated together, anoint them with hot water and oil, until they are reset gently.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not be hasty in re-setting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are reset evenly and the patient's mouth is closed well, soften a round cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with many threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 The patient with the illness should lie on their back, and their shoulders should be between two pillows, so that they neither move to the right nor left nor exert themselves at all, but take light meat until the pains are removed, and the jaws are fastened.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 and then eat lightly whatever they want, and do not strain at all to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well fastened and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be reset in an hour and are not returned to their place, fever and usual sweats occur, and perhaps abdominal swelling, and possibly vomiting bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, know that it is a loss;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the collarbone   (metaphorical usage, meaning "neck" or "throat")
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The splint cannot dislocate from the side within the ribcage and is dislocated outside once at the hip, and it is felt clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 The treatment is that the patient lies supine on their back, and extends their arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 And then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 Then place the splint and bind it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 The shoulder that is towards the back cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 If not, and if it dislocates at any time, then reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then place the splint and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And likewise, the shoulders of the back are returned when they are dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the back is not dislocated except in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 The first is when it dislocates at the part of the shoulder below.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 And the second one is at the lower part [of the body].
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 And sometimes it dislocates in the upper part, and this happens rarely.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 It does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder blade, nor inside because of the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 And many times it dislocates downward towards the anus, especially in those who have little flesh, because it leaps there quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 In those with enough flesh, it leaps to a small extent, and returns to its place with difficulty.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	Sometimes happens to some men percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you must test it, until you are certain.
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then you may begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 It is known that dislocation occurs when it moves downward towards the anus, and you must distinguish between a diseased shoulder and a healthy one, and you will find clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 And you will find a hollow in the neck of the shoulder, and press down on it with the thumb at the base of the neck of the shoulder, just as if it were an eye.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 The patient cannot return his hand to its normal position, nor can he make any movements.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And if it is dislocated upward, it should not be concealed, for you can feel it clearly with your thumb.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 And this type of dislocation is not difficult to reset when it is new, or if the child is healthy.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 The method is that the minister raises the patient's hand above, then places his hands under it, and forces the joint back into place at its proper location.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the minister lifts the hand, and extends it upwards, then places it below.
si venra hastanment.	 It will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 And it is given a soothing and calming ointment, like a concoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a piece of cloth equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, is placed under the shoulder. Then the physician places his foot on the cloth, lifts the head of the shoulder carefully, and pulls the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And another servant binds the head of the patient, so that it does not move downward;
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 That shoulder comes back immediately, and if you see it like this, reset it in this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and it is that you make a larger person be present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and he should be on the right side facing the shoulder of the patient, push his shoulder down under the patient's armpit, and lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 and another servant pulls the hand of the patient down towards his stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, he cannot hold anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And it can also be reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is that one sticks a long needle in the ground, so that the head should be as round as a pea, and not too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then let the patient lie down under [the practitioner], but with soft fabric beneath, and the patient should be long on the bed.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Extend the hand below, forming it in another way, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not return with all these things that we have said, do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a torch from the second arm that is four feet long and three inches wide, with the head round for movement to enter fully beneath the assele in this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then place the staff head on fabric soft beneath, so that the staff does not hurt the patient, then put it under the patient's assele.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 Extend the arm over the long staff, place the shoulder on the staff, and hold the hand at the end of the arm, then extend the other hand below, and let the body hang from another side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The joint has come back now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is inside, no matter how, you must put a sphere of cotton equal in size under the anus, then place a plaster filled with powder from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk, all over the shoulder and around; then hold it down beneath the anus, turn the string around the plaster, and bind the hand to its neck, and let the hands remain in this position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 And it is necessary that he eat little, until the limb is comforted, for it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 and then eat more after five or seven days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 if it is closed and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, you should administer fire cauterization at three places as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold, and cannot lift its arm upwards, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And understand that the joint will never be set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 Dislocations that are towards the hip and the buttocks, or behind, are made by impact and extension of hands, and another treatment is applied.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal until he is healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing, if there is still pain in the limb and slow movement, the patient should use baths several times until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost   (This line seems incomplete, as it does not seem to follow the pattern of translation from the previous lines.)
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the shoulder joint has been dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it has been dislocated in all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not put back in place, since it can be seen clearly and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 It dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when joining the broken bone with the healthy one, make sure it can be seen clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the dislocated joint cannot bend the arm nor touch the shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 You must reset it accordingly when an abscess arrives at the shoulder, because if an abscess comes to the shoulder, it would be difficult to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 And in case it cannot be completely returned from all sides, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 It is worse than other dislocations and causes more pain, and in case there comes death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration is, when it can be brought back to such a state, that you extend your hand to both hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and the arms should be spread out, and the hands in line with the mirror on both sides, above and below, and push the joint back to its places together, or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it will return when you fold your hand over your other hand, and push against the bone joint that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not return to its place, then administer strong traction;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and that two attendants extend the arm and pull it, and then one of them holds it still while the other pulls on it so that it does not move during traction.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double cloth long and wide around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when the healer joins the joint to his hand, he pushes it away with some oil to soften the joint, then forces the joint back into place until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 When it is in place, he puts some plaster dry with egg white on it and pulls it straight, then ties the arm around the patient's neck and leaves it for several days, then unties it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is held firmly in place, he unties the tie and leaves it be.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 If you see that the joint does not hold well, repeat the plaster and the tie and leave it in that state for several days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if it feels sore after the resetting of the joint and it stiffens, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 And place a sheep's bladder on the joint, then let it stay for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter into water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when it bleeds, rub the joint gently, then place the bladder back on, and then enter into water again.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 And if you see, place a warm wet cloth with butter on it and hold it there.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand is dislocated, and when it returns, it is easy, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Immediately, it must be returned to its place quickly, during the very moment when it is dislocated, unless the joint is swollen or there is an abscess hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, extend the fingers, and align them, so that the palm is over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Then, you must look if it is in place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then, the patient places the back of his hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's dorsal side of his hand on the table, and hold your hand over that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, it is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, strain it with plasters to calm the abscess and leave it so to start healing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if it cannot endure, and you cannot put it back in place after any days, then the dislocation remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 The patient must not exert the hand for as long as it is paralyzed, and cannot strain anything completely.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 Therefore know that nerves or arteries are cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 There is no other remedy except to strain it by fire cautery in the case, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put a splint on it as we have said, then bind and leave for 5 days, then unbind and leave in this manner.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot be moved well and there is no pain, moist with warm water and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers on the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 The fingers are dislocated on both sides of the hand at times, or at the back of the palm or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then place the fingers, and push the dislocation back towards your fingertips until it returns, then hold the finger's head, and bend it towards the part where it is disjoint.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And let him wait [the shoulder] for two days, and then make it even on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 And bind it up as we have said, and loosen it for a day, and make it move, and then bind it again.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this often, until it is tight, and do the same if it is dislocated at the elbow of the arm, and do as you have done before, until it is healed.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same when it is dislocated from another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	And for the dislocation of the small of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the small of the back or neck is dislocated, and there are many such dislocations without a cure, death quickly approaches the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the joints jump involuntarily, and they cannot be held, and many times a limb is softened, whether it is the two knees or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And often the sciatic nerve becomes paralyzed at four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 that which becomes paralyzed in the back is called "gilbositez";
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 the treatment is that you should look to see if the gilbositez has come from childhood;
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 if there is no cure or healing at all.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cure used to say in great words, but it is not at all useful in every case.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 but I have condensed it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the gilbosite that comes before the worst case, there is no remedy or health;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 And likewise the one that comes straight towards the two sides, cannot be cured by others except by him who comes from behind, as I said;
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 and the patient should be stretched out on his face in an even position, and there should be pressure underneath him so that he does not bleed.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 then thrust the needle into the head of the shoulder in the earth and the other at the joints, and tie a rope under the patient's shoulders, and one around his thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the joints, between the two needles.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 and let the needles be well closed as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine in form, until it recovers.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if the dislocation does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and bend it so that its top is underneath, and have the patient lie on their side, and push the end of the board underneath the opening, then place the middle part of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And press the mirrors' feet on the other end of the board and hold firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If you see that it does not return, turn the patient to the opposite side.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And you should insert two fingers of a hand's breadth into the head of the patient and between them leave a palm's space in length.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And each finger should be held still, or the patient should be turned as needed, and the fingers should be firmly pressed into the ground so they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each two sparks let there be a spark turning, as the links turn, and have in turning two small sparks of one span long, to turn the turning.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 Then tie the link that is between the ankles to the upper turning and the other link towards the feet to the lower turning, and each of the servants turns his turning along the entire length, and the master puts the splint equal as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is equalized, place a plaster with drying agent and egg on top of it, then bandage it, then place the cast from a tabletop of three feet long, which presses against the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and use the patient with subtle nursing until he is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 If anything comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines, with the steam that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 Sometimes they administer a wooden piece, and sometimes the appearance comes in the back of the spine, and it is thought to be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 It is the bone that opens, which means there should be no presumption about it.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 By chance death may come.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Note that the junctions of the neck and shoulder do not come violently except for dislocation only, they do not break in the same way as other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 The junction of the neck is dislocated in four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Inside and out, front and back;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Also inside thereafter, but slightly less so outside in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and wider apart, and the sick person's thigh is less flexible than the healthy one, and they cannot bend their knee in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 and it is the loosened joint that swells with abscess hot, because the hips of the thigh come there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that one who suffers from this condition is that this event happens contrary to what was mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the signs of him who has it in front are that his leg is well aligned according to the completion;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 However, it does not bend the knee without pain, and if you want to make him walk, he cannot do so, and he holds his urine, and his ankle swells up, and when he walks, he limps on his heels.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that one whose condition is at the back, are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it double, and this leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle becomes softened, and the head of the thighbone is beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The re-alignments of this type of dislocation are such that you check if the dislocation is old and remains according to its position, without any treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 it should not be assumed that there is treatment required.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And for the one in whom the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four types of dislocation, hasten that you turn the joint, push it inward and outward, and move it left and right;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 In case it returns, no further treatment is needed.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, you must apply a strong force and push the leg firmly with two hands or to the thigh that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 And another minister extends his hand over in such a way that he pushes his hands beneath the buttocks, then binds it with a soft rope around the thigh.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another ties the head with the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 They stretch upward and downward all at once, so that the patient is raised from the ground once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If this does not happen, it is necessary to treat his condition.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is at the back, you must have the patient lie on his healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the affected area below the groin, then pull the rope towards the groin, and towards the shoulder.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then take another assistant's hands, and embrace the large thigh of the ill leg, and stretch it out in a wide form.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 then return to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the ill leg should be extended two fingers more than others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 then it should be hung from a post by its head with its arms hanging long.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 then command the assistant to embrace the thigh and another assistant should be hanging with the patient who embraces the thigh, because the joints are returning quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is out of place, the patient lies down, as we have said in the one who has dislocated his shoulder; and stretches the ligament above the sick leg properly, and also above the pelvis.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 then place two splinters, one at the head and another at the feet; then insert the splinter between the patient's knees in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 and have soaked cloths in warm water around it to prevent the patient from bleeding; then each attendant extends towards him, and the one who mirrors puts his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns [to its place], that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, put it on a table and press as we have said in the gout, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to extend the sick leg immediately, and as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And set the mirrors his pain on top of the angry sickness, then press with the other hand and stretch it towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is to the outside, it should not be stretched downwards, nor raised up towards the ground, but rather as if the hip were dislocated to the outside, as we have said in the treatment of two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 and it should be on its back, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 and when the patient stretches out his legs, they will be even.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then align the thighs and place the bolster, and tie it with a strap so that the hip does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And let it rest for three days or four, then dislocate it, and place the splint on top.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 If you see they are even, hold them steady as before, and let it rest for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then dislocate it, and make it go gently, until the limb is comforted.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation in the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The thighbone is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 that is to say, from within and outward, and backward.
et ne desalue point devant.	 Do not dislocate it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 And the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, and extend his leg if he can, and put your back on his chest, and put his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take his thigh with your hands, pull it between your hands, then bend both sides of the thigh together.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 and another servant extends his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg easily at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 and apply the plaster, then bend the leg to the thigh, and keep them bound tightly for three or four days, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And do not let the patient walk, until the limbs are comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is sound.
de la dislocation dou talon	about the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 The sign is that the ankle is swollen, and it tends to move towards the part where it has been dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The reduction (of the dislocation) is easy, and it should be extended slightly when only stretched out.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold him by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then raise it up and push the foot up hard;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 and do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 if it goes back into place, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 but if not, continue the work, for it will come back again;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 and if it cannot go back in this way, lay the patient on his back on the ground, and drive the passael firmly into the ground between his legs, and tie cloths around so as not to hurt the patient;
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 Then, ministers stain the thigh, and another minister extends the foot to their hands or fingers, so that it lies across the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then each minister extends evenly, and the clamps should be close together between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they are stretched.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then, the master equalizes the dislocation in his hands, and another minister stains the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is in place, he puts the plaster and wool on top, and he forms it, ties the foot to the leg, and guards the nerves that are above the ankle, so the clamps are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Leave it [the dislocation] for two or three days, and if it gets worse [i.e., the shoulder slips out again], hold it steady.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Release it [the dislocation] on the third or fourth day, and warn the patient to abstain from walking for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he goes before that term [of three to four days], it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells up, you must calm it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	of the two [shoulders]
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both shoulders are dislocated, they must be carefully stretched out without strain, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 If the dislocation is in any notch of the back or neck, you must have the patient sit on a flat surface [or table] straight, and place your foot on the opening of those joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 When it is level and there is no opening, place a board under the foot of your foot, then hold it firmly, and let it stay for three days, then release it.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let him rest until he recovers.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound occurs with dislocation and it is to be restored, often the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 Do not be presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate, merciful, and patient, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And at the beginning of treating an abscess, apply a warm cautery, and let the patient be in God's hands if you see no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess grows cold.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in place, apply warm cautery to the abscess and treat the wound as necessary with dry ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is fracture with dislocation, and small bones are displaced, if you reset the bones, do as we have said in simple diseases;
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And be careful not to enter into fear, according to what I have said, for it will increase according to your Creator, and for the wisdom of your weapon and body.
