O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I, my very dear son, have completed this book for you, which is the end of the science of medicine along with its fulfillment, and have finished it by its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete this for you with this treatise, which is a part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is entirely unknown everywhere, the science and craft are perishing and decaying, and nothing remains of it from foreign lands except for small descriptions of the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And because of this (cause), errors and vanities have come, and intentions are closed and wisdom is driven away.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 I seem to wish to bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition, declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I shall come with the forms of the iron cauteries, and other instruments of work together with the arrangement of their declaration and preparation as required.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good master of hand is found in our times, the art of medicine is prolonged.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes it should be summoned in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, until he knows the judgment of limbs, and their shapes and joints and separations thereof, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and marrow and the number of bones, and the movement and the resting places and the veins moving and the stationary ones, and the location of their origin.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And for this reason Hippocrates said that the name without the work is nothing;
et meismement en l’art de main.	 and especially in the art of medicine.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not skilled in the things mentioned above, let him beware lest he err and kill men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 As I have often wished for many who engage in this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 I saw a madman who lanced an abscess of scrofulas from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another madman who removed a stone from an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if they cut it he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another madman who took care of our land's duke who had his leg broken, and with the breakage he had a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the ignorant madman straightened the break over the wound with strong pressure, and did not leave salve on the wound, and left it thus incomplete.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And command him not to dislocate it.
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And keep the leg until it has completely swollen and the feet have come to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I was called to come to him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg.
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I had dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But the corruption was already confirmed in the member, and it could not heal it.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the corruption did not stop going through the member until all the limb was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And it is necessary for another person to flatten an abscess and then burn it through the evil of his power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For a chancre, when it is pure of black bile, it should not be touched with iron if it cannot be completely removed from that place where the corruption is.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 Therefore, dear son, it is necessary for you to know that the work of hands is divided into two categories.
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 namely, surgery where there is danger in many ways;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in every part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourself, so that the foolish fool cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 Take your arms in custody, and begin with your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way so that through the grace of God you come to salvation and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And leave the incurable diseases of great sickness;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your arms from that which causes doubt in you, and be vigilant within yourself so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen said in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Do not treat an evil disease lest you be called a foolish healer.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have composed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 The first chapters are about fire cauterization and the cauterization of medicinal diseases, and these chapters are ordered from head to feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 and the forms of instruments, the irons for cauterization, and everything else that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about blistering and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 and these chapters are ordered and the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 and these are ordered from head to feet, and the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, remembering the work, it is necessary for me to say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the qualities of help and harm are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 and on this topic spoke many wise men and agreed with it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 and they supported my words, for I shall shorten them.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that cautery helps universally to all constitutions where there is matter, whether it be one or two constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 this means warm constitution with matter and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In a warm and dry constitution along with matter, some said and declared that cautery is of great help:
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 and the others said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that cautery does not help in disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 Because the nature of fire is hot, it should not be used to cure a hot disease with heat or dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 and he who said the opposite, that cautery provides great help to a hot and dry disease that comes in men's chests.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of a man and his moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it sometimes through experimentation.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And in all ways, do not interfere except for those who have experienced it and who know through long use the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illness, and their symptoms and the duration and time span.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 We are not afraid of other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all men should conform and agree to the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery together with fire is one of the secrets of cures, and of greater goodness than cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and it does not go beyond the member that is burned, and it does no harm to another member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Burning medicines come from one member to another when dislocated, causing illness of great healing to the member;
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 And by chance, the patient dies.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not burn if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 I have found this through experience and the length of my service and study in the art, and it is above truth in matters.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And because of this I excuse myself for the length of my speech, for it does not please me to reveal the secret of fire and the quality of the work, how it extinguishes diseases from bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstration.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Or accept it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, that they agreed on what time the cauteries should be done and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that the fire cautery is appropriate at all times because the harm occurring is kept under control by the aid of the fire cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And similarly, if the cautery is necessary because of severe pain, it should be done immediately before any greater harm comes to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 Do not ever think, dear child, as foolish people do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 for the disease that is cured by cautery will have no return;
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say so.
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 But it is not as they think, because cautery is only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries up the humors that cause pain, and is more effective than medicine due to its speed of action and the power of its work and its dominion.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And it is possible that the disease comes sometimes according to the complexion of the patient and the location of the disease and its nature.
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 And in him are accumulated the superfluidities by the acquisition of foods and similar things, unless cauterizations are administered where there is little superfluidity and moisture, as cauterizations for pain, and such pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 But this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cauterizations are called the rear of medicine, and it is indeed so.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that cauterizations are effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauterizations are the rear of medicine because when we administer means of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we administer cauterization, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is appropriate to know that cauteries are at the rear of medicine, not only according to the intention of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are softened more than iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and said that the lead of the cautery does not cause pustulation, but this is not true because I have proven it, and found that it is true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and cauteries made of gold are softer than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And even when you heat an instrument made of gold, you do not know when it is heated by the color of the gold, and it may suddenly cool.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if you heat it too much;
si font au feu;	 it makes fire.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there is enough impediment.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason, we use fire cautery, which we have found appropriate for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered you this chapter about the head from the neck to the feet, because the path will be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	The olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for both moist and dry conditions on the skull, and it is used to treat a disease known as "soda," as well as various humors that descend from the head into the eyes, ears, and cause many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and also for all diseases caused by coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by soluble medicine for 3 to 4 days depending on his condition and the potency, duration, and accustomed tolerance of the sickness.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 and then apply the hot iron to the head of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then make him sit crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a flat surface.
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 After that, lay the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 Where your thumbs meet, if it bleeds there, heat the cautery called 'olivare', this is its form.
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And place it on its joint marked with ink, and do so by drawing and straining your hand little by little while twisting.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then straighten your hand immediately, and return the joint if you see the bone protruding.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 And if you don't see it, start the cautery again until you see the bone as I have told you;
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 After taking a piece of linen cloth, put it wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for 3 days;
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 Then cover it with moistened wool.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Leave it until the burn is removed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound with the ointment called "tetrafarmacon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And as the ancients said, when an injury remains open for longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and therefore helps heal.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And said one of them that the fire cautery should be left until part of the bone is burned, and then heal the one who was burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the cautery should be applied as much as possible, and pressed so hard that it forces out the bone as wide as a woman's thimble, because the fluids escape more easily.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and the wound must be kept open for a long time;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterwards it should be cured and bandaged.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 And these two methods of cauterization do not seem good in all cases, except for certain men who are fearful.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and I seem to leave it alone.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 because the head is weakened by continuous liquids of nature, as we have witnessed in other members;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And the same applies when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first sign of cautery is more beneficial and healing for me, and from this use I have found salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic and lasting pain comes in the head, it is necessary for the patient to use earwax and pills called "cochie", and purge of the head and oils and plasters.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 and if he is given the cautery as we have said before, it is not effective.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Be careful that the patient's shoulder is of strong nature, and it should not be too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize below that cautery a small amount as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 After performing a fire cautery on each horn of the skull up to the bone, as previously mentioned, and perform the cautery called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and the area where vacuum bellows are placed.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 and press your hand so that you do not see up to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 the patient feels much more pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 and the cauterization of the horns should be more delicate than that of the middle part of the head, and this is the form.
dou cautere dou chief	on the cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When sudden pain comes in one part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged with divers medicines, and other treatments that I have mentioned in the section on diseases are performed, but none of it helps:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then make cauteries according to two methods, namely of hot medicines and of fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 For the cautery of hot medicines, take an alum stone, remove its bark and cover one end of it with wax, then apply it to the area where the pain is located in such a manner that you can place the alum stone underneath the skin.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 And when it is reset, let it stay properly and leave it like that for 12 hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then remove the splint and apply garlic oil to the wound and leave it as it is for 2 or 3 days;
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 then place cotton soaked in butter over it until it becomes soft.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the ointment is applied, let it heal.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 If you see fit, use some of the burning remedies I have written about or treat with 10 of the burning remedies I have written about.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The fire cautery is such as this.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cauterization tool in the shape of this [mold/form].
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 It is called "closed" because the wound resembles a small container or cup shape.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 Place it on the painful spot and hold your hand firmly over it, gently press it for a short while until half the thickness of the coal is burned;
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are away from it, and draw out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Put cotton on it in linen cloth and leave it there for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then put a damp cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you want to burn out this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare", at its tip, be careful not to pierce the artery in this abscess which is not old.
de emigraine	From migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When treating an abscess as we have said before in the treatment of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries mentioned by the medicine do not help, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And so, on the side of the joint, draw a line half a thumb's length long, and then press once with your hand, holding back so as not to touch the artery nor reach the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And watch the jaw that becomes paralyzed when one eats, and let the nerves have no gaze but at the paralysis and that spasms do not come to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut or fear should arise in great measure, especially for those who are not familiar with it and untrained.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 And leave the operation in its course;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to stop bleeding when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery does not help the illness and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 if you see that the artery extraction is necessary and it requires a cautery with two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 and this cautery is better than the other and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	From the pain of cold ears
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear brings pain from cold and medicines soluble and other treatments mentioned in the division have been applied but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After pointing all around the sick ear, or both sides where the pain is, move a little away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 and have ten points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat the spot until it heals.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torment of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 Torture to be cured by fire cautery is not applicable except for those that move due to flux, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform a cautery on similar conditions arising from scabs and nerves swellings.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When treating this condition of torture that moves due to flux of eyes, head purges and gargles, it is not worth it; therefore you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One in the root of the ear, another slightly further from the temple, and the third near the junction of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 and place the cautery in the healthy part of it, and make him cauterize towards the top of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another on the temple as far as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 Leave the cautery for as long as half of the coal is burning.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it resembles the form of a surgeon's knife that we have shown earlier, but it is slightly more delicate and the blade should be somewhat thicker.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After treating the shoulder as I previously stated, let it heal when it is sound.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not help, and the patient does not have a fever, then make four cauterizations:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 One on each of the two forehead horns, one at the neck, and one where the arm is called "waste" as we have previously stated, and the last cauterization on the mouth of the stomach.
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 And let it be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	diarrhea (from Latin lithargyrios, meaning "stone-like")
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 For this disease, give the patient large iris-like seeds or round pills made of brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 Afterward, anoint the head of the patient entirely, and place a plaster made of mustard seed or mustard treatment on the occiput (the back part of the skull).
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 And this is the method of cauterization:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If you do it as I said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If it is purged like this, it is good;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if it isn't, perform three fire cauterizations on the neck down to the collarbone, leaving a space of one inch between each.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat it as others, and if you see that it is getting better, and the patient can bear it, perform one fire cauterization;
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if necessary, two more on the temples, and treat it until it is purged;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cauterization called "olive" be as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 The head should be purified for years and as we have said before.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After the head of the patient, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and also three on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 And if needed, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the illness is far advanced, make four fire cauteries on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 and let it burn until the deeper part is seared, then remove your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 Then treat until it heals, and the cautery called "olivare" which we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for the phlegmatic one, and it is first necessary to clean the brain for years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is great and suffering from thinking about taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is an infant who cannot bear it, give a gargle and make it chew softening medicine for the brain frequently with good foods.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After the king's head in the middle, do as previously said, and apply the fire cautery on the servant, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is outside and suffering, apply cauterization as I have said to him who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cauterization be olive oil according to the method that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, apply a subtle cautery in this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy, the superfluidities or corrupted and putrid humors produce thick phlegm, then apply cauteries with such cauterizations as we have said to those who have paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the excesses are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the sick person is moist, then give them to drink something by which the brain may be purified, according to what was stated earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After the king's head of the patient.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 After that, make a linen tourniquet well made, like a circle, and put it on his head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 And the patient should be crosswise, and tightly bound from all sides.
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 After that, apply lime to the wound, using old goat's milk.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 And the fire must be heated moderately, so that it can be endured by the patient.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After vacuuming the circle from within the head, let it cool.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And have this done to the patient once a week with good management, until he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 Or, if you wish to cauterize it, make points all over the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cauterization reduces the brain significantly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 Then place wet, soft cotton on top with butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	Of the eyes (lit. of the hairs)
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes (lit. hairs) come first according to the signs that I have said in the division, then start and give the patient something cleansing for the head, and guard it from all moisture, and let it sweat or bathe many times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After instructing the patient to lie on his back, perform the cauterization in the head and perform two cauterizations on each temple where there is a single opening or an opening on one side only.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And apply the entire cauterization to all veins and arteries that are under the skull, and let them be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And beware of bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incision of cautery how to apply it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 Sometimes they make a cauterization or an instrument beneath the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	for the removal of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to be above the veins or in the area of the arteries near the forehead;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluidities, then do the cauterization as I said at the beginning of the work descending on the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I cauterize in the head, two cauterizations on the two temples, and two cauterizations or instruments beneath the two bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if it is necessary more, then cauterize carefully on top of the mole with the smallest cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The body weeps tears from within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When treating according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give the patient three colds infusions (to drink).
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 After the king's head (the boil), do a fire or olive oil cauterization.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 Do two cauteries called "clavilis" on the two moles, a little under the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize this cautery which is called "olive oil.
de coi ci est li forme:	 Of this matter are the forms:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 If you see, then do two cauteries on the two moles as long as the moles are.
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And don't leave the hand unless the third part of the paper is burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair that pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes, the hairs of the eyelashes are converted into sweat glands and prick the eye, and then fire cautery is performed according to two methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 (This refers to) fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they have grown and are even, then put the patient in a safe place;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 after that, on top of the eyelashes, make a mark with paper like the shape of the thistle flower, and make the start of the sign along the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then put softened cotton soaked in egg white and pepper mint oil on it, then heat the cautery according to this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After heating the cautery repeatedly at the specified place, the tip should be burned.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And the signs of the success of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn and the hairs raised at the tip of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then lower your hand, leave it like that for three days, then put softened cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if hairs grow later and the paper becomes soft, then repeat the cauterization on that same spot, just as you did before.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hairs are falling out, cauterize it until the paper is raised to its natural position and is even, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The burn cure is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a paper in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and live coal, one ounce each, grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 and heat it quickly so that it does not cool, then spread it on the shape you made like a myrtle leaf, and put the hot mixture on the hairs.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 and if the patient is affected only in the oil, it should be treated only there, and if in both places as well;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 And put cotton wool soaked in oil under an eggshell.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 The patient's shoulder should be kept healthy and put your hand on top of the medication, and press the affected area and move it whenever the patient feels a bite from the medicine as it feels like a burn.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have made it [the patient] stay still for a long time, give him medicine to his body.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the bite has passed, lift the affected area and observe if you see the paper raised as it was raised by constriction from fire or incision.
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If not, replace the medication on the affected area or the medication has not worked, until your work is even and your eyes are steady.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place cotton wool soaked in butter on it until the blisters are healed, afterwards, apply the ointment called "diaphensis" and others until it is healed.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to be careful with your work so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 If the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then repeat the medicine on that spot which has been properly prepared, just like you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After it is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And this is the shape of the feather of the vervain:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 Know that human eyes vary in size and according to their size, this shall be your constraint.
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And do not deviate from the straight path for those who are engaged in this craft.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	Of the cure of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When curing a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your cures are not helpful, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to place their head on a pillow.
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 And hold the sick person's head between your hands in such a way that it does not move or lower its head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 Then put a soft cotton cloth inside an eggshell or under parchment on the oil.
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After heating the iron rod (cautery) to a certain point:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 And position the head so that it forms a V shape, with the iron rod placed at the base of the V.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If you see, it should be aligned from one head to the other, and if you see, it should also be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 However, the position of the head as described is good for your purpose.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After opening the fistula if it is open, drain the pus, and dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 If it is closed, then you should open it, and draw out the excrement (or perhaps 'pus' in this context).
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 Afterwards put the hot iron cauter on the nipple area under the oil (be careful not to burn yourself).
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 Heat the iron cauter in the oil fat and let it rot.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you perform the cautery right up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If that does not work, try heating the iron cauter again if necessary, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 Afterwards place damp cotton in butter and apply the drying ointment until it heals. If after forty days it is not healed, apply a corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And the king, according to what he comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And here is a method of cauterization for fistula that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 To the fistula, make an incision and open it;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 After placing the camahan (substance) in the incision from this form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and they place as much as a cubit of wax;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 Hold your hand with the camahan firmly, and the patient must not move at all, until the wax melts and runs to its oil;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And it is necessary that you put cotton soaked in egg oil on the patient's wound.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The wax will heal the fistula and the wound by marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 If the fistula is healed by the cauterization as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, it is necessary to administer purgatives to the nose and return the fistula to the body of the nose as required in its proper place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often cavities occur in lips, which are called "hairs," and similarly in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When treating these cavities as mentioned in the previous section and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery spatula according to this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 Put it quickly into those cavities until it reaches the bottom;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the shoulder of scab until it is healthy.
de l’aposteme de la goule	From the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When pus comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it forms a pustule and grows and becomes a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 And you cure it as we have said in other parts, but it does not help at all.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Then it is necessary that you use the fire cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After pouring or puncturing the fistula, keep your hand until the iron becomes hot at its base and at its tip.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do it once or twice, after curing what we have said in treatments, until it is healthy.
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 And if it is treated in this way, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 If not, you must find the joint and remove the rotten bone, as per what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	toothache
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums become soft due to moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicine but it is of no avail, then place the head of the sick person in your lap.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After applying the heated iron, let the shape come out as it will, and you place a chain on the tooth in this manner.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 Insert the heated iron quickly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After you let go, repeat the process according to your will;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 After filling the patient's mouth with salt water, let it remain for an hour and rinse thoroughly.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving teeth are held firm and the softened gums are kept restricted, and the corrupt moisture dries out.
de la dolor des dens	of the tooth pain
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When toothache due to cold comes from either frostbite or fever, and the treatments with medicines are of no use, then it is necessary to apply cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 and cautery of butter and cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and its end in an iron or copper spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 Then take cotton and wrap it around the tip of a tent peg, dip it in boiling butter, and place it on the painful tooth immediately and hold until it becomes cool.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 And do this often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see that wool and cotton in cold butter are moistened, place them on the diseased tooth and hold hot iron on it until the heat comes to the tip of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a dog chain of iron or steel, and it should be thick so that the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, its shape will come later, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Do this often, for the pain will be relieved that very same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 The patient must fill his mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then blow hard.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 This is the shape of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And make the cautery in any shape you want, and according to what you are able.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 And this is the form of a dog:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When scrofula is of a cold and moist flushes, and not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the fire-cautery from what follows, and have it openings for the smoke to issue to the cautery on the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, where it is needed, until it reaches the opening of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess and leave it thus for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 Place dampened cotton on top until the pus is drained out.
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the joint of ulcers and abscesses until it is sound.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When worms attack on the channels of the womb, and particularly when it comes from a cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be purged first with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 Afterwards make the fire cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to come up to the throat, and do not dare to go deep but a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 Afterwards make the other fire cautery at the junction of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery called "clavicle" from which we have the shape before.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal the joint as we have said before until it is sound.
de la toust	When moisture conquers over the channels of the throat (toust), and especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines; afterwards do cautery at the root of the throat, and be careful not to go up to the throat, but a little. Afterwards do .i. other cautery at the jointure of the neck to the head of the spine (col au chief de l'espinee), and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the shape as before; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healthy.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all and the disease of gout are of cold humors, and the patient has neither fever nor sweating, and the disease is old, make two fire cauterizations on the forearm veins.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 and another cautery in the groin between the testicles;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 and let the cautery called "clavicle" according to the shape as previously described be used.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you wish, do cautery by pricking all over the cautery called "point" as described in the disease of ears (previously);
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 and the points be up to 30, or within that area.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the joint as previously stated, let the cautery be of three lengths according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And since the cauterizations are lighter because you do them in pairs of two.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Afterwards, make the patient lie down on his back and on his side;
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 After taking the key which is within the titillete with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 And if the jointure is dislocated within, heat the cautery which has two nerves as shown here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 And cauterize (the affected area) until it pierces through the skin, and four figures of the cautery will appear.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 And thus, a cautery with three prongs is used for this purpose, because the figures of cauterization are called cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 And these prongs correspond to the fineness of a tent and this is the shape of the cautery with three prongs:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is twisted around this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After placing the cautery on, break it with silk.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 After putting the patient to rest, let not the limbs be moved for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated upwards, which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod or many cauteries while pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is set back in place, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When there are coldness and much moisture in the stomach that harms its constitution, and the catarrh multiplies for him, and in the usual methods of treatment it does not help; therefore the patient should lie on his back, extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 Then three cauteries are placed under the spoon of the scoop at the width of a thumb, the entire cautery must be clavile (driven in), and two cauteries outside each side so that the figures of the cauteries are at three angles, and with enough space between one and another that they are not joined together when they spill pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 And let the cauteries be so sharp that they pierce both parts of the flesh, and let the figure of the cauteries be in accordance with this shape:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you wish to cauterize within the stomach using a large cautery in this shape:
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 and he who fears the cautery, cauterize by pressing and applying it on top of the stomach at the point according to the quantity you wish to burn:
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 then cauterize completely with the cautery which is called "points".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment of the wound that we had before, let it heal when it is healthy.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When the liver experiences pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, it is expelled from its natural condition due to excesses:
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 and the patient is cured of what has been said earlier in the divisions, but it does not help him, and he must be attentive to his bedding:
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 And sign the third cautery according to this form and this shape and this quantity above the liver, remove the hypochondriacs, where the cost of the ribs comes.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And there should be distance between each cautery equal to the thickness of a thumb.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cauteries.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 And only burn half of the ear, and let the patient lie straight on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 If he cannot, then let him lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 If you wish, you can perform these cauteries with the scalpel, if you are skillful and wise in the art, and beware that you do not burn too deeply, for you will singe all of the body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And it shall not reach boiling, for the herb is very subtle in that place, and the wise can see it.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When you have an abscess in the liver, and you want to know whether it is within the liver's flesh or its membrane.
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 If it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not very strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 And if it is in the membrane, it feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment ceases for the patient, it is necessary that he be on guard over his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 and then hold down the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles a flat iron, as shown in this figure:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 Heat the cautery until the corners are burning, and come up to where the pus is, so that it can be completely removed;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the treatment according to the treatment of abscesses until it heals;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And this cautery should not be used by anyone without extensive study in the art of medicine, for many times these diseases have been aggravated by it.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then he can operate boldly, but I think it is better to wait a little longer.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 The ancients said that one should make cauterizations for pleurisy with roots of aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 take a long root of aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and it should be dry, and as thick and long as your thumb.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 and wet the root in oil, heat it on fire, and cauterize the cautery between the armpit and neck, and apply a few small cauteries downwards in the area below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 and the cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, declining slightly behind.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 and the cautery on the side of the hip, and the other one above the stomach, and the one between the shoulders, and the two cauteries on each side away from the cautery that is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press your hand forcefully, but open it gently as when sniffing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And an old man said that anyone using the fire-cautery resembles a razor, and they heat it and put it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And then the pain jumps wildly, as we said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes which cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mice, that is as we have said in the division of cures and it does not help at all, then apply three ways of cautery, all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 Of these methods, it is that you make three or four cauterizations in a line according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver-cautery that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And do not press your hand on the entire cauterization, and let the patient be aware of his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another way of cautery is that you heat the cauter iron with two prongs, as shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 And lift the iron that is near the mouse, where the pain of the patient comes towards the left side, and raise the elevations from which you heat the iron according to the length of the body, and the cauter iron according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 After placing the two prongs heated together until the iron is pierced on the other side, then pull the cauter iron away, and in this way there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you wish to cauterize with all of the cautery using three prongs.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After treatment when he has had pus for long time, and it is worth applying the other remedies mentioned before.
de ydropisie	The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity.
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When the treatment according to the methods that we have mentioned in divisions does not help, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the wound, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the mouse, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the site of pain.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And let the cautery be close to the swelling of the sore.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After open (the wound) for a long time and let it purge pus, but do not abandon the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing will hasten, and the two intentions will be together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The form of the cautery for the belly is the crucible that we have previously shown.
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 And for the back it should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling on the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical, and they are full of hot liquid, you should cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger;
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep, otherwise the citrine would be forceful; and make sure the cautery is in this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After doing two cauteries on each leg at the point of the knife blade;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 and let the cauterized area be long, one under the knee in front and the other outside, within the leg;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 And let the cauteries heal over time on their own, for it heals them.
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 after the healing of other treatments that we have mentioned.
de la menoison	swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When the abdominal distention comes from cold and moisture, as long as the digestive and restorative powers which are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be healed by means of treatments;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, make a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned earlier, or stomach cauterization, around the stomach.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 and three subtle cauteries around the navel, at every cautery joint, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see the moisture abundant and the patient suffering, apply cautery on the joint, one cautery on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach in addition to the large one, because the cure is beneficial where there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the cure for hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When hemorrhoids are deeply rooted, single or multiple, and are old, filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in the previous section, and it does not help, then apply fire cauteries.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 On the spine of the back, that which is completely dislocated under the occipital bone and moves triangularly, the fire cautery should be applied beneath the buttock.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 If you suspect that the stomach is cooled and meat does not cook, and swelling of the face is seen, then the great fire cautery should be applied on the stomach as previously mentioned, and another one on the liver, and another one on the spleen with a full-length cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 And let the fire cautery remain open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the joint when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the charnositeit which is named "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you treat athlete's foot, if the fire cautery seems to be a razor, then heat it and place it on top of the athlete's foot so treated.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and let your hand be such that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, so that it does not cut.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if there is much athlete's foot, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After the cures of ointments are beneficial until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery on scrofula (a chronic inflammatory disease), it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	from an improperly treated wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot bear incision or opening, which we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be healed by cauterization.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If any abscess comes, and it is swollen, rotten, and corrupted with moisture, you should probe the whole cavity with a subtle needle, and ensure that you know exactly how deep the hole goes.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After heating the cautery that seems like a razor, and pushing it into the fistula according to how much it was entered, start the cauterization until the body parts become burned and corrupted, once, or II or III times, according to the amount of soreness required.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And beware of burning the nerve that is within, and the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestines, beware of these places, and do not act carelessly except in a charcoal fire, and think that it is not useless.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 after curing the place until it is clean, and if the places are purulent and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely clean.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if the tissues are not removed, know that the joint is broken, and the bone is corrupt.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And as one of these whom we will describe in his place.
de la maladie des reins	on the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When cold pain comes at the joints and from large wind, and does not respond to female remedies, then you must make a fire cautery on both sides of the joints with the claw-shaped fire cautery as we have previously said.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we perform the cauterization in the middle, it will have three cauterizations in a row, and they will be more helpful.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a cauterization on the outside of the bladder where the pubic hair begins, both on the right and left side, and each cauterization should be as long as one's thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 And make the fire cautery outside the back, where it is needed.
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 and let the fire cautery be attached in the shape mentioned above.
de la marris	of the anus
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the matrix is cold and moist, it does not allow conception to take place, and the flowers are corrupt and their terms are delayed.
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 and when they come, there is great pain.
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then it is necessary to make three cauteries around the abdomen, as we have said in the bladder cautery and one cautery outside the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the cauteries be attached, as we have said.
de la hainche	Of the hernia
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the moist thickeners descend into the haunch of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 And the joints to be treated should be found in the affected limb, so you must apply the fire cautery on the patient over the swelling area, similar to a circle, and position yourself before the joint around the swelling, as it turns, so that the swelling is inside the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And the cautery should be similar to those used for stomach cauterization.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this type of cautery is not present, make three olive-sized large cauteries and ensure they are as sharp as all the others;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Cure it until it becomes healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain occurs in the swelling area, and it is due to cold and moisture, the patient is cured of this as we have said in the division, but the illness remains;
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Therefore, it is necessary to purge the patient of large humors with foul-smelling pills, or other good-looking pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After performing the fire cautery:
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 And the method of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 (This means) It is to be known together with burning medicines and the fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is according to many methods, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 You shall cauterize on the boil of the buttock with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make good depth and large, and have space between each cautery the thickness of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Sometimes they make a cauterization in the middle on the buttock's head, so there are four according to this shape.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, if you cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the buttock.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But do it in this manner so that the circles encompass the entire buttock, and all its edges are burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the manner in which it is done for sciatica, when the pain remains in the lower back, and does not reach as far as the thigh or leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make two cauteries there where the patient says that the pain is, and the fourth cautery above the ankle four fingers wide, on the left side a little.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And let the cautery be the cutting tool, and heat the thickness of the coal.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if the patient feels that pain spreads to the chest or near there, cauterize it at the place where he feels pain with a lance three or four fingers deep, which is called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, make more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if it is known that the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery using the cutting or circular lance; and take great care in all your cauteries to not let the cauterize too deeply so as not to burn the nerves and large arteries, and to do no greater harm or contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who have performed a fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it become swollen completely, both the leg and the feet, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution where death occurred.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two parts together, perform a fire cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 And the sage (wise man) said in the cautery of the hainche (possibly referring to a part or disease), here is the method, make the iron similar to a small nail of the finger, or slightly smaller, and it should be cross-shaped or made from one crosspiece to another of a distance equal to the size of a nut of the thumb;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 and let the crosspieces be above each other, and also like nuts, and have the iron piece well made.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is the shape:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be heated until it is all red and glowing hot, and then place it on the box of the sick hainche (part or disease), and turn it towards the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 And the cautery once applied, let it heal for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 Then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open for a long time.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Al-Bukassim says that we should not use this caution too much due to fear of its gaze, and few people use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And yet, this is a good cautery, which can be endured by the strong, and there where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The medical cautery is such that you make the instrument between the joints in this way, by cutting through the margin of the door, and it should be of iron or steel with a long handle, and at the top have two notches, and between each one the width of the size of a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 And they shall be open and above, and join together as shown in this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 Place the bed of the backbone on the patient lying on his side, and then your hand a little above the bed of the backbone;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After casting between the two circles of hot iron heated in the firepot, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and the burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 For it penetrates bite-like, just like fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the biting has passed, put your hand with the instrument and gently lift the backbone from its socket, and leave it thus for three days, and apply butter so that the blackness of the burn is removed;
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 And let it rest for three days until purulence comes out of it.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and this would be the last help after the treatment of sores, as long as they are healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or to the leg, make an instrument to bind it according to what you have done in the haunch properly.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And this is the method for hot bandages, and I have written or explained how to correct medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and hot live coal, as much of one as of the other, grind them together and put in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 or if it has a small opening that the point of a lance can enter into.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 and put one pot on top of the other well filled, and put alkaline and salt and soft bandages on top, until there are two fingers' distance above the powders when you have firmly pressed it with your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And let it remain like that until it dries and contracts or breaks open, then take all of that pus, and throw it onto lime and alkaline as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And when it has become very sore and is treated with various medicinal work and other cauteries for the limbs.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it works like fire, and when treated with other medicines from which the inflammation is cauterized well, such as wax, tallow, honey, almonds, lime with soap, all mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure in which a man was cured from pain in the back and sciatic vein, and he praised it much, and said that no other cure was made for it, and that he became healthy once when this cure was done, and he bathed himself as indicated below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And say thus: you take green powdered litharge (lime) and crush it very finely with a little fat, and place it on the inflammation and on the thigh and leg where the pain is, and let it stay.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And let it [the patient] rest for 3 hours, and in this time the patient no longer feels the burn.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 Then make him enter or bathe until his body is slightly warmed, and have him lie down, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be healed.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use such fire cautery as medicine unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's-beard, it helps much;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and put it on the furrow that is between the little toe of the foot and the one called the cubital fossa.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 Take dry goat's-beard, heat it until it becomes coals, and place it on wool, and let it remain until it is cool.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And do this again and continue to do so until you think by your senses that it has reached the hymen and the pain is stopped.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And this method of cautery is called "goat's-beard cautery".
de la dolor dou dos	Of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these resemble cauteries unless for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 It is necessary afterwards that the patient be emptied of fetid pills or similar things, which are placed on the back, where the pain is felt, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line V cauteries, or more according to the power and quantity that the patient can endure.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 and be done the cautery according to the cautery which is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 and if you see, do III or IV cauteries or IV at the cautery with an average shape according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 Many times this disease comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have narrow anus when they strain, and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 and you find in the lower spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and you want to cure it, cauterize it with the cautery of this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery causes each part of the spine to enlarge.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint until it is healthy, according to what we have said, beware not to administer the cautery in a lump that might be within a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain in the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When pains in the joints are due to swellings that affect every member of the body, and when pain comes in feet, which are called "gout" properly, and when it is caused by coldness and medicines cannot cure it, then it is cured by cauteries in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 make the patient hold a hot iron around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick the abdomen, then the entire cautery is applied like "the point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains come up to the knees and other joints, and this happens many times, make one or two cauteries on each part of the knee, with an olive-shaped cautery for each.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 and if you need more, then do more, but don't hold your hand away from the heated iron more than necessary.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the genitals and back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pains are at the hands, make points around the wrist two lines.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 If there remains a point of pain in the fingers, make points above each joint and above the hair on the hand.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains come as far as elbows or shoulders, cauterize each part and make good care of the patient and consider medications.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and purge pus, he will be saved with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sifac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When rot is coming in wounds and the boils descend to the joints and it is new, it is necessary that when you see it to cure, that he does not eat anything on that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 and that he uses things that relieve the stomach, so that the phlegm descends from his stomach.
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 Afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his arm as long as the boils are healing, and you bind it with your fingers, and press down over the roture on the bone of the elbow, and at every sign that is similar to half a circle above the chest.
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Then heat the fire cautery with this form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it is white and gives off a smell.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then heat the iron rods at their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and the assistant touches his hand so that he does not return backwards.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and work well the thighs on the patient, put a cushion under him and a sergeant on his thighs, and another on the bed that supports his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 then place the cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 be careful that the patient does not move when you perform the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 do not burn him;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 So that the patient does not die or suffer further harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And the fire cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and the same goes for adults according to theirs.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days of care, the leach from the fire cautery should be removed when the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After treating with other medicaments until it is healthy, and the patient lies on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary to let him rest for a long time so that the swellings do not protrude when he gets up to go into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, they should prepare a bandage well and keep it for forty more days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And have good rest, let him work little and watch against excessive drinking and eating, and excessive shouting.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he follows this teaching, he becomes entirely healthy.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And here I shall tell you about the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the wound from the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When roundworms appear in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not grow further, then perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and burn the third part of the liver.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 After the cure, as we have said.
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 And none of the ancients said it should be cauterized at the cautery with three corners according to this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 However, mark first the location of the beginning and make a line above the boil, and another below it, and then place your hand on the entire cautery handle.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the initial cauterizations are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts for a long time, and the medicines used do not help, it is necessary to cauterize with the cautery called "poins", and the cautery should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and weakness, and its nature and location of twisting and of its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if he is healthy from the first cautery, that's good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If this name recurs for another cautery upon that one, because custom is that it should change in the limb that is near, therefore you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient remains ill.
de meselerie	To mix or compound (medicines)
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illness is sometimes helped by cautery with great help, and the same applies to those who come from the rotting of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Can you see the patient to be cauterized, take care if the disease is at its beginning, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither it bleeds nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cautery on the head.
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 I place one hand on the head and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairs.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 The first is placed on the temples, and the second behind the ears.
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 Keep your hand so that the cautery comes to the bone and so that the bark bursts out through it so that the vapors of the large humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 And cauterize the mice according to what is before [you].
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the fracture is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 and it becomes manifest, then you must apply these cauterizations as we have said before, namely the cautery on the neck, the cautery on the spine of the neck, the six cauteries on the spine of the back, the large one on the shinbone and the other below it, and two cauteries on each shoulder;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 And he shall stretch out the muscles, and he shall stretch out the tendons with the rod, and he shall stretch each joint of the hands and feet, and the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And protect the nerves that are above the last bone in the foot, that you not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 Sometimes make an incision on the bone of the fist, and another one on the bone of the stomach, and another one on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that when you do more cauterizations, you do more good, and it benefits him more.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the patient feels no pain during the cauterization as the body is already entirely corrupt.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And the cautery should be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in the manners of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour and honey and other remedies until it is purified.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling appears in any member and is treated with medicine, oil, and plasters, and it is not cured, then cauterize the member according to the size and smallness of the member.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 And let the cautery be a small opening in the thick part of the flesh;
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 Sometimes they make a cautery at the hand, foot, and back, to the nerve that paralyzes the limb, and in this way the tumor is removed;
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 and no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about limbs and the paths of moving nerves in the body;
de albaras	Of swabs (or bandages)
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" is evident, and the remedies of medicine are worth nothing, then cauterize with a deep cautery until the inflammation disappears, and the color becomes normal;
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 Then cook (or prepare) flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, as well as the blood of a cat and the blood of a crane, each one in equal parts.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it be mixed together completely, tie it up in a cloth, and apply it to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	They cure scrofula (scrofula is a term for a chronic skin disease, often associated with tuberculosis) through cautery.
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil appears at the beginning, and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize with the cautery that resembles a circle around the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 However, the wise men also say that a fire cautery should be performed in the middle of the abscess.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 However, this does not seem good to me, as I fear that it will become an ulcer and corrupt, and I have seen it happen once.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And the more appropriate thing is that it be cauterized around (the abscess), with the cautery called "circular", as we have said in the discussion about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	The inflammation which cannot move
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it delays healing or because of the excess it causes, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning very old), and there is little blood, or due to the time.
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 and you see it hastened to heal:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 then cauterize it around with many small cauteries by pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	 afterwards leave it in that state.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 When it will hasten to heal. (Continuing from the previous translation)
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced through entirely with the fire cautery, heat the cautery as follows:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And place your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" while the cauteries have pierced through the core, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels them outside to such an extent that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After curing completely when he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	treatment with fire by iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease is called "corrosion," and it is nothing other than a rot of the member, because it consumes limbs as fire dries up dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place that can bear cautery with fire, then heat the cauteries slightly small and large according to what is required for the location or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 afterwards cauterize it all over until you reach all the corruption and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupt should be excised.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas soft powder made with oil until burns from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of ointments causing heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days you see no pus healthy, it is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if not, resume the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted joints.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this lancet has sometimes been cured with medicinal juice instead of fire cautery.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 nevertheless fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicinal juice in the division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The hairs which come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often, through the foot, a disease called "clog" arises according to our understanding, which is a large thing that bites at the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Fire cautery is heated like a feather from a ploughshare, and should be made of good iron to the extent that it can penetrate through all parts, and that its edges are thin.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 Place it all hot on the nail, and turn your hand entirely around the nail until it reaches the base of the nail.
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 Leave it in this way for three days until it begins to emit pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make a poultice of wild herbs boiled with oil and leave it on all night; the nail will shrink and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the joint with a soothing ointment until it is healthy.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if it is converted by foreign matter, and often happens in hands and feet, then you must apply hot cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 It proceeds like this:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a cable of iron or wood, or a pin of lead, and place it on the nail and the anvil, that is, to pierce warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and place the cable above so that it goes all around, then put some hot paste there and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cable comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot paste find its way deeply to the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 make the patient endure the bite of the hot paste for an hour;
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 then leave it like that and it will fall out with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Similarly, do as you did before, until you scorch all those within the body; then heal the burns that cause pain.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 If someone trembles due to cold or nerves, or from quarter fever or something else, you must do four fire cauterizations or four on the spine of the back, one between each spine.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And for the fire cautery, use it on the foot or on the stomach with an olive oil cauterization.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 If he lets it tremble and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of putrid boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, boils or putrid pustules appear on the body due to corrupt large matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 It is necessary at first when they appear, that a cautery be made over each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 A subtle cautery made from myrtle staff, so that the point is seized by fire, or of the long root of Aristolochia, or with a cauterizing plier.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes they are cauterized at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the excess is torn off that comes from them, and they heal.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 But it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often there are great movements of blood from the artery which is cut at the wound that reaches the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or to the cautery of a member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 And it is a very bad thing to dislocate [something].
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 Furthermore, when this happens to someone, quickly place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it as hard as possible until the blood stops flowing.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then apply the olive oil-filled fire cautery, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take, whether large or small depending on the wound and the location in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where your finger is, and hold the cautery there until the blood clots.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a jump occurs when you place your finger on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take quickly another one of the cauteries that are near the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue to do this one after the other until the blood stops flowing.
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 And beware not to burn the nerve that is exposed, and no other harm comes upon the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 And learn that when the artery is not cut through, it cannot be properly bandaged up if the artery is large, unless it's by one of the four ways we have mentioned.
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tightly tying thread, or by medicines applied that have the power to stop bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 and bind and tighten accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever applies tight bandages or places hot substances on it, or similar things, will not benefit if the above method does not help.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens and there is no mirror or medicine present, he should put his finger on the wound as we have said, and stretch it out accordingly until it stops bleeding over the wound and the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And it should not move, but the cold dampness should often be cooled very much until the wound is frozen and swollen and hardened.
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 Make inquiries about what remedies and medications are needed for this case.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about all diseases where it is necessary to use a hot cautery or medication, and we examine the eyes, causes, instruments, forms of the cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 And I have placed that chapter on the head to the feet, and I will go through this chapter in the same way because it is easier to find what we are looking for.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things.
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 There is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you to not undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in the treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 Those who suffer such illnesses and die quickly due to the madness caused by their disease and the great severity of their condition.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 and one should fear such things.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And among these there are those who entrust their senses to you, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Attend, I am cured.
et li maladie est despitouse.	 and the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 You should not easily trust those who come to you with this mannerism, but put more weight on your honor than your desire, and do not rashly believe but wisely from those about whom you are certain, and from which you can take and learn.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 And make use of prognosis and indication in the treatment of your patients, so that health may be attained.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 And this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dearest son, may our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to aspire to the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Moreover, I have organized this chapter in discussing by chapters, according to what is before the chapter of cauteries, which I have previously discussed from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those things that you may need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 Note that this illness often comes upon children during birth, and when the head of the child is forced too tightly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 Sometimes it comes from causes that are not known.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 I have never seen this illness outside of children, and the death hastens for all those that I have seen.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And because of this, it seems to me that I should be less active in these treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I saw an infant whose shoulder was full of water, and the head grew larger every day until it could no longer support.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 And the moisture spread so much that he was dead, and this moisture is gathered under the bone above the syphilis, between the cartilage and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 And the work is such that if there is moisture between the cartilage and the bone, and the abscess is small, you should make a wide incision near the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And let it be as long as ours, until the moisture runs out.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 Look here is the shape of the probe (spatula):
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscesses are larger, make two incisions in the form of a cross, as follows:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 If the moisture is under the bone and you see the signs that the head is opened on both sides, and it forms a sharp crack when you press with your hand from inside, then it has not healed.
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 It is necessary that you make three cuts in the middle of the head in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, remove all moisture.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After binding the cuts with linen and powders, put vinegar and oil on them and leave them like that for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then unbind it and cure the wound with lancing and ointments, let the head swell up, and give the patient dry meat from a damp place to eat until the limb is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incision is that you look where the abscess is large, and where the liquid collects;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 for sometimes it is in front;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes it is behind;
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes on the right side;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 And sometimes to the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore, make an incision where the abscess is and empty the pus, and do as you can with it.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 And beware not to cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And if there comes blood, let the patient die in a seemly manner through bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheum
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "catarrh" affects any of the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which two arteries will be touched.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you wish to cover [something], have the patient bend his head backwards.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After rubbing the area with a coarse cloth until the arteries appear, then tighten the patient's neck with the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look where the vein is biting, and the left and right sides are behind the ears, and the hands should be placed.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then mark the joints with a cross, then strike both with a sharp spatula of two parts, until the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done at the wide part of the joint.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see (it), push the spatula beneath the artery and strike it from above, cutting as deeply as two fingers' width.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	When the vein is cut, it jumps out without ceasing continuously upward.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the arteries do not open to the touch, then you must measure the space of three fingers, then mark and cut up to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And it is necessary to forcefully put out the blood which is 6 cubits, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can bear, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 then observe the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If it remains on the bone close to the skin and the abscess does not burst open, then hold and bind the wound and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	From migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture in the eyes and heat in the temples and ancient forsenee and similar things, and it is treated with medicines and cures, but none of them help, we should cut open the arteries of the temples and cauterize, as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the method of extracting them is that the patient bends the hair on his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, for it opens well by its beating, and is easily found except in some men who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 and if it is found to be in place, the patient pulls his neck with some cloth, then rubs the area with rough fabric, and washes the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 then take the spatula as follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 then gently scrape the skin until you see the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs and separate well the fabrics from both sides.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the arteries are thin, turn it to the point of the incisor, then strike that part according to the size of the two cheeks.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut, it will not heal at all.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 And drain blood from the six veins down to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the arteries are large, you must tie it with two strong silk threads, one at each side of the wound, for pus not to come before the stitching of the wound and bleeding stops.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then strike the excess that is between the two ligatures in the same hour itself, and if you see fit, cauterize with a surgical knife as far as the bone until the shoulders are separated.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And this is the mature work, if the patient does not have a fever and is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 The cautery (or burning tool) is aid for curing moisture:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 it is of greater aid to those suffering from moisture.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the cavity with old cotton and put it firmly in place;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and when they are loosened, you should treat them with dry medicines that cause heat, and with bandages until it is healed.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 and if the artery is not sealed as you work on it, hurry to cover it with cautionery (or burning tool), or fill the cavity with vitriol (a chemical substance) and hold your hand over it so that the wound does not become infected.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 and if you do not have that, place your finger over the wound until it freezes, then rub the wound with cold water until it stops, and hold it as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And the one who is moved and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery, but the incision should be well thickened to keep its heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And between the two blades there should be a space of that size, and then when you have closed the two sides, and you hold the fire burning until it reaches the bone, and cut the vein in two places.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And they should be separated between the two shoulders, because it is not welded by this fire cautery altogether.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	Tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the eyes of the hairs are flowing from the veins that are above the head of fire, and it does not benefit by medicine when one performs it, and you see the patient's face turn red, and you see his forehead shake like a shudder.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 and if they are tender and moist so that the hairs of paper are falling out, and the papery flesh is burnt, and scorched by the heat of tears, this treatment is required.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And they called it by the ancients "contused cure", and is that you make at the back of the patient who has this disease the hairs on his forehead, then you make three cuts evenly along the length of the forehead.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And one of the fissures (should be) similar to the way it should move the entire forehead forward by swallowing downwards up to the nose, and the others will be in the chest through the papers above, and keep yourself from incising the arteries that are above the papers.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 And hold your hand away from the continuation of both jaws, and each wound should be of the size of three fingers joined together.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of cloth for wiping the blood, then insert the sharpened spatula of two parts as shown here.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 from the incision which is below the temple up to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 and cut out all the fat that is between the two fissures to its entire length, which is above the bone, then continue from the middle incision up to the other second one, and then remove this sharpened spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	insert the instrument called "culter" (which is pointed on one side and soft, not pointed, and its shape is:)
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And cut the bone obliquely towards the skin according to your knowledge, and the bone is soft towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the mid-incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the eyelashes that descend from the head until the incision is continuous up to where the opening of the eyeball appears, and then further proceed in the middle split up to the other eyelid.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 Then draw equal amounts of blood and press on the place where the blood was taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 then put a tent of old cotton in each split and place damp cloths soaked in wine, oil and vinegar on top, and ensure that pus does not come.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and on the third day loosen the ligature, and bring a strong plant of cold water, then apply a basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	the removal of the eyes
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When someone commonly comes with an acute catarrh, and you see the eyes becoming swollen and small, and clouding vision, and burned papers.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 And the hair falls out, and if one presses on the head in pain, and the patient coughs.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Therefore, learn through these symptoms that those matters and this catarrh come from many veins, and the medicine to be used for it, if it is there, should be applied.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you shall tell the patient to bend his head back, then make a deep cut across the forehead, and another wide one in the cheek.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin at the left temple to the right temple, and make the incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and move your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating.
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, drain all the blood with a sponge, then loosen between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton and linen thread.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then lay above it cloths soaked in wine and oil, and keep away from getting hot.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is removed (a tumor or foreign body), you should rub the bone until tender flesh begins to grow, then heal with drying agents that promote healing.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And apply it to these wounds to stop the pain everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 Everything that falls in ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grain, or beast, or stone from the mine, or similar things like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seeds, such as peas, beans, lentils.
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 or something flowing, such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear stone or another thing that does not fit into the ear, does not lie in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, distill some purple oil or camphor oil, then apply extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 And you make him cough with condys, and stop his nostrils when coughing comes, and place around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 And stretch the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Many times comes fever due to this treatment.
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not come with fever, bring about the extraction of small tweezers, here is the form for it:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it leaps with tweezers, that is good.
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, bring about the extraction of an onion-shaped fine probe of small thickness.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 and if it does not leap with that, make a bee-shaped cane and push the head of the cane or ear perforation strongly, and stop the one who is around the cane with wax so that air cannot enter with the cane.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 then draw it out in form, for many times comes fever as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 And if it does not come forth in such a manner, it takes glue from what it takes the birds, and puts on some instrument that is sharp for this purpose, and puts a little cotton around it;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 then press the glue onto the stone or whatever it is, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 And if it does not jump out of all these things that we have said, then hasten to cut the ear so that pus comes in and it spasms;
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 and the method of cutting is that you make the patient first drain the head, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its strength, then have the patient sit between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh depends;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And make the cut as round as a moon until you reach the bone, then break it according to your strength, and suck out the juice quickly with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal it while it is still draining pus.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if there are grains (pus) swelling up, administer extraction (incision or lancing).
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 And if it cannot drain, apply a thin, subtle sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 make an incision of that grains.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, as long as you have made many cuts.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then take out with fine forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extractions align.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In water that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm gargles of first remedies, and fill the ear with large cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of that, it's good. (This line refers to the cotton in the ear staying in place.)
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 if this is not done, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and light, and heat them slightly with fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 and place the patient or wounded person with his ear, and boil water on one side of it. From the other side, take another stone and strike the stone in the ear with it.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 and do not stop hitting one stone against the other until the water boils completely out, and then it will burst out.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see, grab the string, and push one of the shoulders into the ear, and take hold of the other head with fire until the more tender joint is burned;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 then straighten the joints of the other limbs until the pain subsides completely, as we have said in the previous section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In the extraction of the beast, if it has a small body, like a flea and similar creatures, treat it as we have said in the classification;
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring forth the extraction of tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and it is the lighter things to remove that are in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the removal of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the classification and the treatment of distillation, and the treatment does not help, then you must observe the ear in the sun;
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are any openings (wounds), draw them shut with fine forceps if they do not close by themselves. And if they do not open, take the cord that is in the form mentioned here:
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And put the smaller plier (tweezers) in the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then press firmly on the cord.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey to come out, stop the cord of cotton around it as I said before.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not come out as we said before, administer distillations that the ancients have proved to be effective in the treatment of worms. You will find it or how to treat with distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you distill your oil and medicines into the ear with this instrument, here is its form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 The lower part should be of silver or brass, narrow and pointed, with a cover above for distilling.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 And for pressing within the distillation, use an instrument made of brass that is suitable, and if you see, take the scraper and wrap it around the tip with cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour your oil or juice into the canal, and whatever you see of your medicines in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then push the scraper into the cotton and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear moves.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And the patient feels pain within, and it should be distilled [treated] with fire in the same way as it is distilled in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be as good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	ear stoppage (stopping/blockage of the ears)
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without some deformity in the ears.
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And this same thing happens in men by the stoppage of a wound or pus born within the ear, and sometimes it comes all the way into the ear if one cannot see it.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And sometimes the deformity turns outwards, and one can see it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, if it comes all the way into the ear and one cannot see it, it is a difficult cure in many ways, and in this case you must place the sick person's ear in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	 And look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 If you see the opening apparent, perform entirely this spatula of which form is given here:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not pierce the ear.
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 If the opening is from cartilage or corrosion of the ear, hold it with subtle tweezers and strike gently until all the cartilage is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the tumor has invaded fully into the ear, take a sharp, thin scissors and heat it slightly in fire, then insert it into the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel an opening that causes the patient pain in the ear, make a gentle puncture and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then place a wick in the ear according to the size of the wound and moist it with the Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Apply this every day until the wound heals, or take a linen cloth and moisten it in strong vinegar, and sprinkle powdered vitriol on top of it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see an ear swelling, then you should pull the linen cloth away and move another linen cloth moistened with rose oil and beeswax until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If bleeding occurs, immerse a sponge and cloth in cold water, then place it on the ear, and use other treatments to stop the bleeding which are either cauterization or distillation treatments.
de la char des papieres	Of the flesh of paper (meaning "skin")
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This is the treatment for blisters that come in paper when they are moist and dry. Then you should stretch them with pliers and forceps, and scrape them from their roots with a spatula.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 Then put broken vitriol on it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if [the patient] does not cut it open, the cautery with the fine lenticular cautery should be used, and after the incision is made, the cauterization is beneficial.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 And many times they repair themselves, but nothing remains of their roots.
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are cauterized by fire, the roots are burned and they do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hail (meaning "hardened lumps under the skin")
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times come in paper from the eyes something that appears like hail in its shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail", and it is a thick accumulation of moisture in the upper and lower paper (eye).
li ovraiges est telz:	 The works are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care if the swelling remains silent from both sides, it is an easy thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Then (you) open (it), next, peel the skin from both sides lightly, then take it with the forceps and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you cannot crush it without piercing a little paper, do not worry the patient.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if the wound is large, join it with stitches and cure it until it heals.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 and if it is small, do not apply force, for the oil will restore it soon and add heat to the wound.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 If the swelling is descending within the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, hold the swelling with forceps and crush and press it from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 And if the paper is dislocated by an incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when the hail is struck, boil oil of brackish water, and heal the wound of those who are injured by the hail until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hairs
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a grease that is injured in the skin of papers above, and this happens more often with children than with adults, and it causes them great discomfort, and they get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot bear to look at the light of the sun because tears hasten to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep on them, and their papers are wet under their eyelids with the exinach that has spread in the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel something exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of work is that the patient places their head on a pillow;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 then take the linen cloth, and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that contains external pus from each part, then place it over [the affected area];
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press with your hands on both sides so that the pus is collected in the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make a hole in the moisture with the narrow lancet, and it should not be larger than the wound made during vein opening.
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and cut the skin completely so that you can see the pus;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 and in various positions, pus comes out of the hole, according to the shape of a white lard piece.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Take then a single piece of coarse cloth between your hands and spread it out; turn your hand from right to left until it is spread out.
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 and ensure that you do not add anything in the slit, that you do not bring the spatula to the oil or pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the dislocation does not open at the beginning of the slit, raise the slit slightly so that it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 Then reset it as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and water, and put them on the joint, and hold with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such men who grind linen and put it on top to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it until it is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if an abscess hot to the joint comes, then heal it with plasters soothing until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	hair from paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When paper-like growths grow with hairs, other than their nature, and are nourished, they harm the eyes and bring on diseases such as regular weeping and softening of the paper-like growths and albumin, to the point that it is the cause of the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And the cure is according to four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 or by cautery with fire, or by cold medication as described in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by canines, as I will explain.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 You must put the patient's head in your lap, then turn the paper of oil on your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is turned over, that's good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, push an awl through it completely;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and cut off the edge of the paper where the hairs emerge from those hairs, pull the thread above it all over the paper, and turn to the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 then make an incision in the part under the paper, beneath the hairs, all the way along the spatula from the large tear to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then draw the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark on the paper a shape like a thistle stalk, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the size that you see the paper should be raised.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if there is need for a large amount of paper according to how much the paper has been softened;
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 then make the whole stylus on the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large notch down to the small one;
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 and let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs at the thickness of a root, then push the onion into one of the two angles of the keyhole, then peel it entirely;
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then assemble the two lips with a stitch of a needle and fine linen thread, squeeze out the blood, and make the excess thread adhere to the two eyelids to any gluey substance, if you want to do this.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 and if not, if you have no treatment for it, then leave the stitch and the thread until three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 then treat the wound without stitching with drying and constricting substances, for the paper relieves at the edge of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is rotten (as they say in the olden days), and this is not work done with fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 and if another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 And it is that you trace the paper with a figure like the fennel stalk, as we have stated, divided into three sections according to the form given here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then fold what is above the small areas equally according to the shape shown below:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 And if you cannot hold the tongs and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread on it and pierce through the figure.
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and put the other thread from the large notch, and the second thread from the small one, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers.
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then flatten your hand equally and lift all the skin that you have signed, as we have stated, then sew together the two lips of the wound by stitching, and let it heal until it is healthy.
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, appease it with cerote and similar soothing ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 Occasionally the hairs of the papier become converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 If you must perform an incision, use what we have said about it.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 However, the stitching in one and the other is more artful.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The treatment of dogs follows this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and it is that you convert the papier and fold it inside as I have said, and then make two dogs by art, and two fine strings as long as the papier and the width of the spatula.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and tie together the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads;
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 Then assemble one and the other gently on top of what is covered by the paper of oil, and hold the two cords of the two parts together.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it thus for some days, and the skin that is held will die and rot and fall off, as it decays through it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it takes too long, if necessary, heal it until it heals completely.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 When the wound is healed, and when the paper is lifted, the hairs will not grow again;
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 And this is the form of the two cords that you will make according to this figure and this quantity of length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The work requires taking a thin needle and putting silk thread on it that is also thin.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then gather the bones [shoulder] and bring them together gently, and may the thickness of the tendons be a palm's length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 then wind a thin thread of silk briefly around [the shoulder] and bind it with the thread.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 then put the patient's head on a clean pillow.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 and let the patient's head be removed from the sun so that the work is clear, for this is a subtle and delicate work, then insert the needle into the entire socket towards the root of the hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly until you draw it over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 then pull out the hair up to the socket and insert into the socket the number of hairs, whether one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then stretch your hand until the hairs come out completely from all the chase on the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out, you will pull the chase beneath to the thread that you have prepared, until the chase comes out from the holes above and you see it through the eye of oil.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 Then you will pull the chase and the thread, close the oil and leave it for 2 or 3 days until the hair adheres in its place and the flesh grows up.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 And if the hairs are small, accompany it with long natural hair and let it grow along with that which you leave, until it is stretched out and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	Of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called "alecrati" or porridge comes in the eye, it has two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly due to a wound or injury, or by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the method of treatment is that you break the adhesion, separate the eyelids from it, put linen threads inside, and hold it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 and it must not be that you use in its treatment of things that dry and constrict it.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the disease becomes worse than before;
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 but the work of things softening, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the broth of water or milk and flaxseed should be cooked, and at once dip it in warm oil from dahiquil, wrap it in a linen cloth, and heal with this.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasure of your cure is that you take care not to stitch it [the wound] in the same way as it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 and these things that we have said are not remedies for this disease except its proper alignment, so that it does not recur in the same form as before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the chyle which comes in the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the procedure in this is that you take a needle with doubled thread, and pierce it into the flesh from the left eyelid to the right, so that the threads come out in two places of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 then fold the skin over the entire needle and cover it with a wide spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shape of the bone returns as it should, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, take the rasp and put it in the incision, turn the bone, and make two cuts along the inside of the bone;
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and let the heads of the cuts at both angles of the incision you made be aligned, and let them form an angle such that when they are assembled, the shape will be as the shape of a letter which has the name "Greek";
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness of its sides, underneath the bone, then join the two separated parts with a linen thread;
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then treat it with the medicine we have mentioned for softening and poultices until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the disease comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make an incision in a plain area beneath the hairs of the paper (skin), and according to what was mentioned before;
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then cut between the two ribs of a tent, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 And the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and wise masters prepare instruments of all possible means to bring the figure back to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are required in multiple positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	the sudden dislocation of the shoulder
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a way that the paper above is glued with the white part of oil and cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must push the tip of a razor under the paper and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And hold it with forceps until you cut what is near the puncture point of the probe, which should not be too sharp nor too piercing, so that the patient does not suffer from a too-sharp probe piercing the oil.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And make your incision, which you peel apart that assembly, gently, so that the skin returns to its natural shape.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And heal all that assembly, and make once in the sharp oil salty, and raise from it sweet oil and bile.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then put between the skin and the oil a tent of linen, and put on top of the oil wool soaked in abundance of egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And after three days use bile and other strong things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the nail is according to two ways:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 the nail is either nerve-like and resembling hard stone, or another that is not nerve-like but resembles white frozen moisture, which when touched by iron and cooked with pliers cannot be moved.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 and both begin to approach the large root, and grow little by little until they cover the whole eye and all the light and the movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is that the patient places their head on a healthy surface, then they open their eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lift the paper in your hand, then take the nail with small tweezers, and stretch it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, and put horse hair or cow hair, or strong thread on it.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and bend the tip of the needle a little and push it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, and tie the nail with thread and hang it above, and shave all the hair on the side of the nail that follows the curve and the silk to the hair up to the root, then chop the remaining in the root of the finger at the very tip of the spatula and small force, and leave the natural flesh or nail so that by incision the body does not produce tears as usual.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 and sometimes the nails grow at the edge only, and with thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape all the putty-like substance of this kind from the wound:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the skin flap and tear it, and that the puncture is not made.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after incising, pour oil a little piece of crushed silk and make a collirium from litarge, and leave it until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat those that need it until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not nerve-ridden, and you cannot push the needle, and the unguis cannot enter, many times this appearance of a nail is treated with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And as I told in the division, if it grows as I have described and you see it covered with oil from the patient, take a small amount of the spatumile as shown here:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And the nail above (should be) scraped gently, and if you see that it doesn't diminish at all and reason follows, then distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder, and stop the oil until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then repeat the other work according to this same work, until it is completely opened.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing prevents you in the oil, as in the treatment of an abscess, first milk it, and heal the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the procedure as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the flesh from the sore harms the oil greatly, stop it at the edge, and cut off a part and not all, so that tears do not come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then distill in the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	Of the flesh which grows upon the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 In some men, red pus sometimes arises, covering the eyelid and pressing on top of paper and turning towards the tear duct, appearing like a rosebud.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the operations are such that the patients put their head on the healthy side, then they cut open the eyes, and hold all that skin suitable for this purpose firmly with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 Then cut the first piece of flesh and go cutting to the end with the razor until the end, and be careful not to pierce the oil at the operation.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 And make the incision with a spathule, as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces of which one removes the scab, according to the shape after this chapter it demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 And when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, use oil of cedar pulverized or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put over the oil fleece with egg white, to ensure that it heals without pus.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 And if there remains something, and the wound is shallow, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave the oil and treat the abscess with things soothing an abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work when it is healthy, and thus do as charms are anointed with oil in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But nevertheless, you must lighten the care of each weak oil by the natural way.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 and of the accidental way, in work with iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is strong enough for this work.
des voines des eulz	the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Should be red veins that are covered on the oil, and they drain their work and weaken the oil day and night.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore, first you should look to see if the oil, in which the stone is, is hollow, and has no other illness except the stone.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then tie the neck thus:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place his head in a loop, then tie those bands all around evenly according to his wisdom, and may the loops be subtle and double as shown here:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two points in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 then tie those bands tightly and squeeze out the blood hour by hour until you see those loops move away from the oil;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 and ensure that you do not prick the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this task at noon in the sun, and be very warm in your work so that the loops do not break.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 and when you have done this, if you can distill green and red oil of collyrium to treat those that remain stubborn with the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot collect all of it in that hour, apply a plaster on the oil of soothing things to alleviate the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and is secure from abscess, then continue as before until it heals;
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of the cautery (procedure):
de la fistule de l’oil	From the fistula of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The surgeon is called "arissati" (inciser):
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a trick in it that you make an incision over the abscess where it should die, and drain out all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, if it requires all the instruments as described here;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 And it is called "sharp head", and it should be made from iron pointed like a chisel as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And place the iron on the corrupted bone, then turn it between your fingers and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 And do this once, then restore the bone with medicine extractors.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the joint is fused and pus appears, and the corpse of the bowel remains fused for 40 days without renewal or abscessing, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed;
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If there is no other remedy than to return the fistula to the pierced navels as follows:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 and you make an incision in the bone for the second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, take the iron drill according to this form, and let the points of the iron be at three angles, and the shaft should be tapered up to the head as you can see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 then place it on the bone at the junction of the rim, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the drill completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his navel.
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 and afterwards restore the place with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh hardens and strengthens the joint, the matter goes to the navel.
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 It is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the dislocation
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When all the eyes (pupils) are opened wide in every direction and there is no obstruction or dimming of the sight, you must tie down the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then apply medicine to the healthy eye, or use tweezers with iron to aid in sucking, then place oil made from acacia, aloe, incense and saracocolla on it, then hold the oil and pour it onto bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 The manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths and fold each one four times, then put one on top of the other according to the amount needed.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 then hold it in place with a hard bandage and repeat the use of tweezers for suction without iron.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then remove the cysts and leave the oil constrained for a day and night, and if they have healed together, then you must stretch it greatly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the ligament the next day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good;
se ce non;	 if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 if it is not, then repeat the plaster and dressings and ligament and cysts until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The double rupture of the ruptured membrane.
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When dislocations occur in the inflamed cloth, then open it, and force out the paper as if with grains of resin, and it is astonishing to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Therefore, if you see it covered, the procedure is such that you push an awl into the root of the affected part all the way up to the opposite side, then push another awl or one with a doubled thread from the edge of the abscess.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 And make it pierce, let the first needle follow the position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then pull through the thread and tie a part of the vein around it tightly, then draw out the needle and put soft oiled woolen yarn on top of it abundantly.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and leave it until the thread sticks to the vein, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound heals.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and sometimes the wound is held closed by the vein on each side of a circle of fabric until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eyes appear large, pierce them with a fine spatula that comes from the oil and correct the moisture abscess and drain the eyes, and put in something immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then draw [the shoulder] out until it is in its socket again.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bowl of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the oil, it resembles an inflamed eye socket and is not an inflamed eye;
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the method of treating it is to make the patient sit on a stool facing the affected side, then take the head between your hands from both sides and move it until you see the bone come up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 then insert a probe, do not drain the pus and open the light [the wound], let the patient see what is there as he is accustomed.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 and if it does not drain below [the probe], know that it is inflamed, and if the dislocation of the bone is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the subtle spatula and poke through the cornea-like cloth into the eye socket with the cornea and bone, as long as it bores through.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it is extracted, distill cold sharp oil mixed with honey or hot water with fenugreek, or honey, into it; then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have the appearances of eyes in division, and those that must be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 if they are healthy.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 The patient should be seated between your hands with crossed legs, away from the light and the sun, and hold the oil clean and squeeze it very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then place the oil paper on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 then place the point of the instrument under the crown through the thickness of a finger in that oil-filled sac at the lower part of the eyelid, then push the instrument called "almagda" vigorously, and hold your hand steady until it pierces into the oil sac, and feel that almagda enters the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 and it is necessary that the measurement of the way almagda be at the full length of the space which is from the eyelash to the end of the eyebrow.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 And it is the crown of the eye;
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 You will see the bone on this paper through the brightness of the horned parchment, and then place the instrument up to it or where it is sharp, and press afterwards.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If the wound begins to drain now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After a short rest, and if the sharp point rises on the second vein, press with the instrument, and when it is fully inserted and does not rise further, gently stretch it around by turning your hand bit by bit.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then replace the sharp point with a little gemmy silk, and cut away that oil from within.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then pour in the oil of lavender or moistened cloth soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind it with the oil of lard.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place a thin layer of beaten egg white on top.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have very hard hairs, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 Therefore pierce the conjunctiva only, and do not go too deep, but make it delicate, then gently push it in as we said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And upon completion of the work, the patient sleeps on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 Rest from all movements, take light foods, do not move your head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his position for three days.
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 Then unbind him in the same dark house, test his vision, show him some things, and then bind him again for seven more days.
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And it is not necessary to do this during the course of the treatment or after the incision now, but you should reduce this, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess comes up, unbind the oil before the seventh day, and direct that which eases the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it is calmed down, loosen the eye and place it on its side to cover for any day, and stay always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 Then little by little, go out of the house and turn into your condition;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from the Yrach, who told us that in our land they do almagda perciet, so that it drips water, but I have never seen anyone doing it in our land, nor have I ever heard of it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the likenesses of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them will see them;
et soient d’arain proprement:	 And they are of arsenic properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the heads of these should be of the same subtlety, and the rear in four angles sharp.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh near the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes charms or diverse-looking scorptions are born, from which there are some that seem like real scorpions with many legs;
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 If there are any of these or if the charm has changed to such a color and if the charm is soft in bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 Therefore, for those charms that are soft and not hardened, you should have the patient sit between your hands facing the sun;
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 Open their nostrils, and pour the onion juice onto those charms, and drive them out strongly.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Then grasp that which you can support with a thin and sharp spatula on one side, until you know that the charm is completely destroyed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if anything remains that cannot be covered, open it completely with all sharp and subtle instruments, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 and if the abscess is not healed and an arrow remains, seek help as necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 and if it is a malicious abscess, act quickly and burn until the pus is drained and all the charred matter is removed, then apply cool oil or vinegar and water.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If there is no healing and moisture comes up to the mouth, know that it is healthy.
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 and if moisture does not come out as necessary, know that there is pus in the bone above, so instruments do not come to cut it.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then you should put in some yarn, about an inch thick, and it should be tied by our hands, with space between each knot no less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 and place the patient's head in yarn through its neck as far as it can go, and pull while smelling until it comes out of the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 and children in schools often do this, and it is an easy thing for someone who wants to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 then hold the head coming through the neck with one hand and the other head coming from the mouth with the other hand, and let one after the other pass by our hands that are tied together by yarn.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Do this until you know that the knots have rotted the flesh, then pull the yarn, squeeze out the blood, wet the yarn in Egyptian ointment and put it back into the neck again as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 Make it last for three days or more, until the burns consume all that remains of flesh.
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 And then place or insert a plug of yew wood for some days until it is drained, and if there is need for drying medicine, use it.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 And this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where oil and medicines are distilled.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it is made of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a plug, and lead it likewise.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you wish, make a closed plug, and let the instrument be hollow for purging the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 and have a handle on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh near the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Many times, in the head of the nose, there arises a disease called "telul", which grows and becomes large over time until it can be seen with the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And for this reason, you must cut it at the beginning and burn all of it, then place the hot cautery or burning medicine on its place.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if you delay cutting it when it is large, beware if it is hard, of such color, poor sensitivity.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 Do not touch it with iron as it is an inflamed abscess, for when you cut it even once, great harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 If the abscess is soft and of such color, you can cut it all, empty the patient and cut it cautiously without fear, then treat the place with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and closed
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 When solutions come continuously into one of these work cartilages, it helps little, except in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Therefore, when such an occurrence happens to anyone, one should look if the wound is fresh with all its blood.
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then align the two lips together in a stitch, then heal it until it heals completely.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 If the lips are separated on both sides, then you must cauter all their parts until they heal, then align the two lips together in a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood powder and incense powder.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and place a plaster piece of strong or other adhesive plaster on top of the powders, and leave it until it dries, then heal it with ointment until it heals completely.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The manner of the stitching is that you assemble the suture:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles, as we have said in the abdominal suturing;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I told you.
des apostemes des levres	of the lips of an abscess
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 In men, an abscess hard inside the lips, resembling grains of wheat, both smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 then it is necessary that you turn the lips, and make an incision above each tooth, and take them with the forceps and crush them in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then apply the lead after the incision of crushed vitriol, until the wound is cauterized.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and then let it heal, and treat the lead with dry things until it heals.
de la char des gencives	From the jawbone
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Many times a boil arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 it is necessary that you hold it with tweezers, and cut off its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 then apply crushed vitriol or other powders restraining and drying to the wound.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 if the boil comes back after incision, which often happens, cut it again, and then cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 if it does not return after cauterization.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And these are the shapes of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	The sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes sharp points are assembled at the teeth's roots, within the mouth between the gums, rough and harsh skins.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes the teeth are black and greenish and curved towards each other, until corruption reaches the gum, and they rot.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands, and his head in your lap, and carefully separate the teeth or the rough skins until nothing remains.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do this with the blackness and greenish areas, and the yellow and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 If you remove those that are at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, start again on the second day or the third, until you have everything set.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 And know that the teeth have need of various types of instruments for drilling, according to what the work shows, because the scalpel used to file down the teeth has different shapes than those used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary when curing the tooth of its pain that you delay the drawing as much as possible, for it should not be done at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because it is a very high substance up until then that one does not have any excuse for filing.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Then, when the patient is compelled to draw (something), it is necessary that you are certain of the tooth pulling.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times the patient feels pain and believes it to be a toothache and pulls out the healthy tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 And yet the pain does not part from him while the disease lasts, for we have seen it done with these noblemen.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 And when you are certain about the tooth loosening, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth all over.  Scraper strongly so as to protect the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then you move it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the very root and bit by bit, until it is well loosened, then you tighten the pliers well.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And let the head of the patient be in your lap, and hold it so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After straightening the tooth without breaking it, if it does not come out on its own, take any of these instruments and gently push it from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 If the tooth is pierced and eaten, then you must fill it with cloth where the holes are;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if you hold it gently with pliers so that it does not break while pulling.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 and it is necessary to apply great care around the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it and leave a part of it, and the tooth will remain in place longer due to the mischief of the root, causing the patient greater pain than before.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And beware that you do not act as the ignorant do, who by their haste and recklessness sometimes break the cart, and do not bring what we have mentioned.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 but they sometimes bring about great illness through the use of these roots that remain in them, or by breaking the cart as we have often seen.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is extracted, clean the area with wine or oil and linen cloth.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 if bleeding occurs afterwards, which often happens, use the area with ground glass.
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And if it does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The shapes of the instruments, with which you silence the teeth first, should be long points and large handles, lest they double when you extract the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	 and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large enough so that they do not bend when pulling, and be made of good iron, and be toothed for gripping.
de la racine des dens	of the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains when extracting, it is necessary that you put on top of it damp cotton in butter for a day or two, until the tooth loosens, then insert the pliers called "algefri", with which the teeth seem to be like tweezers.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 and within them should be made like a crowbar and this is their form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tools, then you must expose the flesh all around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as forceps, in this shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And it should be out and large so that it does not break, and if the root jumps through them, it is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If not, help with all instruments, so that the forms come afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you aid with this instrument having two arms, in this shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are before the teeth, and of this tool that appears like large pincers, whose shape is as follows:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 And let this instrument be other than one that can break, and know that many dense instruments are.
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and also with other instruments, which are not counted;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise masters discover by themselves their instrument, according to what their work and the illness show, for there are such diseases where the ancients did not teach any instrument due to diversity of ailments, and if it breaks the cart or other bones where it should not, it searches among the instruments that it needs, which I told you, and helps with gestures, so here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, so that it does not slip away, but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore the joint with suitable medicines, and if there is pus in the bone, and it is small, press all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth appear not according to natural form, and the shape is ugly, especially in young women, it is necessary that you know if the teeth are not born after the gum, and are not in the correct place, and cannot be corrected or filed:
adonques lou raie;	 Therefore extract the tooth.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 If it is near the gum with the tooth, take this instrument shaped like a small beak, and made of sharp iron at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the chisel should be held often for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, file it with a small flat file as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is as if the limb of which one makes needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 And in grinding the tooth, press and press lightly by hand, so that it does not move while chewing.
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 Then, flatten the end with any file, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, it must be ground smooth until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth are loose
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the teeth loosen in front, either from percussion or falling out, and the patient cannot press down on it while eating so that it does not fall out, and you treat them with constricting medicines; this is of no use.
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 If it must be held in place with a golden thread, for silver threads become green and rot, but gold never does.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the son be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the size of the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two healthy teeth, then place the chisels between the lower teeth (if there are one or more), as far as you can see clearly until the healthy tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 Then continue covering up to the part where you began, and press your hand gently but firmly, so it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 And tie the ligature to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then cut the chisels with the thread using the pliers and assemble them, then place them between the healthy tooth and the dislocated tooth so that it does not bite the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then let it remain as tight as it can endure, and if it slips or comes undone, tie it again with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it remains and serves in this way for its entire duration, it is the shape of teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth or the two molars, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, put it back in its place, freshly, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And do not meddle with it unless one is wise and experienced; and never make the shape of a tooth from animal bone, and put it in the place where it is lacking, and tie it as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	Cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Sometimes this link comes from under the tongue or naturally;
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 or through an accidental wound healed;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold his head steady, and pull out the tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then grasp the nervous link firmly, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or swelling, and it is due to a sudden wound, insert the forceps and grasp the dislocated part firmly;
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and be careful that the incision is not too deep, because of the artery that is below;
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have done this, raise the head of a warm and soft poultice or a cold one, then put a linen cloth under the tongue;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And the itch afflicts the patient every night so that the joint cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If a discharge of blood comes, apply powdered vitriol to the joint.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 And if there is no discharge, cauterize it with slow-burning cautery, which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 then heal it with other treatment until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 If you see it swell with a dark or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it because it is cancerous.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 If it is bending towards swelling and there is moisture, pour on oil, and cut it open with a sharp instrument from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if the bone dares to oppose your work, lay vitriol powder on it until it is cauterized, then return to your work as soon as you draw all the fire.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then lift up the limb and heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes boils called "gogath" appear in the throat, and they are properly called the two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and they do not heal, be careful.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 But let it remain until it is dead, and then you will cut it off, or it would break by itself.
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is of white color and the root is subtle, you should prepare the instrument for covering, but first check whether the abscess has cooled down and been pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then have the patient sit before the sun and his shoulder in your hand, open his mouth, and the servant takes it between his hands, pressing the tongue beneath the entire instrument, which is its shape.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 And it should be made of silver or fine bronze like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 Can you press the tongue against the entire instrument and if you see an abscess, take the hook and insert it into the wound, pulling it out towards the top more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And pull no thing with threads from it, then seize it at the instrument, thus is its shape, which seems like a handle;
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And the head bends and twists in one direction to another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or bone;
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this tool present, use pliers of this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And be called cutting from one side, and from the other called notching;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have seized one of the almonds, seize the other in the same way, and after the incision, pour hot sharp and acid liquid on the patient's wound, which causes bleeding, pour hot acid or pomegranate rind cooked or myrtle bunches, or similar things, until the blood is stopped;
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then let the cure until it heals;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And sometimes in the throat other abscesses than two mandibles grow, so prick them accordingly like two mandibles equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treat a woman with an abscess that was born within the throat, namely an abscess of small size.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 and had the throat closed entirely, so that the woman could not exhale through the narrowed passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died if she stayed in such condition for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had risen to two fingers above the two openings of the throat.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 So I had to hasten and prick one onyx, then pull it out, and pull a large piece of pus from it.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then reset the other part in the opposite dislocation, and force open the mouth and squeeze the tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 Then insert a needle into these abscesses, take some pus, and do not let any blood come out except a little;
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 and thus the throat of the woman was pierced, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting this abscess for a long time;
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 The abscess recurred again and filled the space I had intended, until it became very large;
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I tricked him and burned him inside his throat;
ensi demora sens croistre;	 Thus it remained swollen for a long time.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And I left those parts and let God do with them as He willed after me.
de l’uve	Of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the rectum protrudes to the anus, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is below large and round, it is called "bladder".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is cured as we said in the previous section and the treatment does not benefit, and you see that the swellings abscesses have subsided, and it becomes subtle, then you should cut it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And if it is round but not long, it assembles together.
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 If it is red or of mixed color or black, then you must make the incision.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it as I have said, in terms of its color and length, you should make the patient sit before the sun and press the tongue to the instrument that we mentioned before.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then pierce the eye of the onion into the eye, and draw it out, and press it at the bottom in the incisions of the two almonds that I have said.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And it is necessary that you not cover any superfluity that is beyond the natural limit;
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you cover more of it, it hurts the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After the incision, use what has been said in the incisions of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 If the patient fears covering (it), then you must use an engine for the cauterization to allay his fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cauterizing is with hot iron.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 And it is that the patient places their head in your lap and then you press the tongue with the instrument that has been said in the chapter of the fire cautery, and cauterize with live hot iron, but not too thick nor too thin.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And use the application of this tool, which is shown here in its form:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 And place a hair or a spoon with the medicine, as the handle of a spoon, and put the tool all over the medicine on the ulcer.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 The patient should lie on his side so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine without it reaching the throat or the bladder.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then hold your hand over the whole medicine and press it on the ulcer for the amount of half an hour until you see it scab over and the pain from the medicine is alleviated.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 If you see the scab, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and push the instrument all over the cotton onto the ulcer until the cotton adheres to the ulcer.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And often do this while the cautery is still hot, then let it dry, and lie down afterwards for 4 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 If you need to start the cautery of the treatment again, do so, and after the cautery, let the blood flow around the eye, with a linen cloth in butter, and clean what is around the treatment.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And wash with cold water, and be cured by gargling until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This cure is more effective than incision, rather than cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If it is cured by fumigation in this way, take calamint, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, wormwood and similar herbs, and put them all together or some of these in one pot, add ashes, and boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the head be tightly packed with strong earth, and within it place an instrument of hair according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And let it be of silver or lead, and one of the shoulders pressed into the mouth of the patient until the steam rises to the eye through the channel until the eye is destroyed.
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 After the start, often when the egg dries out, and be careful not to do it at the beginning of the abscess's eruption (breakout), as many things happen.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and not do it before the decline of the abscess breakout.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this is not present, take a rope and put inside the head of an egg yolk so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 as the egg yolk cradle does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is a good cure together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times it turns into the throat bone or fish spine, or something else;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 Therefore, you must pull out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all the instruments until you see the thing move.
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And if it does not open by itself and is replaced in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach.
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 In case of emergency, use vomiting to resolve this issue.
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of cork, a lettuce root, or a piece of dry bread.
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 and tie it with thread, and then swallow it.
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 when it reaches the place, it will swell, and you will draw it out.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 if it does not swell as we have said, take a plum-shaped instrument according to this form.
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And the instrument should be curved at the top so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and have the tip raised.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And beware not to touch the epiglottis, lest all does not live, nor push the bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 It is better that the patient pushes the instrument, because it should move or the thing will be broken.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 if he pushes downward, or pulls it forward equally, all along the instrument, until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the vein of the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Sometimes, bloodletting is the medicine, as I have said in the division, by the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when that does not help, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, and you will press the tongue with the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the pus, pull it out very gently, or use subtle tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a hairy rope and put it in the throat of the sick person, then insert or push into the throat the hot iron several times.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And let the patient drink water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and throw it in to swallow, and move it with your hand often.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as the wound feels wet, it falls (down).
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 If it does not fall down as we have said, then you should afflict the patient with an afetoide of the eye using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Repeat this often, for it needs to be carefully examined.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 The method of fumigation is that you take the pot which has burning charcoal in it, and cover it with a perforated cloth in the middle, and in that put the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then pour out your fumigation, and the patient places the end of the pipe in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape but comes directly to the wound.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And now the wound needs to be opened, and if it does not drain, then repeat the fumigation many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 The patient should endure thirst, eat salty things and almonds, and drink no water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then it will be necessary for it to issue forth according to this government.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 The shape of the instrument used for draining pus is, when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers to enter into the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 and have the form of a surgical needle, and be coated with lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	 observe this shape here:
li chapistres des apostemes	Chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 The shape of abscesses is similar to those that memory brings after this in the book, and they differ in perforation and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And it is in two ways, of which one is similar in shape and from that which holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is by the joints that are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are different from those on the base, and abscesses in the shoulder blade are different from those that come at the joints; each should have its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And if an abscess should not be pierced, wait until the bubble is ripe according to its completion.
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 and if there are those that should be pierced when they have matured, but do not die before maturity, such as abscesses which are dislocated from joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess appears at the joints and is left until it bursts, inadvertently the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 For if the abscess is detached from the main member and you delay the piercing until it has matured, the main member will suffer.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 or if it is detached from the foundation, pierce it before it becomes mature.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 It is not good to pierce a mature abscess without complete digestion, except for one that is detached from the foundation which cannot be closed and has an internal fistula.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 And cannot heal completely.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And you should know the duration of the abscess perforation according to its completion, and it is when the pain is alleviated, and the disappearance of fever, and the decrease in pain and redness, and the subsiding and shrinking of the head of the abscess, and other signs;
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And you should have the perforation sit lower or depending on the abscess, and where it has begun to open.
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the perforation should be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal or without any cover.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that are swollen, according to the affected member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in a charred place, it is good to leave the perforation until it is confirmed in completed digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 If you pierce through the lung before the chest, it will fill with blood and become full of filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And by chance harden the lips and push them inside him.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that has been pierced according to the size of the body, as required by the limbs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 You must make small abscesses, small wounds.
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 And if there are such abscesses where it is necessary to cover and keep warm.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 When it has become like a scab and become soft, if it is necessary, do as for babies:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 And if they are of such that are split into three angles, and if they are of such from which one strikes as the prickles of myrtle, like abscesses in the joints;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 And if they are of such where a round incision is made, and other incisions and similar strikes.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those who have no head, like a superficial abscess, it is necessary that you pierce it completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 And when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw anything straight from it;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 Make it multiple times with great effort, until the bowel is empty.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 for weak patients, women, or children, or old men in decline.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus jumps out at times with the release of the pus, by chance the patient may die, and you should not worry.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, if you rinse the wound, look to see if the wound from the abscess is small.
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 and if it is a large swelling, then bring linen or old cotton threads;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 and if it is a large abscess and there is much pus, then you must place a thread in each one so that they come against each other;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin, and you have shaved it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or raw linen wool without moisture, and tie it up for three days.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then bone it, and cure with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs in your work, bring cold water and linen cloth, dampen it, and place it on the wound repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 If the discharge of blood persists, provide management and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is near winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then you must place warm blankets soaked in hot wine and oil on top.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshy, then you must place cold blankets soaked in water and oil, or in cold wine and oil for three days as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then drain the abscess and let it heal, as necessary, until it heals.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And this must be universally known in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 or I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	on les doibt traiter par cautere de feu, et si c'est li soros qui est gros ou si c'est en estete, il faut les fistraire ou les aignorer avant; et s'il sont durs et ne puissent pas fistreier, alors les coupez en peus et empoignez le tueu par dessous la poix, et mettez feu au cautere, et on les brande comme il se peut, et ains qu'il soit bien chauffez, pesez le cautere et mettez l'en une vase d'eau, et le tirez hors du tueu qui est oste; et lors que li soros seront toutes ensemeies, si les clavetiez ains qu'il se refroidissent, si com il covient.
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses on the head, it is our practice to use linen cloths, as a gardener with a gourd, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are swollen and filled with moisture like boils:
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 and there are those that are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt that the artery does not oppose.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is that you probe with every instrument called "entomoisoir," which gives rise to the following form, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision through it.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 When the moisture is evacuated, if you incise without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, because it will return immediately when left unattended;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 then immerse cotton in Egyptian oil if it is available:
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 if not, use water and salt, and apply the wound, and leave it until the next day:
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And these (things) move those who have remained (stuck) at night.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 And renew the cotton, as before, on the second day and the third, until you know that it does not remain at night.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 And if the abscess remains filled with fat, flatten it according to this shape, longwise;
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 and pour out the pus, and peel off all of it from every side, and put your entire treatment to draw fire through the coat in which it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 And if the arteries oppose you, do what I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And similarly do for the abscess if it is pockmarked, and cut and treat as I told you before.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the incision on the abscess becomes moist, it is lighter, for there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these abscesses or head has no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I flattened on the head of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And I found the abscess just like a hard and swollen stone, unbreakable.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And if one had pierced it with anything, it would have made as much wound as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses coming from the head, such as those that come from a child's head or the roots of the ears, they must be opened for as long as possible depending on their location, to allow the pus to flow out.
et les cure si com il covient.	 and they are treated as needed.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess occurs at the neck, under the jaw, and in the groin area, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, and they are large and connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 And each scrofula is properly within its own side, like the abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 The resemblance of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and others that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In that case, you see it in good position on the body, and resembles the color of the body, silent from all sides and not pulsating at the neck or artery or vein, and is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 You must cut it through the top, and peel off each part, and hold open the two lips of the incision with forceps, if necessary, as we have said in abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 pull it slowly and be sure not to cut the nerve or vein, and may the spatula not touch nor scratch, so that the hand does not slip, and look not too far ahead, lest you cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you open the vein or artery and it does not yield, put vitriol powder into the wound or any powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let the abscess be appeased, and soften the wound, and make it start to drain.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood has stopped flowing, return to your work until you finish.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then examine if there are any small scrofulas remaining, and if so, cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 If the root of the scrofula has a large vein, it is not necessary to cut out that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong doubled thread and let it hang down without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then let it heal.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 And if you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound, and sew them now, since there is no more superfluous material remaining due to the largeness of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand to cover the root of it and draw pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those scrofulas that have excess fluid, pierce there where it has burst open;
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and pierce in the same way as described before, depending on it, then apply poultices with ointment and similar things, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption;
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is well cleaned, let it heal with bright ointment, until it is healed.
de squinance	If you make a bloodletting from the artery, then you must bind the veins that are near so that the bleeding does not continue, and close the wound with clean cloths.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I have never seen one who did it in our land, and it is written in their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 For those who have scinases (a term likely referring to goiter), it is necessary that the cleft in the throat called "epiglottis" be shaved.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And do not help with that, because all the veins and the swelling of the patient are in those who have an abscess hot in the mouth or in the throat or in both cheeks.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the tonsil, it is required to cover the epiglottis to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we make the incision below three or four small circles or a small slit across, between the two circles or through the thickness of the incision due to the scissors, not in the cartilage.
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And the patients who are subjected to the incision of the epiglottis should not have any cartilage, and the veins are long in length.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is afraid, he must stretch the skin of the throat all the way to the chin, then cut open the breast until it reaches the cartilage;
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and remove any vessels of blood that you see, and then press the siphac as we have said;
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 and demonstrated by the section of the breastbone that juts out due to the broken place, and by the lack of voice;
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour has passed in doubt of strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound from the breastbone and sew it completely closed around the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then administer medicines that cause pus to form until it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Abu'l-Qasim says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the bird pecks out his eyes.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Therefore, press on the epiglottis because the patient cannot swallow, and he breathes through the wound, thus keeping him alive.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 And so, the ancients would leave the wound open until the evil of the disease had passed, which it had done in three or four days, and then they would command to sew up the wound and heal it.
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take the knife, thrust it into her throat, and cut part of the windpipe channels.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I was called to heal her, and found her in the same state as death.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and discovered blood coming out of it, and that it had not opened or led the vein except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hastily sewed up the wound, healed it until it was cured;
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And there was no more pain to the maiden except she became red of voice, and she returned afterwards to her condition.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 For this reason, I say that in the case of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 This abscess is called "throat hernia" and it is a large abscess of the color of a pigeon's breast, and it is often in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 and it can occur in two ways:
naturez, et accidens;	 Nature and accidents.
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 Nature has no trickery.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And accidents are of two kinds, one is like fatness in us, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that comes from us due to an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 And there is fear, and it should not be operated on harshly except in the case of a small one; prove and examine all through the incision:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 If you find it as if fat, and it cannot move in any way, strike it like one strikes the nose, and pull it out completely, if there is anything;
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And examine carefully, and heal it as needed, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 Many ways of ours are, which I shall say all similarities;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and it is necessary that I say the whole difference that is between joint and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that dislocation is hot and fever lasting, until the boil has passed, and the swelling has subsided.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With the joint there is no heat, no fever, nor pain, and it contains the pus, which is its own sack and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a blister, and grows.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 and they are similar in one way or another, either thickened, moist, and have much of the same color as I have said in the divisions.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the care of the sick, that you examine and test first all the instruments called "entromissoire," according to its shape or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the method of incising abscesses for us is that you take or more moist leather than you find in the abscess, and turn your thumbs little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced through, then it should be according to the size of the abscess;
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then extract the incision tool, and take care that it does not come out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If moisture runs out, that it has colored [the abscess], do as I have said about other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 And if after the incision tool no moisture comes out, know that it is fat, then do it in crossways, take hold of it with the tweezers and lightly peel it from both sides and ward the coat where it lies so you draw it out whole with the sinew.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If you cannot draw it safely, draw it in parts so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if something remains, it will return to us many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If a small amount remains and does not cause you grief, apply some corrosive powders to the wound, hold the wound together, cover it with warm soothing substances, and treat it with other treatments until it heals.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If it is large, cut the wound into two lips, and heal it with flesh-growing agents.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 If the veins beating against you or someone else hurries and you use glass powder, leave it lying for 2 or 3 days until the wound festers, and let the boiling of blood subside;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to bind what has been left unbound with sutures.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are the shapes of cutting instruments and they come in three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three squares, which are called "albarets", and one that is called "breb", and there are three ways of it:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 Large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistulas.
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are like needles with which witches are sewn, and they are made of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and yellow ones are valued more, and black ones are more proven to surround the swellings of a fistula.
et sont de III manieres:	 There are three kinds of them:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of the funnels are similar to one another, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Large, medium, and small.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 And if the ones with two humps have three shapes as well;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 And if the ones with three humps have three shapes, and are also of three kinds.
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 And if the ones with two humps have one hump only, and the ones with one hump are of three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 And all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The main ones with which we perform this are sharp, and of those who do not cut at all except from one side, for we scrape the nails with them, so as not to strike the vein or the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And of these probing instruments, the needles are tied in bunches so that the patient does not prick themselves at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	 And there are three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you can see;
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 do not use them in any other place except for the chest (ribs), like legs, arms, breasts, and ankles, and similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 Sometimes another small instrument similar to fistulae scissors is used in this way to draw blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is put to the place that stops bleeding from veins, arteries, and sometimes returns according to this large shape:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to become corrupt, until they resemble female breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 and remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to treat them should do it according to this form from line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 then cut the fat, apply medicine to the wound containing burnt charcoal, then close the two lips of the wound with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 And if the arm is bent downward and flattened due to its size, as happens with women, then it should be split into two halves, through two similar-looking cracks.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 so that one remains attached to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape, from this line b to line g;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then peel the skin between the two jaws, remove the fat, and bring what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for treatment, until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 if it is not healed or the incision is not completely made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then you must fill the wound with moistened cotton in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And leave it until it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from the buttocks are cases of hard scrofula where there is moisture contained within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line 'b' up to the line 'g': [This part doesn't need translation as it is a technical instruction about making a surgical cut.]
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the entire bowel in the abscess is emptied, fill the wound with old cotton and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton and treat it with ointment until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula (or scrofulous lesions), then make incisions in it as we have said before in scrofula incisions, and if the wound swells, apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	The cutting of an artery.
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When an artery is ruptured and the skin above it is stuck together, there are often abscesses, and the same happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if it is recognized in such a way that it is due to an artery, the abscess is long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it with your hand, you should stretch it.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is the vein, it feels shallow and round.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is foolish to cover this abscess, and especially when it is under the armpit and near the joints or neck and in other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore, it is necessary to avoid iron treatment, and the same goes for those with head injuries, and in the case of a swelling from an artery, they should be cut through the skin on top.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 Then open the groin area, and carefully disconnect the artery from the fabrics, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then insert an awl underneath it and make it pierce until the other side, and tie the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then prick the place between the two ligatures with a probe until the abscess comes out.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 Then apply the cure by clamping a splint, as long as the limb cries out.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply the cure with soothing ointment until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 And if the abscess is due to the opening of a vein, you must anoint your hand with what you can from the abscess all over the skin, then put the needle under the place that you hold in your hand and make it pierce through, and have double thread so you can draw it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 Then tie the abscess, as I told you, or bind one of its parts with two threads around the two shoulders.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the thread has gone through, push another needle all along the length of the abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tighten the threads in four places.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 Then press the abscess until the pus comes out, then press the cavity and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat it with bandages and salves until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	from abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	Just like abscesses can occur in the artery and vein, so too do abscesses come to the nerves when they are injured or from excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 This happens more often in shoulders and fingers and all places where there are joints, and it is the greatest abscess, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in various positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is squeezed, the patient feels pain, but it is not at the skin level, but beneath the flesh.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 It should be bound from all sides, and it does not move forward or backward, nor below nor above; the one in a joint should not be treated with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 By chance, it may come to contraction;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And whoever is [either] head or forehead, [should make] the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is large, suspend it on the incision, and strip it, then cut and close the wound at the suture, and the cure until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Large lumps hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes it happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "fungus" due to its resemblance [to mushrooms], and the roots are subtle, and the heads large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and there are some small ones and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 And I saw a man who had two bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had small roots, and were cut open, and continually oozed moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I weighed them and found one to be 18 ounces, the other 6, and the wounds in the incision were such that you can see if the patient is moist, and the color of the artery is pale and moist with a thin root.
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If you cut it with a broad spatula, let the fire cautery be present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For during the dissection there are often excessive bleeding, and if it threatens you, quickly use the cautery.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 And if you see the patient fearful and afraid of the incision with iron, take a well-made thread, and tie the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 Then hold it tight, and do not stop tightening the thread of flax until it stops the artery flow, and he feels labor pains.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 If the roots are large, he is afraid to press himself because of his stomach, but you can cover half of it, then burn it so it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then heal the wound, and ensure that you do not cover the thread that is of a dark color and poor quality and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of syphilis afterward.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil bursts out
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the swelling appears due to cauterization of a wound or a cut on the face, and it is on the stomach and among some of the boils, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as described before, or due to inflammation;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And if it is through the break of the shaft and the exit of the bulb, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it is a light thing without pain, and open with various exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	If it is caused by the outburst from the intestines, then it is more various. When you press it with your hands and it recedes, it returns again, and sometimes if it is sutured, it grows greatly at the entrance of the bath and due to hard work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it's due to moisture, it is light and opens wide when you press it with your hand, do not force it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it's due to blood, the abscess opens with these signs: large and hard, and is filled according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it's due to ventosity (gas), it is soft to the touch, and the work is that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or gas.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary to let the treatment rest.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For there is doubt and fear, as I have told you in the chapter on abscesses, concerning the artery and vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is from the intestine or the belly, you must instruct the patient to lean their backside, and stretch out straight, then sign all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 Then command him to press gently between your hands, then go around the place you have signed with a small spoon, then stretch out half of the abscess above the large incision.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 Then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk, and let the patient lean forward.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 Then open half of the extended abscess tied with the thread, and put your index finger in, seeking the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 If you find it caught by the cord, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find the boil, take it at its onset, and cut off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery becomes constricted or the vein, go gently around it, then return to your work and take two needles, and thrust two wires through them, and thrust the needles around that which you have made in a cross shape so that you pierce it.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 then press the abscess in four leagues above the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the place until it can heal by itself; the dead flesh will decay of its own accord.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 or you cut it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 Draw out the blood or moisture that you find, then heal the place as necessary, and suture the place.
dou chancre	draw the boil
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have stated in the preceding section the likenesses of scrofula, and how it should be treated with medicines, and how the cure of iron should be administered.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 Now we will speak of scrofula occurring in the arm, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when a scrofula occurs in a place where it can be shaved like scrofula in the breast or thigh, or in similar places, it should be completely removed when it first appears.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, you must not approach it, for I can never heal it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 In this context, "ne nulz" means "no one", and "n'en sana onques devant moi" means "can never heal it before me". This is a continuation of the previous sentence.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the workings, when they are in place where they can be removed, as we have said, is that you cleanse once the sick person of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then make him purge if there is manifest repletion, then prepare the patient well to perform the working.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 then you throw your onions or boils and all the hair from every part, and the bone from every part leaving nothing.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And let the blood flow freely, press well on the spot with your hand or something, and if the movement of blood opposes the incision of an artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is coagulated.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it from another treatment as long as it is healthy.
de ydropisie	The translation for this line would be "of hydropisia." Hydropisia refers to a medical condition in which there is excessive accumulation of water or fluid in the body tissues, specifically in the abdominal cavity.
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division the resemblances of dropsy, and how its assembly is made, and the signs for each resemblance, and the medicine treatment and that which is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 if it breaks out only.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 And one should not use iron in these two resemblances.
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 That is to say, tympanites and hypochondriac, because it is deadly.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 Therefore, when you treat this appearance of edema, called "eclites," and the cure does not help, consider whether the patient is weak or if they have another disease apart from edema, such as abdominal distension and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 do not apply iron to it, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 and if you see the patient with strong strength, and they have no other disease except for edema alone, and they are not too old nor too young, then you should proceed as follows:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 lay the patient flat on your hands, and the assistant presses the abdomen towards the lower part of the back, then take the pointed spatula as follows:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through its second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 At the point, and it should not be so deep that it can reach the intestines when inserted, and it should not be burned.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 Then look if the pus is directed towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 you should make an incision below the abscess, three fingers' breadths right beneath the tip of the finger.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 and if the pus is due to liver disease, make your incision on the left side, three fingers' breadths.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 and if it is due to the stone, make your incision on the right side, but do not let the patient lie over the incision so that the fluid does not flow to the weak side.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 then pierce the skin with the instrument, push it in, and insert your hand into the hole up to the spatula, or as far as the thickness of a nail.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the shoulderblade until the spatula reaches its position, and it is the upper part [of the shoulder], then draw [it] out, and insert this instrument with the shape shown here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it resembles a thin silver chain and is made of iron or light lead, and at the lower part there are small holes.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 And on one side, three small holes are placed.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 And two on the other side, and one on the other [side].
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And the head is shaped like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes make with their pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 On the top [of the head] is the handle, so that when the instrument comes to the upper part, press now on the tool.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 Empty then the half or the third part, for if you empty more than is necessary in that hour, accidentally, the patient might die due to the resolution of their spirit from the weapon, or they may fall down or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 but empty according to its potency and according to what the patient's condition and pulse indicate.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 then draw the instrument and hold back the liquid, it is now retained for the caution that prevents bleeding from the wound, as I spoke about before, pierce in this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 then use the instrument again on the next day if you see the patient suffering and draw a small amount of liquid.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do this every day, and avoid drinking too much water until it doesn't remain but a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 And if you doubt the patient, and give him too much water, cure it with the sepulchre or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing, and expose to the sun, and anoint with wine;
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 and cure it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the removal of water, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who have no foreskin or whose foreskins are small and not in the right place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary that you make a very thin incision in all spittle-like places according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 Then place a small, thin cloth plug and hold it for 3 or 4 days until he wants to urinate, then remove the plug, let him urinate, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And by chance it is not closed at all, because the urine that comes out does not keep it shut.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 For the person whose wound is small, the treatment with a cup made of lead, as we have said, will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who do not have the foreskin in its place are circumcised, because no one is born with a foreskin on the head of the penis, which prevents them from urinating before they pull up their foreskin.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 and cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the wife, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 And the procedure is that the patient lies on his back, with the head of the penis and the tip placed as close together as the end of a feather, so that the foreskin meets in the middle, as it should.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of bleeding that often occurs, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from those who are bleeding, and heal the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the penis ulcers
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Often this albatus appears in the penis, and it is a sign of bad flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 And there are malignant and non-malignant ones in it.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 You must grasp them with a very fine loop, strike and clean them all, then place dampened Egyptian cotton bandage on top.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then cure it with diaphinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, of a greenish-yellow color and foul smelling, then you must apply cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have struck it and the albathe is inside in the shaft and part within the skin and part outside, you must remove the inner albathe first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is sutured, cure it externally.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you cure it together, the shafts are not certain that they will not be pierced, and darkness and corruption come into the shaft and where it is.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You must cover all that is black and corrupted, then bind it with an ointment made of honey and flour which is made from the peel of pomegranate rinds and vine leaves, then cure it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery as follows:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cauteries aid in combined applications:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 it means, in the drawing of blood, and in rotting.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 if the head of the penis is rotten and pulled out, it is necessary that you insert or lead a sheath of yew, and make the patient urinate.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 if the skin is torn on the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then you must scrape it with the instrument of comb, until the ligaments are loosened, and the head of the penis is released from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 if it is necessary to talk about this, you must scrape it with the spatula slightly from the head of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then gently insert it (the dislocated joint) between them (the two bones), and place a thin linen cloth dampened in cold water on it, so that it does not swell again.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not a continuous cutting as other wounds are;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 Nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on children, it is necessary that we do the best and easiest work for their salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for it is not in their law, and we have only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 Because I have seen the majority of masters and healers who perform circumcisions around there (the area), using force, and without using anesthesia.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 the pain is avoided because there are two cloths (or layers), and by chance if one of them is struck above, the one below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 And it (should) recover covered, and the pain is doubled, and at the cleansing which is deep in the limb, there is no assurance of the point of the member.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And in the cleaning of the nail by chance, the iron may slip, and it will spoil the work, and many times (it) arises so that there is no need for cleansing, and I have seen this happen.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In the amputation which is made all through the thread of iron I have found the benefit of the experiment, for the saw cuts exactly as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you press your hand, cut evenly all the time;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but that the thread be well tightened around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 and the manner of the first work is that you make the child understand that you only bind the thread around the penis, and then let it be relieved in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then make it be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infant does not see them, nor any of the tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand at the neck and blow or squeeze, and draw it up as far as the head of the neck is in.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 then clean it well of the filth that has gathered there, then tie the joint with a double thread, then tie it under the foot to another cord.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and hold it as required by the second knot at the elbow and the wrist, and press between the two cords, then pull the cord quickly upwards and draw the head of the neck.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let the blood come out little by little, for it is the healing process.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And pour powder on top and above the powder, you stick a glue made from cooked egg white steeped in rose water, mixed with fresh and good rose oil, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The shape of the force during the healing process is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The two shoulders should be tender and sharp, and the shoulders equally as wide as the hand.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The error in healing is when the cavity within is incised.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore you must stretch it with your nail so that it becomes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And stretch it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then take tweezers and stretch it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the scrotum swells, let it be until the abscesses have subsided, and lightly incise (or lance) the skin.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 If the head can move like you can move it, and keep away from the area of the scrotum, it will not be harmed.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Then treat the wound with healing powders, as we have said or treated with powders, and if it moves too much, it will go above (or grow), but it will not be harmed.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it (the wound) until it heals.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is due to a stone in the bladder, or frozen blood, or watery stool, or a child born dead, or similar things, as we have said in the division (section).
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 And if the urine is not released, and you see it is retained due to a stone or neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees;
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 and the feet should be placed on the back, extend his belly from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 then the neck of the bladder is pressed towards the expression of the stone above it, so that the urine is released;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 and if it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must provide extraction with all the instruments called "syringe," of which this is its form:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And let it be of fine silver thread, as thin as a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And let the cable be a palm and a half long, and be fine at one end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of the urine outflow is that you take a double thread, tie one end of the cotton or woolen yarn to it and push the threaded end into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and squeeze the excess of the cotton and push it up to the top of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and cold water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then bend the rod above towards the buttock.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then place the syringe towards the bladder, and make the patient feel it arrive at the empty spot, and this is not done according to this order for any other reason than because the one guiding it makes a turn.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then wind the thread around all the woolen yarn, and make the patient urinate following the yarn, then remove it, and correct the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 Then repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	On the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorches or blood comes in the bladder, or pus is assembled there and you see it distill liquids and medicines, then use all the instruments called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed, and if it has been pierced three times:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 One on one side, and the other on the other; as you see.
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 And the joints of the neck shall be closed in such a way that the medicine is thick enough to stop the worm, if one can drain the moisture and insert what is necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 And when you see that you throw your medicine into the bladder, put the head of the cuestour in the moisture and draw out the worm that is there;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 If you draw out the moisture from the cuestour, then push the drawing hard;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 The worm will enter into it (the cuestour), and will come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 And this is the form of the subtle enema with which one instills the bladder:
si est ci:	 If it is here (meaning the patient):
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or iron, and the head is raised higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and under the arm where the bones fall;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 then take a sheep bladder and put the moisture which you use to cleanse the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with good doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 then insert the head of the bladder into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder with all the moisture coming out, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 and if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment, make a circle, and pierce it roundly;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then push the strong thread into those wounds, then gather the circle in the same way one gathers a thimble, and put oil, moisture, and water inside it and tie it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And do as you have done with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	From the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have already said in the section on stones about the methods of extraction and medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 I have also said the difference between a stone embedded in the flesh and all the signs, and for which stones one should operate with incision.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 And I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stone embedded in the bladder occurs more often in children, and it is a sign that water jumps out of the bladder like water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And he opens an hernia, and greatly stretches the patient's vein, and pierces it many times, then ties it.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 And for these reasons, the foundations are filled with fear.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and it is moderate in those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the treatment of large arrows is lighter than that of small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to treatment, it is first necessary to purify the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the feces that are in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes obstructs seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet, and bend them back and move downwards so that the arrow points to the depth of the bladder, and withdraw it once towards the top.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make him sit between your hands prepared, and his hands should be below his thighs, so that the bladder is completely descending downwards.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Touch it inside and hold it there.
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall at the touch, moisten your left index finger with oil, if the patient is an infant, or use your thumb, if the patient is a fully-grown young person.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 Push it into its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull the stone to the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 Then press on it with your finger and push it towards the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to spread his right hand upwards, and with his left hand peel off the skin that is under the testicles in the area where the cutting is to be done.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then push the large spatula, of which it is the shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And place it between that which is between the cheeks and the bottom, not in the middle but at the left side of the nose.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 and be straight above the stone, and your thumb should be at the bottom or base, and the tip of the spatula should be wide in length but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 In case the pressure on the thumb which is at the base causes it to jump out due to effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 And know that there are several stones or areas with edges and borders:
si est griés a issir;	 if it is gritted out (? - not sure about this one);
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And if there is a concave area, similar to a plum pit and rounded, from which the stone easily emerges.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 For the one with angles and edges, make the cut larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 And if it does not jump, then you must press with pliers that are similar to a chisel at the tip, to forcibly move the stone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or you push underneath the instrument curved slightly at the tip.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot maneuver it in this way, then enlarge the small opening a bit, and if it does not burst out, stretch it with glass.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are more than one stone, then push the largest one against the bladder's neck first, then strike it, then pull it, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 If it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things happen to the sick person:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 or he dies, or the urine comes immediately due to the loins which cannot be sealed.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 but still make efforts to drain it, or break it with pincers, as you draw it in pieces.
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and put on it a damp cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 then lay the sick person on his neck and do not undo the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you undo it (the bindings), immerse the wound well in oil and water, then apply the ointment "dyafinicon" and "basilicon" until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 And if an abscess swells and corrodes in the wound, or freezing of blood occurs in the bladder, and as a result the urine is retained, which is known to come without jumping with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Therefore draw your knife on the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains there, the bladder will burst, and it will be ruined.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Lift the wound of pus and pus-like matter, and help it in every way you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary that all the wounds you treat, that you tie them together with bandages, and apply the medicine on top of the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 If the stone is small and it is led from the urethra and thrust in, and the urine cannot come out;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 if you treat this as I have said, that you cut it many times, then you are excused from punishment for this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod in the shape as follows and sharpened at four angles, pointed on one thread:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take the thread and tie it around the rod beneath the stone, so that it cannot return to the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Push the drill lightly into the rod until it reaches the stone.
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 Turn the drill gently in the stone, bit by bit, as you can pierce the stone from the other side.
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 The urine will soon come out, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the rod.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 It will be broken and fly out with the urine, and the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, tie the thread around the stone and the other end outside, then push the rod towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the frozen blood from the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal until he is sound.
de la piere des femmes	from women's stones (kidney stones)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 It happens that stone be engendered in women, and if it ever occurs, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 The first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second one is that it cannot be found a woman well versed who undresses herself in front of mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third one is that by chance it cannot be found a woman well versed in this handcraft.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth way is that the stone of a woman is deeper than that of a man, for this reason you must make a more profound incision and it causes great fear. And if you need to do it, then you must take a skilled midwife, and even though she is hard to find, do not resort to using an unchaste mirror;
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 and show a wise bailiff in the affairs of women or a woman who knows some part of the art, and command her to do what you command in the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And examine very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then one must place the finger or probe and search for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 and if it is found, one should hold it with the finger under it, and instruct the woman to push her hand or press against the patient, and search and press her left hand on the bladder.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If it is found, it should be moved gently from the entrance of the bladder downwards until it reaches the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then strike the stone at the root of the thigh near the mons pubis, where it can be moved easily, and feel the stone in that area.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 and do not move the finger above or below the stone, and cut it (the stone) at first small parts;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then push the iron into the abdomen, if you feel the arrow, press the wound so that the arrow can come out easily, and know that there are many kinds of arrows.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 this is to know: small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 know the appearances to understand the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the arrow escapes you, put it in its place with broken vitriol and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work until the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you about in extracting the arrow for men to help you in your task.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 and if the arrow escapes you, and it is an artery that is cut, put powder on the place and hold with tourniquets and bandages, do not start again, let the arrow be and do not draw it out, for there is danger the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood has subsided and the wounds have closed, return to your work, until the arrow is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	of a carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Aquous (is) nothing other than a collection of moisture or white chalk which is beneath the coil of the egg, containing water.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and is called "syfac," and sometimes it is properly in the eggshell, if one thinks that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 and it is the membrane of the shell between the white chalk (we have said).
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 It does not happen unless there is a hole (in the shell).
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this hernia is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and the matter spreads out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from impact on the eggshell, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white watery liquid, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And these are the signs to recognize this assembly, for if it is white and shapeless as we have said, it is an abscess; it is long like an egg, and does not open the eyes, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the very cloth (of the abscess), it is an abscess with a part of an egg and for that reason one thinks that it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if there is moisture between the outer layer (of the eye) and the white shapeless (area), one can feel it well.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you must test with all the introducer (instrument) and thus determine its form as mentioned above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside based on the probe that comes afterwards.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we treat it with iron, the patient should be purified to our ability and the filling of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then lay him on his back, upon something slightly high, and put much cloth under him.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 then lie him on his left side, and instruct the assistant to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the shoulders.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 then take the spatula, strike the skin of the shoulders along its length down to the end of the tip, and make the incision straight in dividing the skin of the shoulders up to the elbow, and peel it off delicately according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 then pierce the skin deeply with water, and draw out all the water, and then put your fingers, and stretch the skin upward.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Cut through or in pieces the ribcage of him finely, otherwise if you do not cut it skillfully, the wound will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 If the egg jumps in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the bladder.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then assemble the two bellies of the kidneys in one stitch, then heal it as with other wounds, until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the discharge of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then cut the kidney with everything attached and extract the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if the humerus is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 If the other part is placed similarly to how you did the first one, then squeeze out the blood and put moistened linen soaked in rose oil on the wound.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and put another piece of moistened linen soaked in wine and oil on both sides, and place bandages over them, and tie it all up with the same kind of string as shown here.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take the bandages and fill them with hempen cloth as shown here, sewn together in the shape of a collar for the arm, one end grasps the base up to the back, the other at the handle.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other shoulder joint is placed on top of the two angles, and all the rest is gathered in the bracelet loop.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 At times, this ramie (or bandage) of fire cautery is used in place of iron size, and it is that you take the cauterizing cultellar knife, touch the skin of the wound, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the whitish substance containing the aqueous fluid is exposed;
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 if you take the cautery in this form and pierce the whitish substance at once with it, then scrape off that thin layer of heated cautery;
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And beat it in all ways as you can until it is burned completely.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and make sure the fire does not touch the egg (meaning: yolk).
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And know that this work is more wholesome;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 and moves guarding against bleeding, and moistens that the works of cutting;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 and if nothing happens contrary to you, or abscesses swell or bleeding or something else, treat what happens contrary to you, according to what has been said before;
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, introduce perforation as I tell you, and it is that when you are quite certain through the signs we have said that a hernia is present, make the patient sit on an elevated seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 then pierce the abscess in the part beneath all the spoutulum wide and place the perforation along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp corners flow freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 then place cotton on the wound, tie it up, and let the remaining blood flow freely, then cure it until the wound is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 and if the white cloth does not allow blood to flow from the wound's mouth, then you must put a feather or instrument for draining fluid from hydropics into it, as described previously;
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 and widen the wound, check that the blood returns, and wait for it to heal, which is about 6 months or more, and when it heals as described before, the patient will recover their health.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the kidneys
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Check that in the section of this artery there is fear of various positions, so it seems to me that it is better to leave it.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I shall tell you the work and the likeness of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 Then many abscesses come in bodies, and especially in joints;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And this happens frequently.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 This is caused by an excess of sour and wet, which is spread in the kidneys or by trauma.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 The color of the abscess follows the body's complexion;
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 No pain is found, and the abscess is severe.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 Sometimes an abscess is hard and stony, of such color, and at times comes from the artery or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is due to an artery, it can be recognized by the hot swelling of the abscess when you press with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 It should not be touched.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 An abscess caused by swelling of a vein can be recognized by its appearance when touched with the fingers and can be safely cut open in this case and in similar cases.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you cut the core of the cheeks, then lift up the egg, and pull the thread from the white yolk, and free the suspension of all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already softened with these born charms, then it is necessary that you draw the egg and crush it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is swollen in the yolk, or in that which is within the vessels, you must release all that softness, and crush it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the hernia is at the rear end, you should cut it all out and extract the egg as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	When your work is done, apply the wound with moistened linen in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the kidneys
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in a covering resembling a purse, with the softening of the cheeks, and the patient becomes silent as he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the cure for this disease is as risky as the one before, and yet we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then push the suspension ligament from the coccyx down towards your hands, to all the vessels that are near the verge, and mark them with the master's fingers, and stretch them out fully.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then with a sharp pointed spatula, wide enough to reach the vessels, uncover them and then skin from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 Then insert a needle with double thread and tie it to the first place where blood has appeared, and then tie it to the other side.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 Then strike it in the middle directly, according to the length of the body, and pull out the corrupt moisture.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then heal the wound as one would heal another [similar] wound, so that no animal cheeps that is fed by either side [of the wound].
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 for in this way no harm comes, and if all the animals come to it, then you must draw blood from all of them.
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 so that the eyes do not lose their milk due to the wounds of animals, and they dry up and cannot help themselves.
de la routure dou syfac	From the rupture of the sifac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The consequences of this dislocation are by the section that comes out or the extension above the stomach in the area of the inguinal region, which is why the intestines descend from that cut through one of the eyes.
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 and this cut is either the syphac or the extension of it, and these two types of wounds come from many causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 or of percussion, or of a jump, or of a fall, or of lifting a heavy load, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 and the signs when it is of stretching the sinew, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 and abscesses are equal towards the full, because the sinew follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is of the section of the dislocation, are that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear differently, under the skin near, and this is due to the outflow of the intestine and the body turning away from the dislocation.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines come out through the hernia, and are retained there, and cause great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments there is fear, therefore it is necessary to escape from them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the method of work is that you instruct the patient to pull the intestine with their hand into the wound if they can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 then put it on its neck. hold it between your hands, and lift the legs;
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 then stretch the skin above, and cut all the hide of the cheeks with long strokes;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert the little fingers of the waist deeply according to what is necessary to open the wound, and so that the thumb can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then peel off the flesh that is beneath the skin of the nails, until the white flesh under the skin is exposed all around.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your index finger into the nail where the nail and the white flesh under the skin meet, between the second layer of flesh, and separate the part that is behind the fingernail and between the second layer of flesh.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And then move your right hand inside the nail cavity, and lift the white flesh upward to your left hand, and peel off the fingernail entirely in the direction of the waist.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 And command the minister to extend the arm upwards, and untie the one that is behind the elbow.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 And if there is any evidence of the intestines wrapped around or hardened white matter, and if you find anything like that, push it into the abdomen.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with a thick thread made from X threads, and push it into the back part of the white matter, which is after the hide of the kidneys.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the waist, then cut the hairs that appear from the threads, as long as there are four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then put them one on top of the other in a cross shape and tie the white matter, as we have said is behind the hide of the kidneys, with a strong knot of 2 parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads of the fingers, and tie them together with two bands, so that no one feeding them can enter into it, except abscess pus comes in.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 and place the linen straight according to the first linen of that length two times its own, and afterwards leave a small opening at the end where the swelling is near the bones a finger's width.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 And after all the rest according to the roundness that the egg bears;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 Then cut in the part that is beneath the skin of the eyes, as much as it requires without damaging it, and bend, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then bring dampened wool in oil, apply it to the wounds, and bring the thread that we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites are cauterized as we have said, after the incision, due to fear of bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this often happens, and let the thread stay until it has closed up.
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if it takes a long time to close, warm it with hot water and apply what we have said on it until it has closed.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then treat the wound with another remedy, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I never saw anyone who dared to perform the cure with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is made like a sprig of willow, in this manner you tie the branches after cutting them lightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then cut it [the affected area] in half, and treat the abscess of those who work [the area], until the pus stops.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal as we have said, until it is healthy.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 Sometimes gangrene comes in wounds, as we have said, and open the limbs.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And do not remove any of the internal organs such as bowels, and if some are removed, it is bad, and repair them every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 Furthermore, if it remains too long in this place, the wound or fester, as long as the internal organs are being removed.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 This happens due to the spread of the fester which is in wounds, as we have said, because it is extended, then the limbs are softened and inflamed and opened.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 Sometimes it is healed by iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 and the patient lies supine on his back between your hands, then strike the swelling at the wound site according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 and draw out the pus that is under the skin, then take the iron and place it on the visible part of the abscess;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press down deeply into the belly, then burn the two visible parts of the abscess on top of the iron tip, one after the other;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then remove the iron tip, and do not cover or extend the abscess or anything else, as I have previously told you in the treatment of the ramie of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Then treat it with wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (sutures), if it becomes infected and heals the wound, let it remain until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The fistula (li sifac) is closed, and it has no appearance in the wound, and the cauterization is performed in this place, and it is closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often, the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men due to the internal charms being softened and there is pus visible.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 It is necessary, when one wants to treat it, that you make the patient lie down on their back, and strike the softened skin on the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then bring the two lips together in a stitch, and if you see, first make a seam for the excess skin softened with three or four stitches firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then strike between the stitches, and the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed, and cut the thread.
dou chastrement	The punishment or correction (of a patient)
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that amputations are condemned in our law, and for this reason I would not like to speak about them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And it is not necessary unless for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 because the mirror in amputation answers when asked, and in amputation, the treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other, because we often need to use training with some animals to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 Then I say that trainings are done in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 or by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In that which we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until its joints are softened and loosened.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Hold them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 The cautery of the incision:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you mark the beast, and press the skin of the hocks with your left hand, then tie the thong, and strike on each ear when you have well flayed them;
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave any small piece of flesh or subtle flesh that is on the hooves;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 And this method of cauterization is better than the one made by attraction, because at attraction something from the hocks may remain accidentally, causing the beast to desire lust;
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites (intersex individuals)
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditus is according to two kinds of humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 One such case is when there are two openings wide apart as in the shape of a woman's figure with hair between them and sometimes urinating inside (courting).
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other method is in women, and it has above the hilt like a rod and they pierce it.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the treatment for the man and the woman is that you press the closed wounds together and treat them as other wounds;
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second manner, in men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, there is no cure.
de la tentigene	The translation for this line is:
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 Tumor is a closed wound on the natural part, as long as it is too unsightly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 And some women have them as large as a hand, and this is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 You must dye the excess of the tumor with your hand or any cloth and press it gently;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not go too deep, so as not for blood to flow out, then cure it with other cure until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the womb, and the membrane bursts, and by chance it jumps out, and it resembles a cow's disease, and for this reason it is called the "cow disease" by the ancients.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It must be cut as we have said before, and it should be cured until it is healed.
de erratique	From erratic [or wandering]
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 It is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceived or if the wound is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 And it may be by natural birth or accident due to disease that comes upon it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it may be a sore joined together, or from the subtle matter of pus, and is made deep in the womb, or in the flanks, or inside, or anywhere else.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 Prevent conception, pregnancy, and flowers to grow.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And the knowledge of these things is through the observation of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the discharge approaches, it may be in your hand or at your side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a soft and subtle pain near the liver, hurry and search for it in this manner:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Place your two index fingers together, and the woman lies on her back, spreading her legs.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 Then feel the two livers form, until the soft subtle pain is found, and be aware of the openings.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 Then take linen, dampen it in oil, and place it on the place, let the woman lie flat each day, so that it cannot adhere.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the wound is hard and thick, you should cut it with a spatula resembling a myrtle leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the opening is of new cheese, suspend it to an onion and cover it with clay.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 And have the medicine to stop blood, such as alum, dragon's blood, incense, and egg yolk in abundance.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 then introduce a broad strip of linen cloth so that the wound cannot be sutured.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and it should remain long, and you should also provide a dry tent made of linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then let it be healed by other treatments until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when a child is born in marriage, it should be covered according to this manner, unless abscesses are swollen.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 To the swollen abscess that is within marriage, one should not make any attempt to touch it.
des emorroides	Hemorrhoids [or Piles]
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins without cortical treatment, and when hemorrhoids become old, they become hard.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And as we said in the division, their likenesses and signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are fully formed in marriage, and cannot be felt, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the sore, which can be felt, are those who can be healed.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore you must put the woman in a cold house, then boil the eel to the point of tenderness, and chop it into its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as alum and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then place his feet on the surface for an hour, then put them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 If bleeding occurs, make it sit in a decoction of sumac bark, apple peel, hawthorn and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg yolk, and apply it as a plaster on its back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it stops bleeding, it is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If not, make him wear armpits on his back and avoid hitting the breasts;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take linen, wet it in juices of plantain or marsh-mallow with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess rests, treat the place with ointment until it is healed;
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And the one called "albathir" is red, and resembles a sharp head. It needs to be covered as I mentioned in the remedy.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then nurse it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	emorroidal openings (of the anus)
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many types of abscess come in marriage, such as boils and hard abscesses, herpes, scabs, fissures, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I mentioned in the classification.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore, I must explain in this treatise the hot abscess that comes in marriage, which is not like other abscesses.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you wish to know the work of iron, look to see if the abscess is acute at the beginning of its arrival, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hasten to pierce [the abscess], but allow it to mature until the pain is eased;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 Then make the patient sit on a low stool or he may lean, and support his back and gather his feet at the parts away from the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 Spread his thighs, place his arms under his knees, and bind them well with a good linen.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then suck the boil towards the right side, and introduce the instrument with which one operates the mouth of the bladder, by which follows the shape.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 It is necessary that when you introduce this instrument, that you pierce the right side first to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters within from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not prick the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the incision is larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with cloth, so that the incision does not hurt.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And it is necessary to put the handle of the instrument on top and to heat the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 And when the abscess opens, and one touches it with a soft hand, it must be covered with a linen cloth.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the boil is empty, you must put damp and oiled rags or dry green oil in the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 And put a clean and damp linen cloth inside the wound, and on the outside of the wound and on the handle of the instrument place a hot or mustard-soaked linen cloth.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then the patient is cured after two days of ointment application, as long as he is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And sometimes they lift the sore and the wound by cleansing with water and honey, and then with water or liquorice roots and long-cooked Aristolochia.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then return to the ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is sutured in the flesh, you should avoid iron cautery, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	From childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 Firstly, the woman should know the form of natural childbirth, and the signs when you see the woman after pressing from below, and desire to urinate.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then, the child hastens to be born with force.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Therefore, recognize that the childbirth is according to the natural form, and it comes out with its head, and the afterbirth follows.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his stomach, so that the child comes out quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 for when he descends upon his head, the second one follows with him, and the husband of his superfluidities is cleansed by good purification.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and this one who comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For sometimes he comes upon his feet, and the belly or shoulder, or hands, or upon the stomach or spine, and is transformed accidentally at the neck, and in other bad shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 it is necessary that the bailiff be wise and skilled in these matters, and guard against error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes in which one should help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If a child comes upon the head by natural birth, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or have women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and anoint it with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then insert the plaster between his palms using the small spatula shown here:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and cut the second tooth, and grind it with the nail as far as the moisture that is within the core comes out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and bind the woman's belly until the child is born, and if it does not come out, you must fumigate the woman with fennel seeds and oil of lavender.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then make her bind herself and purge herself with cumin, hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Instructions for the thigh.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 If the hands come out (dislocate), you must gently pull them back a little at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot enter (reduce), place the woman on the seat (examining table) and raise her feet.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then tip the chair onto the ground, and hold the woman so she does not cry out during the tilting of the chair.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 if the hands cannot enter and the thigh is dead, strike the hands with the knife placed in front (of you), extract the child, and reset it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 Of the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the thigh comes above the feet, push it upwards;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then turn it a little at a time until it is level.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take the piece and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If it reaches up to the thighs, instruct him to grab hold of it, and make it vomit out of his anus.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 If it goes forward, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it little by little until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Therefore it should be done gently.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not go forward as we have experienced, say that he should take myrrh from above, oil of sesame, and melted gum, and grind all in a mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 And put the mixture inside a woman's nature and apply this ointment externally, then make him sit in hot water up to his chest.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 And when it is softened beneath, let the collar of myrrh be placed on him, and let him rest for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make it sit on the chair, then make it vomit and hold its mouth and nose, and press its belly gently, for the infant is about to be born now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	Of the birth of the child on its genitals
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the baby comes in this form, put the midwife's hands little by little.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 then be supported on its neck, and let the feet hang downwards, and it lies on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 and fold its hands little by little, and then press its hands above the belly, and push the hips downwards until it is prepared for delivery.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 if the baby does not come out, take its feet and help it come out, then push its stomach upwards, and put your hands there.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 And you pull the child little by little;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Instruct the woman that she should take hold of herself until the baby is born.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The birth of a child that comes out with one hand extended.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to devise how to return the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 if it cannot be returned, raise the woman and walk.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If she cannot walk, have her lie on the bed, and bend her legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 Then bring the belladonna that I have mentioned.
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 And if she does not give birth, have her sit on the chair, then study how to return the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 Pull the child according to its natural shape, make her vomit, and have her hold herself until the baby is born for sure.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby by the neck and spread your hands apart, then turn your body towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 It is necessary that the barber press his hand, then turns it slowly and gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 And when they are even, he puts some muscle-relaxing substance of alum and oil (as we have said), then commands it to move slowly.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grab it;
et la fai esternuer.	 and make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way, treat all similarly
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When the second finger comes in this manner, grab the second finger with your nail until the moisture is evacuated;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 and if the serpent enters on its face or neck, grab it with a rope, so that it is not held back, and kill the serpent.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Then put the child inside, until you have placed it as needed, and command the woman to take hold of herself once:
adonques si istra legierement.	 then gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	From the birth of twins   (In this context, "gemelz" refers to twins, as "gele" means a twin in Old French)
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 and this is not an unusual occurrence, it happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Twins are rare and do not live unless named.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that they can be increased and are deprived by the one who divides them, which is tied to the womb.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 and sometimes they come out naturally like a child under the mother's belly, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if they come out forcefully, the treatment is as we have said, and let the doctor be subtle, and do quickly and gently what he does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And make him do as he needs to move towards health.
de plusors enfans	Of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 There are sometimes formed in the marriage between I, II, III, IV, V or VI, or up to XV, and they are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of his age, and it is necessary that the bailiff knows this because on occasion similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 If he does as he should.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When you are curing the woman of a dead or unborn child, as I said in the division, and it does not come out forcefully, and you are forced to work by hand.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 If you need to know if the woman is of pure virtue, and she has no accident or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 The woman must lie on her back, with her hips inclined downward, and her legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 And the midwife pulls it in two parts, or she is tied to the bed so that she is not treated during childbirth.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then rub the mouth of the wife with moist oil mixed with myrrh and camphor and flax seeds, then anoint the midwife's hands with these oils and these mixtures.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then push gently into the wife, then seek out the place where she pushes the child's head and make sure that it is ready for delivery.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the head is not visible, push the baby's head into the woman's womb, her neck, mouth, palate, below the beard, or in the groin or near the hips, and if the delivery is on feet, push or apply pressure to the middle of the ribs.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 It should be translated as: "And it is necessary that you press the anus with your right hand, and place the thumb between its two sides with the left hand, and push gently with all of your hand, and insert the thumb into one of the places that we have mentioned until it reaches the empty space.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 "And this is the shape of the anus:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 "Then insert into the opposite anus, or if there are multiple, so that the extractions are equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 "And then stretch them equally by moving from both sides to make them come out, and the anuses should be closed to keep them shut, as shown in the figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 "And if there remains any part, then the bailiff presses one of his fingers on oil and pushes it into that part, and pulls the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if there remains no socket, set this bone or higher in place, and hold it until it goes completely out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be returned due to strain, then you must wrap it up in a cloth until it goes completely out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then break the toe at the joint or edge, and you must do the same for the other foot and both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 If the child's head is large and it is narrow at the exit or has a sharp point assembled, then you must insert the spinal needle between your fingers and open the sharp part and extract it.
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 or you turn to the instrument called "almidach," from which the shape of the instruments or chapter that follows it comes.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 And in the same way make him (the patient) fasten himself with a large natural birth;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 Then draw out the bones with pliers, and if the shoulder joint jumps out and it is held by force, cut (the bone) until the moisture that is deeper issues.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 And if it cannot be drawn out, then break it into pieces as much as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if it is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, it is necessary that you pierce (the area) until the moisture runs out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, the delivery is easy, and the guidance towards the mouth of the birth canal is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 And if it is strained in the belly or at the groin, it must be drawn out with the hand wrapped in a cloth.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And make the belly or the groin, until the moisture that is there runs out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if the other member is dislocated and the head remains, press the ball of the hand into the socket of the joint, and pull it back to the mouth of the joint.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 then push in once or twice, and pull harder.
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 and if the mouth of the joint is narrowed due to an abscess that has come, do not try to force it, instead administer moist and fat things.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 apply plasters, and soothe with warm softening and moistening remedies.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 If the intestines are on top of the side and can be pushed back in place, apply what was said earlier for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if it cannot be pushed back, pull it out in pieces, leaving nothing of the contents.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, present him with what we have said in abscess poultices that come for the woman's ailment;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 and if bleeding comes, let it be stopped by tight binding, and present other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had been dead, then the first doctor consulted with another on this matter and revived the fetus.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time an abscess appeared in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened up, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned to care for it, and I thought about it for a long time, but could not heal the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I placed strong plaster on it, and a bone came out, and after some days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I want to treat the wound, and press hard on the bones until the woman is in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 let her remain in this state for a long time, then add some beech bark to the place;
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 and I have not heard of this chapter being used except when the master finds a strange thing that he knows how to help with it.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the marriage to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here comes the form of the forceps, which we use in books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 And to the shoulders turning from their joints. (In this context, "II" is Old French for "the", so the translation could also be "to the shoulders dislocating from their joints.")
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 Furthermore, the cannula should be more delicate in constriction, and made of ebony or boxwood.
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 And its mouth at the end of the cannula should be wide, and the trees' bark edges should be there, and a length of one and a half palm.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 And between the two joints there should be two identical cannulas from the same tube, which are closed at both ends, with a length of half a palm or a little more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 And these two cannulas are inserted into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the shoulders.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, resembling a more subtle and lighter one, should be made of yew or boxwood, similar to the shape of pliers.
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 And let the handle and the jaws, as you see, be one palm length, and two fingers wide.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 And when you see opening the woman on all the equipment, let her sit on the bed, with her feet hanging and legs open, then push the two pliers together into the woman, and hold the head of the instrument underneath between her knees.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Then work your hand on all the equipment, as you have done with the pliers equally, according to the amount that you see opening the mouth of the woman, until the baby does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 These things are all covered and are numerous in their similarities.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the mirrors have been set up, the work is more urgent, and higher for mankind due to their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Never leave the tool unprepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the second pouch is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold in her anus, and then make her vomit by shaking her, and hold your hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 And if she jumps due to this, it is well.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If this does not happen, take the pot, and make it a plug or a stopper, and place herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as rue, anise, chamomile, cascara sagrada, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs, or some of them, are to be cooked or put in water over fire.
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 then insert a straw or tube into the pot, and put the other end into the mouth of the woman, and squeeze as much as the vapors enter inside the woman.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second one jumps hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 If she remains after this cure and does not fart, command the nurse to moist her left hand with oil of sage or mustard oil from elder, then rub it on naturally, and wait for the second time.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 and when she has found it, take it and stretch it slowly, straightening it so that the woman does not shriek at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But it must be moved gently to the right and to the left, and then pulled out.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 Then it will come out and dislocate.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the wound is stretched out, we have said the cure for evacuation and the fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 and if it is not all that we have said, ensure that you do not pull too hard.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But it is necessary that the one at the mouth of the wound tie it to the woman's thigh, then clisterize with an ointment called tetrafarmaçon.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If it will pass and be returned, it will come out stronger.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 However, if it does not pass and if it brings a bad smell to the stomach and head, it burns the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 Therefore, it is necessary to use suitable fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 Any of the ancients have proven fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument used to fumigate the woman for the retention of flowers and the second birth is as follows:    (This sentence is incomplete, so I couldn't provide a full translation)
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it is to be seen like a small stone, and the head is put in its place in nature, and the arms placed over the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And let the fumigation be on hot coals, and the burning until it is extinguished, then start another.
de percier lou fondement	to drill the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, instead they have been stopped up with some subtle sifak.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 Therefore, in birthing, that sifak should be pierced at its proper place, not with a sharp spatula, and carefully so as not to touch the baby.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then put a soft cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then apply an ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will reopen, place a leaden cannula over it (the boil), and leave it for several days, and remove it when the pus begins to move towards the rooms (of the body).
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 Sometimes there comes this stopping of sudden pain from a wound or abscess.
si covient coper celui soudement:	 it is necessary to cover that sudden pain:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 if it can be healed as we have said from the juice of walnuts.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come from under the foundation are swelling, and those that come above the foundation discharge fluid or pus, or in the space between two parts, if there is one fistula or several.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that swelling has been present for a long time, it becomes hard, and sometimes moisture causes a boil or a thin abscess, and at times these fistulas are persistent.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And are known by those who understand that it is either an evacuation or windiness when the patient makes an evacuation, and possibly a jump from one side to another.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 If the ulcers that pierce until the bladder, and up to half the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 reach the joint of the calf, and the knee bone.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus one recognizes a persistent ulcer at its base, and not a persistent one:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And you shall press your thumb or base onto the ulcer, and insert a fine needle of iron or bronze into the ulcer where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 If it has a twisting, then insert a thin reed or horsehair until you feel the reed or hair on your thumb.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you do not feel it (the dislocation), it will not cause death, nor pus, nor wind, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it does not pierce (through)
si te haste dou curer.	 hurry up to heal (it).
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula has perforated up to the bladder or up to the conduit of urine, if it spouts urine and cannot heal with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it pierces up to the knee-joint, then the tendon comes up to the level.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is no twisting and the pain around it, then it remains (in place) bent and does not require medicine or treatment with salves.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these Persian fistulas, there is no remedy but labor, and the vanity of foolish healers who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those which are not Persian and not ancient, there is hope for healing by iron, as I have experienced, and the patient lies between your hands on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And bend the legs up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the belly;
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then insert an arrow tent or a plank if there is curvature, as long as you know where the dislocation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the base, you must insert your index finger, then if it sinks in, you know that the arrow has pierced.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and uncovered or you feel between your finger the shaft or the meat, then you know it has penetrated.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 if not worked at all, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 It is said that some can be well healed, but this happens little;
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 and the help is what is done, it is heating the cautery fine according to the width of the wound, as previously said.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And push everything hot into the fistula until it comes out of its base.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this two or three times until you know that these charred items are burned, which resemble a bird feather.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then heal it with moistened tents in butter until the burn heals, then heal it with a healing ointment that burns and seals.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and if the tent enters but does not penetrate to the base, place a thick layer of charcoal or silk between your hand and the tent, so that you can see the fistula through this cover of charcoal or silk.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 if the head of the fistula starts at its beginning, push the tent forward and then burn it up to the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 And the tenter and sheriff will be delivered.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then bind those charred limbs that appear like a bird's feather, leaving nothing behind.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound gapes and separates, cut between you and it, then cauterize with fire or medicine ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For the fire cautery brings together two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 It is to know, the scalding of these charred things, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 then the treatment of damp tents with butter or boiled cheese until the wound heals over, and when the flesh has grown enough, the burnt things should be put in the wound.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 then treat the wound with onions boiled in strong charcoal and dry medicine.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes all the way up to the bottom, and is separated from the body, push your thumb or finger against the bottom, and check it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel the wound and there is cloth or linen or burnt things between it close to being pierced, have no fear as long as there is a way of faith and hope through one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you can cauterize it as we have said, or you pierce it to the bottom, or if there is pus you put fresh tents on and treat it as before.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 And go not too deep, so that you cover the holding device for the foundation, and the evacuations come through by voluntary sensation.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 Then heal, as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 If by chance it will be healed, then remove that covering and wash it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by a tent or any other instrument pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 Then disinfect the flesh graft in the wound as much as you can.
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 Then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula on the side opposite the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If it will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes fistulas are as follows:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and when you pull the tent in the fistula and it is on the side of the foundation under the skin above, then take a perforated tent at the top in this manner:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and insert one thread twisted in two, and press the tent on the entire length of the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head (or top).
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 If it is perforated on the edge of the foundation within, then draw out the thread of the perforation, thus you push your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 and draw out the head of the thread, and bring together the two shoulders and hold one against the other, and leave it for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 and keep it immobile until the threads heal the charred area and heal.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 Then treat the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not pierce through, make it pierce in all possible ways, if it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not advisable to treat a dislocated joint by covering it tightly and then curing it while it is still unhealthy.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of the spurred spear-point from which a fistula is made is very sharp on one side and cuts through.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 and on the other side it is not sharp, so that one does not cut what one should not cut, as you can see here.
des emorroydes	piles (hemorrhoids)
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 Emorydes are of two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are within the foundation, as with resin grains, and there are small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood, and there may be one or more, and they turn away from the foundation and toward the top of the foundation:
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 but those that turn away have a little moisture, and there is either a little lemon juice or a little blood, and they have the color of the body:
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 and the treatment for those within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain himself to urinate in a chamber until the foundation dissolves, and this appears as thread-like material:
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 if you hurry, and it is with tweezers or you hold it with your nail, then break it at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 And if the finger cannot be held due to moisture, take it with linen cloth or cotton, or a piece of chamois leather.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 Then pull them apart, then strike them, and powder some hot powders on top, instead of a fire cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Or cauterize them as said in the chapter on cautery, then treat with other remedies until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 If the underlying cause cannot be drawn out, then clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean the area where the underlying cause is, so that it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 When the patient washes himself, and if the threads are forced from the abscess, then the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 And it is that you seize them with your nail or tongs, and strike them, then heal them as we have said, until they are healed, and fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 It must be done thus: bring forth the stitching...
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take the twisted thread and put it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side, and turn both ends of the thread under the needle, making it large.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 And form a knot, then knot the thread, and draw out the needle, and do this with all the others, and leave a space for the blood to flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 Then put the damp cloth soaked in rose oil or pitch on top of the foundation, and place it there, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then let it drain until it stops, and when it has stopped, you should treat it with ointment and other treatment, until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	The dry heat of the fire or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often, there is dryness from fever in the intestines, and due to the natural constraint, when the sickness is old and medicine has no effect.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 You must scrape the skin's surface with a small metal tool or nail to prevent it from becoming moist.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 then treat it until it is healed as required.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 If it cannot heal, then repeat the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals completely and the skin is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it until it is healed.
dou fremit	toothache
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 A frog-like growth that appears on the body, and moves a lot.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Sometimes it is difficult to distinguish between the frogs and the tumors, they feel like deathly cold and come all over the body, more in the hands than in other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the remedy is that you take a cane from an goose quill or a strong eagle feather, and put that cane on the trembling, until the purple circles surround the trembling completely.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand along the entire cane so that you cover all of the trembling, and immerse it completely, and harden the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do as with a cat's incision of honey or iron according to this form, and be subtle beneath and draw above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not pierce, but rather press with your fingers.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you wish, you can cauterize the trembling as described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the form of the clyster   (enema)
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes a silver or pitch clyster is made, or melted beeswax or honey.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And sometimes these small and large instruments are made according to those who need them.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when treating children who are weak and painful, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the cucurbit is both small and large, or the belly is tied in this manner:   (Note that "cucurbit" was incorrectly provided instead of "clistere".)
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 And it shall have an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the head pierced within.
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 And on one side it shall be pierced twice, and in the other one.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And the belly or stomach should be filled with medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it shall be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then insert strong thread of twisted thread through each hole, X or Y number around, and bind the stomach as if it is a sheep's purse.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicines are inside, tie it with strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse.
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 This is the form of a circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 And let the medicine not be too hot or too cold, and anoint the head with linseed oil or egg yolk, or something similar, then gently apply it.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the attendants should separate the patient's legs with their two hands, as much as they can see, then remove the linseed oil or egg yolk, and wash the patient's legs in public. If the medicine appears, apply it as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if he sleeps all night, it is a greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you plaster the patient with belly distention caused by gas, and the medicine appears to work quickly, continue until he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 If the hemorrhoids are festered or abscessed, let the linseed oil be as fine as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And this is the form of the fine linseed oil where the skin is stretched:
des plaies	in the treatment of wounds;
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have already said in the division the treatment of wounds;
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 We will tell you about the treatments for hands and medicine, according to completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 The things by which wounds are made are by the thrust of a sword, the cut of a knife or a lance or a staff or an arrow or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 or which are made according to the laws of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the chest, or the stomach, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 I say that when a simple wound or head comes about and the bone is not broken, be careful if it is due to an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, and you doubt the abscess has formed deeply:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 treat it with hot oil immediately if the wound is shallow and there is little blood from the wound, and apply the hot oil to the opposite side of the injured part.
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 empty the patient's fullness of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 And if it does not want to heal, reduce its food, do not drink wine, and do not eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 and place on the wound if an abscess comes up, cotton dampened in rose oil only or in stypic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 And if there is no abscess heated, place it on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air or powder, I will say a little more about it afterwards;
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the arteries have moved it, place some remedies on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by sutures, bring them together by sewing, as I shall say for the abdominal wounds, with suturing.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is exposed to the bone, and hollow, and does not hold together but only slightly, bind it.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then cure the wound with medicine, use tough leather instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked tests (head) and wheat, also asparagus, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find or skin rot, it is not on the bone, bind the entire rotten part and throw away pus, then cure it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, which cannot be stopped without cauterization, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie it with a thread if you find it dislocated.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if that does not help, then cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And you put on this powder that causes it to heal as soon as the air touches it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The method of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense, some of it;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 The blood of a dragon, two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Live coal in three parts, and apply the fine powder to the wound, and press it firmly, until it purges well and unites with all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then tie it up well, and let it heal on its own if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 for medicine should not be applied until the wound is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with only chalk, when there is no incense nor dragon's blood, but the wound has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the burn has opened the wound, by all means do not apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 But apply certain digestive herbs or barley flour made with water and honey until it stops weeping.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 If a bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, pull it apart gently using delicate forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And I will tell you afterwards about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the neck wound    (literal translation)
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between it and one in the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.   (literal translation)
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is the nerves, there is no other instrument but to leave them alone and not put anything binding, because it harms the nerves and makes them retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest part.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But the medicine should be warm, like water boiled in sweet oil and rosewater, and also boiled water moistened with other similar stones, and instantly moist.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, bind it with strips, then let it heal until it becomes healthy.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, pierce or deeper.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And if the artery is cut, bleeding occurs, stop it, tie it, and cauterize as necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the spinal cord of the neck is cut or pierced, and it is guided, keep it, so that the meat goes along with it, then tie the wound above the neck of the neck, and do not touch the throat but return it to its natural position.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then straighten it gradually and leave it for some days, then heal it with disinfected onions until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound presses against the bone, pierce it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are fragments of bone, pull them all out if possible, and those that cannot be pulled out, leave it until the wound heals and disinfects and aligns the opening.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder on it as I said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	If there is bone in the wound and a fistula, treat it as I have said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a lance or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a spear or knife wound and the wound gapes, check if the patient exhales air from the wound.
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Then know that the wound is mortal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 If it is not deep, and the wound is still fresh with blood, do not immediately apply powder or tie it up for the blood to clot and return to the heart, take care of the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 But apply atracitive ointment and tie it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 And if you don't have ointment, place a piece of old cotton in the wound to draw out moisture and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 or 4 days or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 If it does not come spasm or bad tremors of heart nor strangeness of aliens;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see the good dispositions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Treat then with cautery and other remedies, as long as it is sound;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 And if it cannot heal, open it up, then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	 If the treatment is as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or deeper, or on the back, treat that which is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 if it is large, sew it up.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 if it is small, with powder, and if it is pressed into the bone and has pieces in it, open the wound and pull out the fragments if they are dislodged;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 And if they are not drained, let the wound fester, align the extraction.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 For other wounds on various members, the judgments are as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The displacement of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The ruptures in the belly can be large, medium-sized, or small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From a large wound, one time the intestines may protrude, or the nerves of the intestines, due to which the insertion of fingers;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worth less than a large one, because when the intestines are put back in, they are put in piece by piece if not done all at once.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, so they are put back more often, and therefore the smaller wounds are worse than the large ones, because the intestines must be reset to their place more frequently than others.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four kinds:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common stitchings occur in the hernia of the belly, and the stitches for other wounds on the body and the other specific stitches are common for other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And each of them is more suitable with the stitching of the belly, and I will say one and declare it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 When the wound is small, and nothing from the intestines has protruded, and there is little to return, this is suitable for one of the two methods:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are inflated due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, heat it in this way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Moisten a sponge or a piece of linen in warm water only, or cook it in warm quince and cypress and pepper, and rub the intestines until the inflammation is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And at times, this wine constricting is made, and it is to be moved like sulfur for inflammation.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the inflammation spreading, if the intestines are cooked with too much or too little water or poor quality, for this reason the entry is blocked to almost nothing;
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 And if it cannot enter, make a small wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first remedy is boiled leek, which one should not cut excessively or it will lose its effect.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 and this is the instrument to split (it):
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 cut through lengthwise but not too deep, and look at its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines fall out, you should put them back in their natural place in their proper position, if you have the ability, because it is important to do so.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and located in the lower part of the abdomen, you must make the patient lie on their back and raise their legs higher than their head.
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If the wound is in one of the two parts below the abdomen, you must make sure that the affected part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus it is necessary to apply what I say on large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 On small wounds, apply what is provided to you, then take pitying hands that cover the entire wound with their hand and press the lips together.
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 and this is the common way of suturing, and it is that you take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the wound a space, and insert a needle where it has strong thread.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 and pierce the two bones of the skin with the two bones of the sinew, which is under the skin from that part, until you have pierced it through, and join the two heads of the sinew together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 then draw the thread through both parts of the needle, then join the two bones of the wound together in order, and then leave a space, and insert another needle.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 Then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and do not stop doing so according to what is needed for the needles, until all the wound is held in place.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And let the needles be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick; for thin needles pierce through all the flesh, and very thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 because they must be medium-sized.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 And it is not good to push the needles too far into the flesh and skin, so that they do not pierce and open up the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 Then tie the heads of the needles so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put weights or cloths on the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 And this way of stitching with needles is more suitable for small wounds, because it pierces an awl or two there.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second type of stitching is common, and that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the flesh together with a single needle having a medium thick thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 and when you have pierced all the bones four together, then withdraw the needle to the part where you began, in the manner that garments are sewn.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 and put space between each stitch of a fingertip's thickness.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This stitching is for a man, and I sewed a wound that a knight had in the belly, which was stabbed with a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and it was the intestines that were two palms deep inside the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine before it had been XXIV hours [outside], and the wound was sewn up for 15 days, and it healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And they had judged him to be dying, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and I did not treat him with salve because I was in a place where none was found, nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and I placed cotton over the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing [or: stitching]:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 take the needle and thrust it from outside to inside the part.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 when it has penetrated the core straight through, then take hold of the end of the thread or stitch where you inserted the needle, and pierce it from the inside to outside at another spot.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 The meaning of this sentence is that the understanding of this stitch is that you sew it as furriers sew pelts, and that you leave an opening once from one side, then return it from the other, until the stitch is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second manner of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is when two parts are assembled naturally and one edge of the opening is applied to the other edge in this way:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert a needle or point the mirror close by, and make it pierce only that place, and leave the two edges of the opening.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 then turn the needle and make it pierce from the outside to that within, through the two edges of the opening.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then pierce one and the other of the outer part right up to the inside, in two shoulders at the opposite sides.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 And this is the usual way of suturing and the most common method.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said this word, and no one can deny it, that one should sew the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 And one needle should be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, as those who sew leather do.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Know that when the wound is in the belly, the suturing is more painful than other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgments of the wound are such as the judgments of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And when you find the fresh wound filled with blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then put in again the intestines and the flesh.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then put on a healing charcoal powder and if the arrow has moved it, then put on any ointment that is present, until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 And stitch the flesh, and bind the suture and the mirror.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat the wound as the others do, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 If you have no medicine, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to ooze pus, and stir it two times a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For you do not need other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you doubt that the wound spreads to the main members, then it is necessary for you to apply light linen dipped in warm oil or rose oil around the injuries and under the joints.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 And if there is pain or swelling in the belly and it often happens, then clisterize with black wine and particularly when the corruption reaches the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 And pierce it through, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small one.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine known as "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is because of the inflammation of the veins that are there, and due to the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the hernia jumps out of the wound, put it back in place as with the intestine, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is old and has turned black or green, you must tie the part that is black, so that blood flow does not come from it, because there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then catch what is between the ligament, and hang the two heads hanging from the part below the wound so as to straighten the extraction when the sinews fall out, and the wound bows.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the eyeball
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 If the intestines are torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, because I have seen that a man was pierced or stabbed in the abdomen with a spear.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became abscessed and turned into a fistula, and in this there were discharges and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I gave it treatment according to what I knew, and did not stop subsiding until it was healed and the wound closed.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I see it sutured (stitched), I doubt if the patient has something wrong in his stomach.
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and he had no sickness, but remained in better conditions, eating and drinking.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 and some experimenters said that when he has a small wound in the intestines, it should be tied (sutured) in this manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 take large forceps with big handles, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the forceps have opened its mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches its mouth over.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 and then you strike its head, holding it so that it cannot be disengaged (loosened), and then put another forceps following in the same manner until the wound is completely closed.
et cout la plaie.	 And dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the head becomes inflamed in the intestine and brings no harm to the patient, it can be tied with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal in this way:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 take the head of this intestinal thread that is finely sharpened, then tie it to the head of a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread in the needle and sew up the intestine, and pull it out through an incision.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 and this method of sewing inflammation has no force unless according to the way of trust and hope;
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no trick or health, but only subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it heals and forms a cavity, is universally called "fistula", and the same when it is closed and becomes hollow.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And fistula is according to nature a hard and white nodulation, where no pain is felt, and it is as hollow as the feather of a bird.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 sometimes clear and at other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 sometimes small, and at other times large.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 and I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is foreign only by one of the NINE reasons:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 meaning, by the scarcity of blood or body.
ou por sa malice;	 or by its corruption;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 or because there is hard flesh within, and above the lips, that does not allow new flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 There is too much pus.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 The joint is dislocated, and the substance is of bad quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 because corruption is a kind of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 because in the area, digestion is slow, health takes time to recover, and it runs away by nature.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 there are veins or bones.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 I have already shown all these causes, signs, and remedies of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Therefore it is necessary that I tell you the treatment for fistula which is done by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Fistula occurs in all members of the body;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 because there are fistulas that come from the large veins, arteries, nerves, or in the groin, intestines, bladder, one of the ribs, spine on the back, or any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And if it comes to the property of the main member and its similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 All such fistulas are of severe healing, and there is no remedy for them except labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula that does not come out until the level I have said and you are confident of its cure, and you recognize it, take a tent of goose or iron, if the fistula is straight, apply it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is crooked, search for a thin tent of lead, because lead bends with curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula is pierced in many places and you cannot search for it with tents, then cleanse one of the openings, because moisture quickly moves from one opening to another, and purify it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then carefully feel with your power if there is bone or nerve and whether it is hardened, and ask the patient in detail about the pain they feel when pressed by your hand, and where they feel it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 and when you know the truth about its location and whether it is far from a joint, nerve, artery or vein, or in any of the locations I have mentioned, then cut according to what I said, and remove the fracture and corrupt tissue that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is well opened straight through, you must cut deeply, as far as you can, then put wet bandages soaked in a strong medicine into it, and push them up to the tip of the fistula, until the medicine corrodes the superfluous material that remains inside.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then put on oil-soaked linen cloths until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And if it doesn't heal by that, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the wound, strike it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If neither vein nor nerve affects or major limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove it until all corruption is removed, then apply oil-soaked linen cloths until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 And if it doesn't heal and the condition worsens as before, know that you are not going to the font (fountain);
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 If you expose it and dig as deep as you can, and remove all corruption, then reset the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it remains thus sound, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If it is not like that, know that the corruption is too advanced, you will not be able to achieve it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other remedy than waiting for nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is only a little bone corrupted, and you can draw it with the pliers, take out the one that seems appropriate for that, and if there are many bones, draw them all, do not leave any of them.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 and if the moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, strike the moisture and the flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something repellent corruption on the wound, and leave it until the flesh grows around the bones, and then they will more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, such as the leg or thigh, only remove the corruption until all the blackness has disappeared, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 If there is a large part of corruption and it reaches to the bone marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 it must be cut and covered up to the corruption, and then heal until it is healed.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 I will tell you about a fistula that happened in the thigh of a man, take this as an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 A young man about 30 years old had pain in his leg due to an internal cause causing matter to come to the leg, and there was a large abscess that could not be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 However, due to their foolishness, they overburdened the abscesses too much, and in doing so, they corrupted a great deal of matter, which became a fistula, and much pus emerged that all were wet with moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and many patients put themselves under treatment for about two years, without any wise man in the art of hands, until I was summoned to them, and saw his leg and the remedies with which he was being treated, and what ran through the pus at great expense.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And the young man's body became red, and had a yellow tint.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I searched for all the wounds, and found that some came towards each other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 Then I hurried and made an incision in one of the sores until I exposed a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the rot reached the bone within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I appeared to me as if the bone was rotten, and I thought there was no other corruption, except that which I left.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 and began to apply balms of sodium to the wound for a long time, but could not heal it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 and then I recommenced, and exposed the bone as before, and found that the corruption was continuous in the bone, and I removed it, and then left it, and thought about healing the joint.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 but I could not heal more than I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and then let it be completely exposed, and applied balms to it.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 and it healed and was healed quickly, and there was no need to resume the work except due to the weakness of the patient, who could not endure it, and due to the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation (procedure), it often bleeds profusely, but it became completely healthy, and a hard cyst grew in the bone's place, and it was well-positioned and had no harm or disadvantage in any way, neither in its appearance nor in coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if the bone is broken at any place in the body, it must be thus set:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take thread, and hold the tip of the broken bone open, and command anyone to stretch it upward;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and put another thicker thread of flax over the first thread, tie it above the flesh that is stripped from the bone, stretch it out to pull the corrupted flesh below, exposing the healthy flesh where you wish it to be, so that the bone does not pierce the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and put a splint or plaster under the bone to cover the corrupted flesh.
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 It must be held until it can be seen and felt that the corruption has subsided, and it should be held again at other times.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, you should uncover the flesh entirely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then put the iron on it, and then soak one part of the corruption from the other end, and the soaked area should be the length of the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 and if the corruption is at a joint, you should break the corrupt joint, and you should soak the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other remedy but to break it.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 and if the corruption is at the base of the hand or foot, it is a very difficult thing, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption to see how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And clean it in all ways as you can, but let neither the vein nor the nerve hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And know that the saws and files for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore it is necessary to prepare an instrument for each type of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the instrument that you will need, according to your knowledge of this art and the testimony of the forms of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 If you consider the instrument that you need according to what is required.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The shoulder may dislocate either from within or from outside.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 and when you have administered that corrosive cure through medicine, and it does not help, then it is necessary to cover the affected limb up to the point where the corrosion occurs, so that the patient suffers from death or greater evil due to the defect of the limb.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the signs are that the limbs become black, as if they have been burnt by fire, and afterwards the blackness spreads from member to member, and it takes over the entire body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If it is haste by the sting of some venomous beasts, such as a sea scorpion and a viper and others, if the corrosion is at the top of the neck, then strike it, but do not allow it to come up as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it comes up to the hand, then strike at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 And if it reaches the forearm, then strike at the elbow.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 And if it pierces through [the flesh], it is death, and there is no help but in the quantity of its virtue.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 And thus do as when the corruption comes or the putrefaction:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 If it comes at the first joint, then strike after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 and if it comes on the foot, then strike the entire foot;
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 and if it rises in the leg, then strike at the knee joint;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 and if it comes above the knee, then the patient has no other remedy but to die.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 The manner of striking or healing the limb is that you bind it above and below, stretch a minister on one of the tendons below, and another minister on the other tendon above, and you compress the flesh between the two tendons with a spatula wide enough to expose the bone.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then strike or heal, and place linen cloth on both sides so that the blow does not touch healthy flesh, causing the patient other injury and abscesses.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding comes when you work, then cauterize the area immediately, or apply some powders to restrict it.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then return to your medicine until it is complete, then bind the limb with a tight bandage and cure it until it heals.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 and I will tell you what happened at the house of the peasant:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 a farmer had a burn that looked like it was scorched by fire, and the corruption first appeared in his foot of the peasant, until it spread over the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 and when the farmer saw the corruption, he covered his foot with copper and was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 A long time later, the corruption returned to his hand, and he came to me. I gave him remedies after purifying the body, but the corruption could not be stopped.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he orders me to crush the hand, and I promise that I have no hope of repelling the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 Furthermore, he also doubts if I would cut off his hand, as the vitality of the man was weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he gave up all hope and returned to his land, and decided to cut off his own hand, and it healed.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 I have told this story only because such is sometimes done if necessary.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 Sometimes an abscess occurs in the shinbone and lasts so long that it causes a large swelling of the leg;
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 Then they run and pierce it, causing the leg to jump, and the bones appear visible, like a knight;
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And the skin that is above is as thin as unspun cloth, and it will not penetrate to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such disease is called "sores", and is not called "fistulas".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 but if it is so long that it comes to the bone in depth, it is called "fistula";
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 and the skin is such that you can cut all around it, and equally when it is thin, as cloth.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and does not spread due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you have reason to believe that the skin is spreading and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with fat, then treat it with clysters in this way:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look if the breasts are large, and the belly that is in it has a foul smell, then clisterize with Egyptian medicine which is made as follows:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 Take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red and becomes as thick as honey.
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 and then take from this according to your need, make it into water and honey, and clisterize the breast, and press the abscess.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 leave the medicine in for two hours, then strain it.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 do this many times until the breast is purified and the pus is removed;
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 and sometimes clisterize with water of ashes when this medicine is not present, and take vine ash, pour water over it, let it cool, and then clisterize with it until you know that the breast has been purified.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 If the patient cannot endure it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clisterize with water and honey or have a little powdered lead;
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 or you clisterize with honey and sweet wine, as the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the blood less viscous.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this and you are confident that the breasts are well cleaned, then you clisterize with what causes milk to grow in them, and take an emplastrum, make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 or you clisterize with certain medicines and ointments, as I have said the properties for treating wounds.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the abscess in the breast is small and the cannula of the cupping glass cannot enter, widen it a little with a knife, and put on a tent of the Egyptian ointment or ointment of basilicon until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too large, leave it only enough room so that the cupping glass or cannula can enter, and if there is a pus-filled boil above it, bring it down or lower it slightly.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the boil is ripe, do not let any flesh grow into it;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cover the breast as desired, arrange it in such a way that the boil moves to its lowest position, because when the boil is ripe, do not let any flesh grow into it and if you cannot cover the breast as desired.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 The bow moves gently forward, and do not let go of anything from the bow.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 Take medicines that consolidate and place them on the wound, then stretch it over a linen cloth that covers the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then push the force against the wound in the chest, slightly larger than the first one, then anoint it gently with oil on another cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound of the chest to straighten the bow, but do not remove the large cloth except after several days.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the one on the wound of the chest, often removes it to straighten the bow, and knows what will come out from the bow, whether it is poison or pus or digestible or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And beware if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been administered in this manner and you see the pus rising, know that the breast has turned sour, and approach the healthy.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Then loosen it in the morning or at midday, and when you dislocate the wound, change another linen cloth and renew the salve.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	If the breasts overflow with undigested matter for many days, know that the breasts do not swell.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle venomous worms come after a long time, do not despair of health, for it approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men whose wounds heal too slowly in linens, and those who do the opposite.
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if it swells improperly from the breast after many days, know that the breast will not turn sour.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the breast takes too long to heal and is far away, join drying medicines that are moist in substance and dry in effect, such as diaphytum, for there is great use of vitriol, and it is the final medicine.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take a definition of diaphytic, make it with rose oil, and mix equal parts of old wine in its substance.
puis le confit et en use;	 then apply and use it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 and do the same more cooked and thickened when the diaphytic ointment is not present. Or take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them into powder and sprinkle it on the honey while it is over the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 and then dab it on the cloth and place it on the breast. Sometimes an astrologer long is administered to it, and roots of celestial lily, which is like flour and cinnamon.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 and use simple herbs or compounds:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 grind them, make powder, and sprinkle it on the honey that I said, and apply.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the limb is long and not treated by this remedy, then know that corruption has fully set in, and it causes pressure on the bone or hardening of the tendons.
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the wound is treated with the fire cautery as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	Of the abscess of the nail bed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panearice is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 And when it is neglected and no care is taken, the abscess swells and corrupts and runs towards the root of the nail, and in some cases, it may corrupt the entire nail.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 The corruption reaches the bone, causing a strong-smelling pain, and the toes become swollen and discolored.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, and cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The cauteries are very helpful if the bone is healthy, and the nail is intact.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 and if the nail is below the skin and begins to point and swell, you must put oil beneath the nail so that it does not pierce the skin, and push it upwards, strike the swollen part gently but finely, and place hot and corrosive medicines on top to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then cure it with ointments until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw it out, because as much as the bone is corrupted there, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you see the tooth decay, strike it with a drill as mentioned before, then heal it until it heals.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is wounded and pierced, and causes great pain, then you must first cleanse it.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula perpendicularly across, and make sure that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail, because the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 and if it happens, place something on top of it to alleviate.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand gradually subsides.
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One must straighten the fingers that are born in some people by chance, and they are all flesh, and sometimes there is skin or bone there, and occasionally there is a nail; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, or their growth is in one of our palms.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 The one who is born in any part of the body does not move, and the one who is born at the joint of the finger, by chance moves.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cutting of the fleshy one should be easy in this way:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 Cut it at its root with a broad spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 The one who is born in the root of the joint should be treated carefully:
si te tien dou coper.	 cover it up.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who is born or should be in the last nail, you must cut the flesh roundly up to the bone first, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and then treat it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The joints that come together in the fingers also come together by birth, or by injury, or by fire burn, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 If it is necessary to cut the suture, it should be reattached according to their natural shapes;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 then place a piece of linen or cloth soaked in rose oil between them so they do not fuse together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 or you may put between two thin boards until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	Similarly, if it comes to either of its sides with the palm, you strike the joint as necessary.
des vils	 of peasants
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are swellings large and full of melancholic humors that come in many parts of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And it happens more often in legs of those who walk or work or carry loads than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer purge of bile at times, and then the healthy from the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The treatment of iron is according to two methods: [This sentence is not a complete statement and does not translate literally. It seems to mean that there are two ways to treat iron, but without more context it's difficult to provide an accurate translation.]
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 One is to strike them [the iron objects], and the black blood is drawn out.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And another way is that you open a vein, and draw it all out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The cutting is as follows according to this method:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 First, the lower leg is raised with strong hot water until the flesh becomes thin, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to below the knee.
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one of the three places (I, II, or III) with a large incision, then separate and draw out black blood to your hand from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's condition can tolerate.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 and then tie it up, and instruct the patient to bind himself with meat broth colored black;
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And resume the evacuation and healing when veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The application of the leeches is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Reheat the patient's leg if there is much hair, then place it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 If there is no warm water, heat it over the fire, and then press it against the vein along the thigh or in the part below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then, with the blade, cut the skin to the edge, and peel off the vein from both sides, as much as you can feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 When it becomes red and black, and when it comes through the skin like a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then push the bone back inside, until it is raised from the skin, and then cut it at the edge lightly, then press it in another place three inches away.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then rinse with warm water, as you have done before, and make an incision at another location, as you did previously.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Make another incision, or more if necessary, then rinse, and make it at the base of the foot, then draw it out and rinse until the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then extract it bit by bit until it all comes out, then seal it up.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 And if you cannot pull it out and lift it, push an awl through the entire length, tie it and draw, then push it beneath the skin, and turn your hand from one side to another until it comes out.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 And guard that it does not swell, for if it swells, it cannot be drawn nor lifted, and it is harmful to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 And when you have treated everything, place on the wound a linen cloth dampened with vinegar and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and heal it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the wound is contracted, twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must make an incision, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 and draw it out as we have previously stated.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The shape of the iron used to pierce the vein should be curved and not cut, but rather open the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and is of large curvature, because if it is thin, it would pierce the vein; but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is opened in the legs, in hot parts where no herbs or trees grow, and on dry ground without moisture.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And possibly it may be found in other places than the legs, and this happens due to the corruption that comes from under the skin, as it comes inside the body like a snake, opening up between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very large inflammation comes in the leg and then the joint changes and the vein starts to forcefully appear, like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the head is opened, you must wrap around a piece of wood from 1.5 inches to 2.5 inches and sew it up, and leave the wood on the leg, and whenever there is leakage, you should re-wrap and sew it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 and if it is too long, you must cut a part of it, wrap the remaining part, but do not cover the root, until it is completely expelled.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 If you cut [it], it returns to the flesh, causes an abscess and pus or a bad disease at that place.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 Therefore, it is necessary that it should be treated little by little until the neck [or head], and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And sometimes this vein, when it is treated for five or ten inches, a man came to me who had it come out from ten inches, and when you cut [it], it swells up like a balloon or a bladder, and pierces through to the bottom, so that everything comes out.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 And empty the matter that is inside, and bring medicine against pus to the place for several days, then treat it like an abscess.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 And sometimes at this vein, many tears flow, and especially when it opens in the joint of the arm or leg, causing much harm, from which blood flows repeatedly.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Then do as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called "cattle disease" in our land because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that grows between the skin and flesh, moving throughout the body expanding and shrinking, and causing pain from one limb to another wherever it moves or jumps.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 and is engendered by the putrefaction of some bodily fluids, like worms, snakes, lizards, or roundworms in the abdomen.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 And there is doubt about its nature, for when it travels through the body, it ascends to the head and reaches the eye, by chance entering and destroying the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you wish to cure and draw it, one cannot force it out except when it is moving:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 Therefore, you must lie the limb above and below with a strong ligament tightly, then hit it upwards and draw it out forcefully, and if it turns inside towards the flesh and you cannot grasp it, you must cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And the greatest damage that it does is that it causes an eye infection, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 And if you see it approaching or close to the eye, hold a ring beneath it, then hit upwards and draw it out forcefully.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And it is necessary to use the patient with purification of the body with soluble medicines for expelling bad humors, and boil food that is spoiled and rotten.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Of the pain which comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called "vakirir" on our land, and it is a pain that comes in some limbs, and then moves from one limb to another;
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 And I saw what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was summoned to a sick woman, and she revealed her arm to me, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And then, it appeared to climb like a worm into the shoulder, very quickly, as fast as living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain spread from that place and pierced into the shoulder, then shortly afterwards ran through the entire body until it came to the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then she told me that it kept turning around the body, as I had seen.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was greatly amazed at how it moved from one member to another, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 However, I wanted many times that the pain moved from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 And I thought it was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and that's why that constrained breathlessness appeared.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And it does not appear in accordance with this reasoning to those who are ill and have moist bodies and veins closed.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, you must lay it above and below quickly, and then press on top so that the constricted breathlessness returns to its place.
et cauterize le leu;	 Cauterize the place.
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure that which expels the breathlessness, such as fetic pills and serapin pills, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are various, according to their shapes and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The diversities among them is such that there are some who have large points, small, sharp and soldered.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 and of those which have angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are fragments.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and that which falls in any member falls according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in a primary member, like the brain, heart, liver, spleen, kidney, intestines, stomach, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it falls therefore in any place of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you hereafter, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 you should be careful with the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 And if this bad symptom is not evident to you, and the arrow is not fully inserted, draw it out and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And when the skull symptom occurs with an arrow striking the bone, and a swelling appears on top of the skull, it is accompanied by symptoms such as scotoma (blindness in part of the visual field), pain in the head, throbbing and twisting, reddening around the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and disturbance of understanding, and vomiting of bile.
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 And by chance, without force from the nostrils, or ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and by chance, it loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 and jumps from the wound white matter resembling pus, and also as boiling water;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 and if this sign appears, hold back from treatment, and draw out the arrow if it is not in;
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sign of an arrow when it falls or pierces the heart are that it is close to the left nipple and feels like it has been driven into a hard object, not empty;
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And by chance, the arrow becomes silent like pus, and black blood comes out, and coldness and sweat come, and fainting;
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The patient understands death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that never pierces the flesh is when bubbles rise from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, sighs loudly and seeks fresh air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 If the arrow falls under the bed, it should be removed from the flanks;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and draw a long line and cause great pain and suffering.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And all the limbs of the shoulders move. (in the shoulders, all the limbs are moving)
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	If an arrow falls into the stomach, possibly something from indigested meat may escape from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	If an arrow falls into the belly and nothing escapes from the intestines through the wound, there is no hope in the treatment or removal of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 If an arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine jumps out and spills, and the patient feels great pain:
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 Know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other member, as the hand, arm, throat, shoulder, armpit, backbone, waist, hips, legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisoned, as I will tell you what happened to me, because of this you do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 There was a man who had an arrow or spear pierce his neck root:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I pulled it out from the other side under the ear fat, and he was immediately sensible without pain.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And pulled out with play an arrow that pierced the oil sac under the paper under, and the arrow was curved, and could not be reached but the tip towards the flesh, and the arrow was large as a Turkish bow, all iron head.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The play was sensible, and no bad accident happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 I pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with iron heads:
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I was a barber, and became subtle until I could do it, and the Christians were healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 And extracted an arrow from a man who was either head or stomach-wounded, and thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not improve.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I cut above the arrowhead, and guided it, and extracted it without any bad consequences.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 And if you wish to a man who has an arrow lodged or back, and the wound is healed over.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And the arrow remained within him, and did not disrupt his natural state, nor did it harm any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And to another man who had an arrow lodged in his face, and the wound was healed over.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 It endures thus without suffering great pain;
et mout d’autres semblans.	 and many similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And draw an arrow from the body of the king, who was lying in bed, and he was slightly tilting to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 and the arrow was fully inserted.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was summoned for treatment after she had been lying there for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 Found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I felt her entire body with a delicate probe but did not feel any sensation;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt the tip and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was the arrow tip, so I applied a healing plaster attractifet digestif because the wound was not inflamed.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 The wound of the arrow appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I apply the plaster for many hours, and straighten the wound directly, and let the patient stay like that for a long time until he feels the arrow within his neck daily.
et il le me dist.	 and he told me it.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I put the wound on medicine that is corrosive by hand for many hours until it is healed, and then I tried it and felt the head of the arrow which was sticking at its place.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 Then I opened the wound with this corrosive medicine until the arrowhead appeared clearly visible to me.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 And it healed well within the four-month limit, and then when I cut open the wound with the pliers which I had placed on it from both sides, it could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Therefore, I continued to refine and devise methods for tools, until I took the hour when the tweezers were well made, as their shape will come at the end of this chapter, while pulling it out and returning the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And the wise men judge that the nose cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 Or I told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, but you set your care upon that which I did not say, for books cannot grasp everything.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But the wise masters understand little things and what is present and lacking, they discover nine works, and nine instruments, in the reduction of foreign matters that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows are not inserted into limbs where they are fixed except according to two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 or through the side, or from another angle.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which jumps forth at the place where it enters is an arrow penetrating into fleshy parts, and jumps out occasionally.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is pierced around, and straighten out the exit.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 And if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave it for several days and move it each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And then it jumps out, and if it does not jump out, perforate all around with a sharp instrument until the flesh around is expanded, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is driven into the skull bone and reaches one of the brain ventricles, and some of the incidents that I have said openly to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 Do not draw it out immediately, but let it stay as is for some days, for if the arrow reaches so far (to the brain), that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow has not been lodged deep into the bone but only slightly, and the patient experiences no severe incident and remains for some days, you should devise a means to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it is deeply lodged and cannot come out by itself, administer leeches around it, as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 If the arrow is lodged in the body so that it cannot be seen, seek it thoroughly;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 and if you feel it, pull it out with any suitable instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 And if it cannot be due to the narrowness of the wound, and the deepness of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then open it as wide as possible.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 Draw the arrow if possible, and if it has ears like an animal and holds there, remove the flesh that is embedded on both sides as far back as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow, until you can draw it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And be careful not to break the arrow, but rather pull it more gently.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	If you cannot pull it out in one go, push the linen cloth around it until it is reached the joints, then pull it gently, as the extraction should be done carefully.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the flow of blood opposes you, bring what we have said in the chapter on its treatment;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And beware of incising the nerve or vein, and make an instrument as you know how to draw out the arrow safely, quickly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 Place the patient according to his form when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest aid that can be, and if you cannot, do so as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow coming from another place, opens anything of it, or the skin is swollen nearby as we can see or feel apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Therefore cut through it, as long as the pliers can grasp it, and then pull it out:
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If the arrow is now gone.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly, until it enters the bone, and widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 And if it is of the arrow shaft, push it all out.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 If it is a dislocation, and you see the need to administer a traction, then administer the instrument of traction so that the tip of the arrow enters the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 Then push forcefully, and if the arrow is entangled, administer the instrument at the tip entering in, to make extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is touched (by the forceps), it is necessary that you cut around where the venom is, as much as possible, then treat the wound as required.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 If the arrow is stuck in the head or face or abdomen or bladder or side, and it is accessible, and you can cover it, then cover it.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And be careful to not pierce the vein or nerve, and then extract it, and then stitch the wound if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used to extract arrows resemble an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 And there are many ways to do it:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the hair root is similar to the feather of a bird, to guide the point of an arrow, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The shape of the pliers for pointing and straightening is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	incisions of the body common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 From the veins which one heals there are thirty-one (ways), of which one has sixteen (methods), namely:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 The beating that are after the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the two arteries that are in the two temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and the two veins that are in the two eyelids, which are called "aspirers";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 and the vein that is under the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 and the vein that is at the nape of the neck;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 and the two tendons that are at the neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that are in the lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins which are commonly cured in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 One is cephalic, and it lies on the left side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the head".
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 and the middle is called "artery", and it is composed of the cephalic and the basilic, and the lay people call it "vein of the heart".
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 and the basilic is on the right side of the chest, and the lay people call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the liver, and it is that which is used for bleeding, which opens obviously above the vein.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 And the little sausage is the vein that is between the ulnar and the radial, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 The first shoulder is located below the curvature of the left ribcage, and the second one that is at the ankle of the right ribcage.
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "nasse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And there are three veins underneath those [veins] in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The purging of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines.
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 The quality of the purging, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth.
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 Then squeeze the neck of the patient with a screw, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places depending on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Touch the thumb at your finger, and where you feel the pulse beneath your finger, press firmly on it.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lance, and thrust it through beneath the vein until the bone, then withdraw your hand from the entire vein above, strike and the skin and the vein well two inches through, and make blood come out as much as you see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 hold it tight and press until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 and I have already said the incision and the cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples, is good for migraines, scrofula, and chronic otitis with tears at the eyes.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the qualities of the healer are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it is to stretch out the patient's neck, until both veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feel the pulse beneath your thumb, and then press firmly;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then lift the cork on top of the vein toward your index finger, and push the lancet under it, lift the vein upward, and pierce, as you have done in the other veins, and draw blood according to your need;
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then apply cotton;
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and then tie it firmly, and leave it until it heals.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 And we have spoken about their bandaging and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The draining of the vein in the forehead is worth just as much as the draining of the skull in ancient facial diseases that have migrated and turned red.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 and the quality is that the patient straightens their neck by twisting it until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 then take the tool called "fosseur", whose shape is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the tip on the vein, and press with your hand, or something else, and allow the blood to flow according to the amount that you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and not once should one use a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 However, the flames must not be too sharp.
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And the bone is twisted, for it is close; and by chance, the flames break when they are subtle.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The salve for the two veins that are in the armpit helps with swelling, and with inflammation, and with scabies, and with earaches, and facial diseases;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 and the quality of its salve is that the patient stretches his neck by twisting it in any way, as described before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then apply the salve, and let the salve be made with a piece of flame about one inch long and wide, for there is no need for charcoal.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 If the flames are subtle, they may break by chance;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make a poultice of blood, as much as you need, and then apply it on top of cotton, and secure it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The vein of the neck serves to cure sickness, scurvy, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that come from the face, especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 And the quality of the vein is such that the patient should compress his neck, then press his neck on your left hand, and take subtle flame long, and insert it between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well in this way, but the pain will begin to recede soon.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 And do not go too deep, and make the bleeding according to your need, then let it rest for a night, because it is soon restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the form of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The two bindings of the iron aid in the stretching of the bowstring, and at the beginning of tempering, and in many diseases, and in stopping, and in corroding, and in sores, and in stomach ailments.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 And the quality of the binding is that the patient stretches his neck under one and the other, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 And the master standing on top of the patient's head, and the patient lies on the seat, then open the vein along its length somewhat widely, then draw out the blood gently, or as much as necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then do the same on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently constrict both veins so that the patient does not strangle.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 And let it rest until morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the liver surgery
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The translation of the given line is as follows: "The opening of veins in the lips above helps in cooling in the mouth, and in corruption of the gums, and cuts in the lips, and toothache and around."
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 Then arrange the quality of healing by making the patient sit before you and hold their neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the jaw, and look at the two veins, one is on the right jaw and the other on the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 Then take hold of both (the veins), and if you do not recognize them and are uncertain about it, grasp the larger one from each side, and also do the same with the two veins that are above and below, for this is the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the liver beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The veins below the tongue assist after the cephalic vein is cut, and this is at the incision of the throat, and in diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the qualities of the leecher are such that the patient lies between your hands before the sun, and raises the tongue, and looks beneath each side into a black vein.
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Then heal both, but do not go too deep, for there are the arteries below.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins from the costal side, which are commonly healed according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or by pricking with sharp, large mirrhin or subtle olive oil as you know it's called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The shape of mirrtin flames is very renowned, and it is wide as you see: (Translation)
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 It is necessary to open the veins that are full of thick blood appearing on the surface, and which contain thick and troubled blood.
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is the form of the olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointedly subtle, and is for refining subtle veins with citrus-colored thin blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The basilica's vein, one of these arteries, assists with the diseases that are beneath the throat, and in the neck, and in the stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And the lord must bleed profusely, and he should let it flow from the artery that is beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 If it touches the artery and bleeding occurs, it must be stopped, as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the flame should not be pricked, but rather cut like a nail.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 If the basilica does not open clearly, then you must open it and change another.
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Or you wish to take any branch from it, or bleed in its place the vein from the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	 It opens clearly.
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And then hold it in the flame, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you want to know the location of the vein, then you must also stretch out the arm and feel for the pulse until you find it.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then mark the location of the artery, then tie the arm, and burn the vein with the flame.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 And be careful not to wound the artery when you see it swelling, for that is the artery:
eschui la donques.	 avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, know that it is not from the artery:
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Hurry up then, and place your hand firmly on top for a long time, then cut your hand open in multiple places;
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 bind the arm and let it be still, and do not move it for the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and keep it above fear, and do not move it until it is drained.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if it is not drained and swells and the medicine is not present, strike the artery if it is open, for the head of the wound will recede.
et estainche li sans.	 drain the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a piece of fir bark, cut it in half and place it on top until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 if the wound is drained, that's good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If not, if you treat it, as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the stopping of the bleeding should not be hasty in various positions for the small wound of the injury and the strength of the suture on the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The evacuation of the vein in the middle helps to treat the blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of basilic and cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And the surgeon must be careful when searching for the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deeply and finds the nerve, it inflates and the patient becomes sick, and there may be no healing.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve opens up very often, and if it does not open in any man due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the healthy part of the instrument.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 Cut the nerve with your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The incision of the skull helps, because it draws blood from the head and assists the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is necessary to incise at the point of olive oil or myrtle fire, because this is the safest among all veins, since there is neither nerve nor artery below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 However, you must seek the most shallow joint and do not press too hard if the first time is necessary, and repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And by chance, the joint swells in some men when the first time is required, but do not press too hard.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you should know about healing is that healing does not come unless to keep health and avoid upcoming diseases.
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 and the healing shall be done in one of the three veins that are cut:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 this is to know, cephalic, femoral, and basilic.
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 and it should be healed at the beginning of spring, autumn, and winter after eating, when the signs of satiety appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 and it should be healed on the first or third day, after two or three hours.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The healing that is given for diseases does not have a set duration, but when it is necessary day or night, in all hours and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 It is not necessary to purge children until they are 14 years old, nor a woman during pregnancy except for the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	They should not heal the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 If anyone wants to purge themselves in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle clysterium, if they have retained many feces, so that the veins do not transport the waste from the intestines and harm the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 A person who is excessively salted with foods, who is drunk, as long as he is pregnant, or dropsical should not purge themselves.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 If there is diarrhea after purging, vomiting, distension of the abdomen, excessive abortion in women, much labor, watching and fasting, and those who lose all their strength, or due to something from the weapon or body parts, it is necessary that they rest.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then thin out the humors, if the patient does not have a large amount of them, with food and drinks and medicine, if you have that ability.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then immerse [the affected area], if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and heal the vein in the affected area around the third, as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And keep that day from work, and from pain, and from sexual activity, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And rest in bed and enjoy yourself, and let the bandages be higher than those of the patient being treated, and rub the arm 2 or 3 times, then gently pull the bandage upwards, because if it is too tight or loose, it cannot heal.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And afterwards rub the affected area with your hands until the veins swell and they are felt.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then moisten the incision with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein beneath the skin as far as you can see the incision, so that the incision does not bleed and fail to be cut.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that run like cords for the incision, and some that are filled with pus, such that when you put fire to it, it recoils from the flame and cannot open the vein, and thus it is with those.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the incision should be advised in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not (the joint), start again a little below or above that level if it is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the joint is swollen and the patient fears, let it rest for a day or two, and do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 Perhaps abscesses will come out.
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 Do not enter (the wound) or bathe it, then start the healing if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if the wound is small or you doubt that it will not bleed much as you see, trust in that same wound entirely with direct heat.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 Work a little quickly, so that the joint is swollen.
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 For this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start treatment immediately. Put a little oil on it, for it cools the body from the blood, and the oil is made in this place where the oil is.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And thus administer the oil of oil in every treatment that you treat the veins, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and this same thing is triple and hollow from it when it is put on the joint;
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 if the blood becomes too thick and spreads out when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 And if a large abscess comes, which happens frequently, especially when the treatment of the vein is not performed until that time or the opening of the vein is small, hurry, and put a damp sponge on hot water and oil on it on the joint and hold for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you do this after the blood flow from the vein, and if it remains in place after some days without any black or green appearance, it does not matter.
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh resin under a hot iron, mastic, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 And often an abscess and appearance occurs near the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Put your hand on it then, and if you feel that the place is soft to the pressure of the hand, it is the harmful appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Then do not put anything of what has been said, for by chance it may be an artery;
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But you can use a plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each person according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 If the wound is black, leave it to drain until it becomes red;
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 and if you see a swelling, let it become thin;
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 For the person who is swollen and hollow, and requires bloodletting, make the incision larger, and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the one who is weak, do the opposite, and it must be bled lightly and often, and it should be bled by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this method of bleeding avoids the displacement of blood and the compression of nerves, and is better than bleeding deeply rather than widely.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And to the one whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give soft bread under ripe pomegranates.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If it is scalded, let blood three or four times; and if of cold complexion, before healing eat soft bread in syrup sweetened, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, chives, and a pleasant-smelling syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if the hand is wounded after much bleeding, then it must be treated with burnt charcoal, a fragrant subtle syrup, and other things as mentioned in the division or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	If one wants to fracture his arm, and heal it again at another time, if it is weakened by repeated healing, then let him heal little by little, according to the amount of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who wants to fracture his arm after the first healing, and has a strong body, let him heal in 6 hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And who wants to heal from another part, should heal on the second day or the third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 For there is much blood within the body which is already scalded, causing fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 Therefore, a large amount must be let out, and the hole widened until it chooses to emit in a cloth.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 Then, having prepared all the conditions for healing, place your hand on top of the cloth when it heals so that death does not come in its place, and this happens many times when healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not necessary that when you dislocate the arm and draw blood a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press firmly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 nor if it's bent, stretch out the arm as much as possible, for that would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but leave it until it bleeds a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you touch it with the tip of the flame until the congealed blood flows out of the vein and put on the piece of linen kept in vinegar, and press slightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein has burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is appeased.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if you need to draw blood a second time, draw it from the same place, or another vein, or the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are opened at the location of the neck because they are composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the method of bleeding is that the patient immerses his hand in hot water until the flesh becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then it should be bound moderately so that the vein appears well, then bleed now across the palm, neither too wide nor too long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And make the wounds large, and cauterize them closely near the joint of the hand, and if it cannot be drained, put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow out into the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 And if it is frozen, do not push the hand into hot water, because it is put more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the cauterization of this vein is safer than all other veins, as there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The cauterization of the tendon of the right hand is useful for all liver diseases, and this is how it works:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 Hold the hand, put it in hot water until the vein has burst open, if you can see it.
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And if the incision is transverse, and you cover it entirely all over, it causes no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not go too deep, for the nerves are beneath all uncovered with flesh; then place the hand in hot water, if the wound does not freeze and cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as necessary, put oil and wax on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgative of the hand on the left side is beneficial for the disease of mice, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The salve of the thigh is effective for all diseases under the body, such as diseases of the belly, retention of fluids, kidney diseases, and old leg and knee diseases, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of his wound is that the patient should thrust his foot into hot water and rub over the vein until it perishes, and bind above the joint of the foot.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot go very deep.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Therefore open it more widely or as large as at the ankle, for it will heal quicker.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you open the wound above the foot, beware of the nerves that are beneath, and make an incision transversely as when cutting.
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 And let the flames be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the limb cannot come out, put it in water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if it is necessary to apply leeches for the first time, then start with the second one a little, because the flesh is salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the soothing of the other side equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The place of the sciatic vein is at the knee of fire, and its lesion is worth the pain of the hinge when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his leeches is that the patient enters or bathes, and draws above the ankle 4 fingers in twisting, for otherwise it does not open the vein.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 And if it opens, then draw out in all ways that you can, and by crossing over.
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 It is better to cut it off, for the flesh is rotten, and it responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you do not heal it, no remedy will open or close the thigh bone, and turn towards the little finger, and beware of nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 Make such a pressure on the blood that you see, then cut the ligament, put cotton on it and press.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of suction cup remedies
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Blisters are made of horn, or hare, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And blistering is done according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 or by wounding and drawing blood, or without wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this blistering that is done without wounding can be done in two ways:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 It is to all fire, or without fire;
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 and ventilation which is made by wounding and the extraction of blood if it is done in 14 inches on the body, so the one who is entirely in summer (the head) is affected.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 and the others are in the neck;
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and the others in the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and the ventous (boils) under the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and the boils of the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and the boils on the legs;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and the boils in the two arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and the boils of the two legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 and the boils on the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 and ventilation does not deal with blood, except for the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore it should not be doubted at all, if as with opening of a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 And it should not be administered, neither at every fire nor with fire, in any disease that comes from repletion, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 If by necessity of diseases it is required to apply leeches, or according to custom, we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle and at every time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 for there are those who, when they need to apply leeches, have a heavy head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 and to those who find repletion and redness in their face, and in their head, and at the neck, and darkness in their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 and those who find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are bleeding;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there are some who think, and see by no blood and boils and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially if it is outside of the month, we command to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The mouthwash helps with the pain in the head ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that it should be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 and this ventilation is in place of the mouthwash for the headache ... and it is not necessary that those who are of cold constitution should use it, or who have catarrh, because it does them great harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And for this reason, it is not necessary that the guards should use it, nor those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who heal themselves often become careless and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass a little lower due to the danger of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 Ventilation around the neck is in place of the mouthwash for the head and basilica, and for this reason it is effective against the stiffness, and splitting of the channel of the worm, and swelling, and fullness.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 And it should not be held too tightly, for if it remains firmly pressed, it may cause obstinacy or stomach and heart ailments.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosations in the ribs of the neck are worth the pains of the head, and otalgia and migraines, and strangulation, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the sanctuary of Basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And you should instruct the lord to press his hand gently, not to crush the artery, and not let blood come out excessively.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 The ventosation under the chin is worth the mouth diseases, and corruption of gums, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is in the place of the sanctuary of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations of the shoulders are useful for disease caused by heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 The ventosations of the ribs are as much as three veins from the arm, because it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 And command the lord not to make too deep an incision, because the bone is naked with flesh, and hides nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 The ventose (ventilation) above the buttocks is worth as many fistulas from the foundation, and diseases beneath it; and the ventose should be large and made of copper, because it needs to draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And in case it is subtle (thin), it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 It causes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The ventoses of the legs open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and are worth ancient pains in the back, and in the testicle, and bladder, and reduce swellings.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 And they are in the positions of the shoulders, and the elbows, and yet they weaken the body after long use, and bring palsy in various conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The method of putting on the cupping glass is that you put it first empty, suck it quickly, place it hastily, move it equally, and do not stop doing so until you see the area turn red and inflated, and the redness of the blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then cool it down, and apply the cupping glasses, and take care in the placement of the body, for there are some who have tender flesh and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 It is necessary to cut only once, and make large incisions, and a small deep one.
et suce legierement.	 Suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 If it isn't swollen, then it should be struck twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time is to thin the way of thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if it is very swollen, then it should be struck a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we want to draw the blood drop by drop, we only need to pierce it once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if we want a lot of blood, then we reward it often;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the swelling is large, we pierce completely and make sure that the arteries are punctured suddenly; this is for those with thick skin and hard flesh, and who have narrow pores, that you anoint the sides of the veins with stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 If it is oil of violets, olive oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of seed from a gourd:
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 and if it is linseed oil, watercress oil, iris oil, chamomile oil, or any similar:
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amoradine oil, or balm of Gilead oil, or anise oil, and others similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if one who is to be healed has to stretch out tender flesh and large pores, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after the ventosation with rose water, or cold water, or water of morels, or water of cucumber, or water of porcelain, or any similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from asses' milk, or water of myrtle, and sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those with excessive fluidity rise up from old wine or sour water, or decoction of fennel or chamomile, or any similar:
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 and it is not necessary to bleed with a lancet before the bath nor in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two:
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 and he must not sleep after bleeding, and it is necessary that he urinate, when he needs to bleed and when he has bled.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 And be aware that if the person who is healing is coleric, and he lacks temperament and is excessively inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 then he must take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuce in moderation, and similar things;
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 and eat spicy foods, and meat of young rooster, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And if he has a cold constitution, he should take honey syrup, moderately fragrant wine, which is neither old nor new, and eat little, and spicy foods and small birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 and on the day he will vomit, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 it is necessary to give some men three times tracle or muscatel before vomiting, or after, to strengthen the main limbs.
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let the drink be refined, but it is not suitable for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The blisters placed over wounds are those placed on the liver, the spleen, gout, abdomen, flanks and loins, because these parts do not bear being cut open, and it is done for no other reason than to draw blood from one member into another, such as we place them over the breasts when a woman is menstruating.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 To remove the viscosity from the limb, as we do by placing leeches on the abdomen and the buttocks to reduce it.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and alleviate pain when there is obstruction or a foreign body, as it draws out the obstruction by chance, or dislodges the arrow from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 and in this manner it performs when placed on the liver and the spleen where there is retained fluidity, and these leeches are administered empty to suck as little as possible.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 Sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this manner the leech is filled with hot or cold water to which cooked herbs such as comfrey have been added.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the bladder administered to fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should be two fingers and half a palm in length, and have an opening of about one millimeter around the middle, like pushing a needle, and made of steel, soft enough before so as not to prick the patient when placed on the member.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 and have a rod of steel or iron for the purpose of applying a plaster, and it should be large or small according to the diseases and age of those who take them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 for the sores of children are different from those of the old and thin from those that are fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And this plaster should be placed thus on the member:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 Take the plaster of wax or lint and place it in the plaster inside the rod that is inside the plaster, so that the light is at the bottom of the plaster so as not to burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 And then place it on the member, and your fingers should be over the wound as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if there is steam, remove the bladder.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 Take a thread and repeat the suturing often, if necessary.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the bladder given for the disease of pleurisy, in all acute cases, there should be no needle or wound, and it should not be brought unless when it is full of liquid, and it should only be placed on the member.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Bladders are not brought except for members where it is not possible to place bladders due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And in bare muscles, as with thighs or similar;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 and the qualities of the patient are such that when you find bladder stones in sweet clear waters, you can take them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 and put them into clean sweet water, until they become familiar and have no air in them;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 and then pierce with a vein and a bladder, then rub the member until it is red, and put the bladders on them.
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and hot, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, put it there because it works well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If it cannot be done, lift the area and clean it with water, then press it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the limb heals too long after the body, soak the linen cloth in cold water and place it on, until the wound is dried.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if the wound multiplies, place broken glass or similar things on it until it dries.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Or put half-peeled beans on the limb and leave them until they adhere to the limb, it will dry now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you have more need of it, take other wounds.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the wounds do not want to take, rub fresh blood on the limb or insert a needle into the wound until it bleeds, then place them on and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see that they (plural, referring to the eyes) are weeping, sprinkle a little bit of aloe powder and crushed camomile or ashes on them, and they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Know, dear child, that the foolish man who suffers from this chapter will never see any of the old books or read any letters in them.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 And because of this reason, the art (science) is alienated from our land, for I have never found anyone good in it.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 And I know nothing about it (the art), except by the science of the old books that I have studied so much that I have treated it, and by experimentation, and by the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 And I have described in this chapter what is contained within it and summarized it at the end, and clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought, just as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, it is necessary for us to say the prologue of this book the summary of speech and chapters where wise men put their understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who have experience know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when fracture or dislocation or twisting or sprain occurs to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless something prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 or if the time is not very warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 and avoid cold foods, namely raw meats, and consume cool drinks and vegetables, do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty foods, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about abscess heat or spreading of matter to the member.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 if the patient returns to his first government he used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make thick broths, or they have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, and meat of the head, and feet, and pancreas of cow, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	In prolonged nursing, the wounds break more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that the broken bones of the old and decrepit cannot be well regained or joined according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as children's bones.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but there is no healing, reset the broken bone on top of the large tendons that pierce and join the limb together, as forcefully as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not let him at all work, and for this reason, he must be fed large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are different in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is different than the break of the arm or leg; I will tell you all the ways of a break in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are breaks that heal by growing together like the quill of a pen when writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if the break has an open wound, and the break is just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And in every way have his device and instrument appropriate for the restoration, according to what comes to mind in its place.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And it is known that the fracture of the bone occurs when the joint is twisted and opened wide by pulling apart, and it is compressed with the press of the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And when it has no twisting or crookedness, and the patient does not feel much pain, there is no breakage.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it may have twisting, or a fracture, or a small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand at all, but place medicines that come after here, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 Know that the breaks which grow into ulcers, and are the two parts dislocated, you must now set them equally, otherwise abscesses will grow there.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses come close, you should leave it for some days until the abscess subsides;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Then set it equally to the muscle that you can easily and skillfully move, and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Then hold steady, as needed hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 And if the bone is broken into pieces and split in two, whether it be of the hand or foot, or with one hand for small members, or by using two ropes, or with one rope and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the member are disconnected, reset them with all devices in their joints as you can, and ensure by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 Align well the two bones properly according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If it is well aligned, do not strain it too much nor press as those who cause abscess and contraction in the member by their work, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 When the member is set, punish the patient so he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other way.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And keep the limbs so secure that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For when it feels no pain, it is not in place, and it must be set in such a way that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And ensure that it is placed correctly, so that deformities do not come when it is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that the broken members vary in smallness and in size and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members such as arms and fingers and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 It is necessary to wrap linen cloths that are soft and thin.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And for those that are thick, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 It is necessary to wrap with a thick and hard cord, because the wide cords encase the whole large member, and restrain it evenly on all sides so that there is no gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the member, and hold your hand slightly on the joint, then go above the fracture and apply less pressure, so that the fracture contracts a little, then move the fracture away a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 Soften the joint slowly, taking a large part of the healthy limb, then take another bandage and turn it around the broken limb in the opposite direction.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 then return to the part below the fracture and apply moderate pressure, neither too hard nor too gently, as we said in the first line above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then put soft bandages of linen or cloth between the joints so they are even, then tie everything above with the bandage, and then place your splints well made on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is swelling or abscess, place a soothing hot substance on it, and who removes the swelling, leave it for some days;
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 then hold your arms steady, and they should be about half the width of a thick cane wrapped tightly, or a plank like that used for splitting wood, or palm branches, and in this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but the arm that one places over the fracture should be a little thicker and larger than the others;
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 and be as long as necessary for the small or large limb;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then hold your arms steady again as you did at the first stage, then tie them with a cord going upwards, as you did on the fracture in the first stage.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 The more narrow it [the joint] becomes, the less wide it will be.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and it is necessary that the thread be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 because if the thread is thick, as I have seen in the works of fools who make their cords from twisted flax, and that is a great error, for the knots cannot be even if it is too delicate; moreover, there should not be less than the width of two fingers' space between each stitch.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient has been struck by the heads of arrows in their joints after they have been set straight in healthy ones, place linen or cotton poultices over them so that they do not become inflamed.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a fracture, and the bones are broken, I shall tell the cure below after that.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to set all fractured limbs at once on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 For when the limbs are large, it is not necessary to make holes for stitches before the fifth day or the seventh, or more according to your certainty of abscess healing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twisting:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And you take flour that is kept near the mill walls and mix it with an abundance of egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it; this is the common method for restoring a fracture in various ways, and especially for women and small children, as it is not too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another way of applying plaster to restore the fracture, dislocation, and sprain:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take a lancet and linen cloth and alum and asafetida and Arabic gum, mix in X quantities;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 myrrh and aloeswood, in V quantities;
alechil VIIII З.;	 The shoulder blade (alecil) should be set back nine times;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 and make powder from it, and mix it with egg yolk;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 If the patient's constitution is hot, use this plaster, as it has a good composition, and restore broken bones quickly, and helps many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another type of plaster for twisting (torsion) relief:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 Take mugwort and vismil, in nine parts;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 myrrh and aloes, in eight parts;\]   pois les moule et les metes en une paille a fumier;
acaice VI З.;	 The dislocation is caused by some disjointing from its place, therefore it cannot move, and the limb is misaligned; this causes the patient great pain and injury.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Break well and grind finely, boil with vinegar or an abundance of egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another way to apply plaster for dislocated joints and displaced bones, alleviate the pain that occurs, and cut away the bone, break it.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen, soak it in boiled oil and water, and put it on top of the place.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This bandage does not restore [the joint or bone], but it is good for alleviating the abscess heat and bone pains properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another way to apply plaster for bones that are broken and displaced:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and purslane leaves, grind them together to make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of bandaging for the restoration of the fractured bone and for hastening the healing of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of comfrey, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wormwood, from each one a part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind, and make into a paste with wine, and if the limbs are burned, apply to it moist coriander water or vinegar, and use.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medical ointment or paste) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of comfrey, flax seeds, balm of Gilead, sweet clover and witch hazel, flowers of violets and chamomile, all together in equal parts.
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 grind, and make into a paste with salt water, sweet water or wine, according to the heat of the limb, and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates wrote in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken member for restoration except for an ointment made from beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and said that it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It seems Galen says that dry and somewhat warm things should be placed on a broken member for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way of poultice that helps for injury and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Grind up muggath and horsehairs from shaved men or feathers of birds, and equal amounts of alum, and sieve them, and make a plaster with it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 Then wait a little while after that, and ensure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bone moved from its place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 If it is not dislocated for several days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 But if pain comes to the place, or itching, without rest or swelling, hurry and dislocate it, remove the plaster now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 Take a light cloth and sea sponge dipped in water, lift the place, until the itching stops and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the limb rest for an hour, then place dry linen on it, dampen it with vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up tightly until you are sure the abscess is hot.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 And let the inflammation of the limb rest and the pain be removed, then begin wrapping it subtly, using a little emplastrum, and do not strain it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that the abscess has healed and turned red, swollen, hot, and sore, and you need plaster and linen, apply it as you did at first.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, do not remove the binding before three or four or five or seven days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 And sometimes leave it for twenty days, as one sees fit, until the bone breaks and the wound heals over.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then stretch it more than before, and make its flesh thicker, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 If you see the joint drying out too much, know that nutrients cannot reach it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Warm it with hot moist heat every time you dislocate it, and do so three times a day, and loosen the joint slightly.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 By this means, cut off the nutrients to the limb, and quickly heal what fools leave twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 It is bad, and it is fearful work, and I see nothing but laboring and working correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many types of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended for different things.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 For there are breaks made by the impact of swords, and the collar bone fractures all the way up to the shaft which is beneath the bone, as a hacksaw or club does;
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 and for this reason, such break is called "hackbreak".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or if the sword strikes the bone from above in such a way that it pierces through, this kind of break is called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And these two breaks are large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a percussion buried, or a cleft or shaft of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent fracture that approaches the membrane beneath the bone, or it is on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if the wound is closed in the bone as thin as hair, and it is a small fracture, it is called "hairline".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or anything similar, and it drives a bone fragment inside, and the joints are crushed as blacksmiths do on top of the cauldrons;
si entre li piere dedens.	 If (something) enters into the bone.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this happens more often in those with moist bones, like a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 It also occurs in all these ways of breakage, where small pieces are dislocated, like splinters.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 I shall speak about its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we know all kinds of fractures by the traction on them, and the exploration with probing, and by corruption of the flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy appearance is known to those who, when they have uncovered the bone and rub it vigorously, make the fracture blacken.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, beware of the patient's condition, and if you see any unfavorable circumstances, such as vomiting of blood, loss of consciousness, swelling, paleness, high fever, hairs appearing and turning red, and other signs in various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you see no unfavorable circumstances and hope for a recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the navroz comes first to you, and it is in winter, you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the start of menstruation.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in this state, hurry to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and come the complications as we have said.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the bone break comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, you must cut open the fractured part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 And you are to take the head of the patient and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and on the figure of the wound make it softer than possible, and if a discharge of blood comes out when exposing the bone or an abscess appears, you should help it with what is necessary; and it is that you fill the place with damp cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And make the wound rest until the abscess has subsided, and ensure the flow of blood is stopped.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begins the bone to cut out, and it is done according to two ways of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 The first way is that you cut in a narrow incision in front, and this is the shape:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 The second way is that you have different numbers of incisions, some narrow and others wide, pointed, and made with sharp iron tools.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And work gently, so as not to cut the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 If the bone is hard and protruding, you must drill around it so that you can make incisions with chisels, but not cutting through the bone to the other side, and above the point it should have a margin or circle, which prevents the point from passing through the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 And you must have several, so that each one comes into its place on the end of the bone, so that you have trepan(s) for all purposes.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 This is the form of the three kinds of trepans (trepan instruments):
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The qualities for trepanning around the broken bone are that you place the trepan on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 Then place the trepan elsewhere a little later, and do this all around, then cut the space of the bone that is between the fractures, and do this as subtly and lightly as you can, and carefully, as we have said, until you extract the bone with your hand or any tool you have, such as pliers or tweezers.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 Keep in mind you are not to touch the brain or the spinal cord.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 Once the bone is pierced and treated, it is necessary to reset the dislocation that remains within the bone with an instrument resembling a pair of pliers, but it should be thinner and more delicate than other pliers.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if there is something remaining of the small bones, or scales, gently remove them with instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 Then treat the wound with cautery and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 The other way of work, which is more dangerous, is the one that Galen described.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 He very strongly advises it, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture is visible, so that when you have exposed this part, you will place under it the head of the curved incision, which has the shape shown below.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And it does not cut completely through from one side, and the parts are sharp on two edges, so that the cutting is toward the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly cut through the bone all around, and take care of the cloth that is below;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 if it is close to the bone, cut lightly, because cutting too deeply can cause harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through to the cloth, and the bone is chipped only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must do this after roughing it up, and remove the scales with a sharp razor of various sizes, in order to make available the most suitable one for each place, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	The patient should shave off large areas of hair, then proceed to finer razoring, and continue this process until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other hair-like cuts and subtle breaks, you should bring to the surface according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 this is something not easily answered by one who has put his study in this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is exposed, you should take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil and put it on the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another cloth folded in two or three, wet it with wine and rose oil, and put it on the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 and do it more gently than you can, so as not to weigh down the wound, then administer it through another layer, and do not strain it any further than necessary to touch only the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 and leave it thus for a day or two until the abscess is soothed, then release it, and administer medicines like those of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, arsenic, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 and make powder from these things, put it on the wound, and administer immediate medicine without masticication (chewing).
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And be careful that the wound is always clean, do not leave any dressing or pack it with bandages, for when the packing is assembled on the brain cloth, it will rot and corrupt, causing great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 For if you put anything sharp on it, it will burn through from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, be careful to avoid any bad accidents happening to the patient as we have said, for it is doubtful and full of doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness does not come forth except for the medicine that has been put on it, having this property, you must take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them together with linen cloth and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it in the manner of wounds that is appropriate, until it heals completely.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one part alone, because they are two bones;
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And below is cartilage, and it does not break, but it does not cause swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 And if one of the two parts is broken, you must break your little finger or thumb nail, and insert it equal to the break inside the index finger, and to the palm by the side, until the nail regrows according to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	If the fracture is in the part above the nose and the thumb cannot reach the place, you should place it equal to the top of a small rod.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 If the break is between two parts, you should repair it similarly, and hurry to restore it within a day if possible.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then apply bandages of linen to the tip of the nail if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 When you step on another from another side, it breaks there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 and the tents be as thick that they fill the holes in the neck.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said any remedy that one should soak tents in butter and churn them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem good to me, but they should be moistened in the making of egg yolk and flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Then let the tent remain until the bone is hard and the cartilages harden.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes people step on goose pen feathers instead of tents, and if the wound is covered with linen cloth, and hold the breakage, and blow into the patient.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 or do what you want to do.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess occurs while you are working on it, put either cotton soaked in rose oil or a small piece of camphor on it.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 If an abscess does not come, apply plaster on the outside, with flour of lime and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light stops on it and do not bind the neck.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And if the break in the neck is small, and it breaks into many small pieces, extract the fragments with suitable instruments, then make an incision, and treat with substances that are healing such as plasters and ointments suitable for this purpose.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no wound within the neck, treat it with linen strips, and place woolen bands on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	If the jawbone is fractured without any external wound and the break is not split in two but only displaced, and if it's recognized easily that it's just displaced, not broken completely inside, as can be seen from the curve.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 It is necessary that you insert your index finger into the mouth of the patient if the break is in the right part.
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 And if the break is in the left lower jaw, insert your index finger of the right hand gently into the opening, and adjust it with the other hand from outside, and hold it steady.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two places, you should provide extension to both places equally.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if movement of the teeth occurs, or breaking, hold them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place a broken jaw bandage on it and place a double cloth on top.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 Place a big bandage or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it in place where you can, and tell the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 If you see that the figure changes, dislocate it the next day, and then reset it where it is changing.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 Place a plaster on it with milled powder with plenty of egg or flour of lime after removing the bandage.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 And put a light linen cloth on the dislocation, and if it swells, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 Often it heals within three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess arises, apply what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 If there is a fracture and wound together, tie up any piece of the bone that has been removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 Choose the most suitable instrument for removing the bone piece.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, expand it according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces and there is no more left, then close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the bandage
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The break is often made several times towards the shoulder, and the fracture occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 or it is broken and disjointed at the second joint, and it has parts, and it is the easiest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 and there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the work if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, you should have two attendants, so that one presses the shoulder where the bone seems broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 And the other extends the neck towards the part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 Then equal the break at your fingers, so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deformation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to stretch more, put a round ball of fabric or linen on the patient under the shoulder, and it should be large according to your need.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 Stretch and raise the armhole, hold the ball in place with your hand, and straighten the break as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outward due to its being deep-set, as it comes in deeply, then the patient must lie on his affected side, and place one ear against the shoulder, and push the shoulder downward, until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then direct the break at your fingers, and if you find that it is broken, you must cut over it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 Pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot be joined in any way, strike it at one of the incisions you have made.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 But you put it under the forceps for traction.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and appears like a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 and it should have two arms, as you see, and one wide and the other narrow, as is the incision of the wound that you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 and when you are sure of the abscess being hot, if the wound is closed, and the incision is small, or if you doubt the abscess being hot, if the wound is closed, use linen cloths and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if pustules become hot, soak a cloth in rose oil, asafoetida, and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The setting of the bone, when it feels like there are wounds and sawing, is that you place on the bone the plaster made from milled powder and egg white, apply light stops, and put a sphere under the assemble if necessary.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very long bandage of one palm width, then place a double cloth on top of hot iron, and apply it.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a thin stick of three feet long and wrap it around the bandage, so that the head of the bandage protrudes.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 and place the stick on the broken bone, turn the bandage around the neck, and press down healthy flesh, and press down sick flesh.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 and separate each part, and when you see that the bones are healing properly and it is clear that the stick does not move above the broken bone, keep it in place every day, and if the swelling subsides, hold it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie down on his back, and place a small pillow under his buttocks to raise the shoulder.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 Align the fracture of the forearm by aligning the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck and do not untie it except in case of a bad accident for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then repeat the plastering, if you see that it is necessary, and bind it and leave it like this until it heals.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 And it will heal within twenty-eight days at the most, and in less time for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the shoulder fracture
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It seldom happens that a broken or dislocated shoulder does not heal, and it should not be forced unless by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If the fracture appears according to its break's figure, and you reset it according to its natural form in all ways possible;
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 then put on the joint powder from the mill with abundant egg and light plasters, and place it on a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 then place a broad and fine awl, a bit larger than the shoulder, and under the awl is the hollow part of the shoulder in any position; if there are no cavities around the shoulder, use linen plasters so that the awl pierces evenly.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 and then hold it tightly with a strong bandage so that the awl does not move from its place, and observe the ligament every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 And every time it breaks, hold it in place, and align the bone if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 The shoulder will be reset within twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is completed, release it, and be careful, for the bone does not move easily.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes before and not beneath the skin, lift it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment of an abscess to cool it.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture by the wound
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The arm is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but it often breaks at the elbow.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken through the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, lack of alignment, suddenness, and occasionally vomiting blood, and the fractured bone opens widely, and it feels bad everywhere.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 The restoration is that the patient lies on his back, places the cushion between his shoulders, then presses the shoulders and assembles the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly align in all ways possible until the shape of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then place plasters and poultices over the subtle stick of salt or another light staff, and wrap it in a cloth, and hold it on the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 And turn the rope tightly around the back, and tighten it gradually, and each hour inspect the knot, and if it loosens, tighten it again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to undo the rope, due to corrosion or pruritic irritation at the place, or pain or abscess, then hurry, undo it, remove the plaster, and direct those who have come for treatment in a suitable manner.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the plaster and tighten it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the broken ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that the fracture of ribs occurs only in large ones, after the back and inside the chest, and they do not bend except for when they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 and it is felt well at the examination with fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 The restoration is that you make the break even again, as necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 And then put a splint and bind it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the fracture of ribs is inclined downwards, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, just like in pleurisy, because the bone pierces the lining.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 It protrudes with points and quickly and vomits a great amount of blood, and it is a grave illness, and they used to apply much effort in treating the old.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if there are those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that distend the belly, in order to push the fracture outward.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come, unless they have arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have arrived, we heal it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And some of them said that bladders are placed on the wound, to suck it out, and it seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Always, there is fear that the bladder does not draw superfluidities to their place due to weakness of position.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And it was said by some that one should cover the wound with damp linen soaked in hot oil and put plasters between the ribs to make the wound evenly healed, then it is cured with a cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear from the bone which does not pass through the wall, and fear is present for the patient, then it is necessary to break above the area of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under it to support it;
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then you must cut the bone and pull it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound, if it is large, and treat it with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 And when an abscess comes to the surface, put wet linen soaked in rose oil on it and cover the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And treat as needed the place where it should be incised, and let it lie swabbed on the side where it is, until it becomes healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes breaks occur in the neck bones, and often they bend.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And similarly to the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And when this happens and you want to know if it will heal or not, take note if his hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, he does not feel pain.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in various positions, and if they are mute and can feel when stretched or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient should be healed if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 And if similar things happen to the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and sudden back spasms and movements against one's will.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it has been swabbed on the stomach, sudden movement occurs against one's will.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it has been sustained on the back and you want to relieve it, you cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Note that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Do not labor at all in its care.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen to him, it will be a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is to warm it if there is an abscess that is hot, apply rose oil or oil of egg yolk until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices and tie it with a string, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And do not sleep on that part where there is pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 And if any bone is dislocated, it must be covered with oil.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large, with stitches, then heal it with soothing ointment until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the shoulder blade is broken, which is called "the shoulder of the cow," push your left hand's knuckles against it and align them with the other hand as you can, then put the splint and the stick above it if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then straighten it, and if there is bone displacement, raise it, and set the bone and heal the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the shinbone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It rarely happens that the bone of the shin is broken, and if it does happen, there is only a slight reduction in the pain at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 And they make it long, bend it toward the inside, and bring pain to the patient at the place, prick it, and swell that which is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the repositioning is such that you stretch out your hand above, while you are at the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and know what the break and its shape is;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 if the break is only in the head, then equalize that break, while it remains in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the fracture is long or bends inside, then lay the patient on his stomach so that the restoration of the fracture may be apparent to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have made it even, put on a plaster and then a splint of wood or horn, and hold the break still so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 place the arm below the ribs, until the joint is equalized.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on the unaffected side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 If an abscess swells there, do not touch it until the swelling has subsided, and place on what we have previously mentioned.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 And then return to the restoration, hold it as required, if there is no bad incident.
et c’est li maniere.	 This is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder joint is that which is between the neck and the upper arm, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 One method is to take a large splint, in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And tie the heads together with two ropes, and raise them up, and place the patient on a chair.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then lay the broken arm on the splint, until it is in place, and have a curve of splint in the middle, then raise it up to some heavy object or the assistant extends it downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then put the mirror the equalizer in his hands together, until the equalizer returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to place the patient on his side and tie his arm to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds the broken part with his hands above, and the other holds the rod below with one cord and extends each part to its own side.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the assistants to his part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 If the equalizer is close to the shoulder, then you must place the middle link below the socket and the other towards the skin, under the equalizer;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 and similarly if the equalizer is towards the skin, then place the link gently, without effort, so that the equalizer is even on the joint and on the skin.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then make the dislocation equal as it should be, and hold it steady if abscesses do not come out.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 If abscesses come out, do not hold it steady for more than 7 days, and put soft linen on it with rose oil until the abscesses are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then hold the shoulder in place, and the way to do so is that you place the elbow on the dislocation, then move the arm towards the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or chest.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And place the cloth, then hold the shoulder in place towards the shoulder, so that the arm is in its socket, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not dislocated.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone is not dislocated, use a splint, and place on the dislocation a larger and stronger splint than the others, with a space of 2 fingers between each splint, and make each splint so large that it passes over the dislocation by 3 fingers on either side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Hold firmly on the joints, as I said at the beginning of the chapter concerning fractures, more firmly and less in loosening them.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the position of the joints and tightening, as we have said, during the time you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal for seven days as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then examine every three days the wound, to ensure that inflammation does not occur or come to the place, or the pus cannot enter the member because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such accident occurs, do not remove the bandage until three days or more have passed, and let the patient lie on his back, and keep his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And place a splint under the shoulder equally thick with linen, and observe every hour of the day or night that the broken member does not move, or the ligaments are not softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 if the advice is given by the virtue of medicine, and meat is given which we have previously specified, so that the meat is initially fine.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 and when it begins to regain strength, it can be made thicker.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 And it is customary that the shoulder and leg should be restored in forty days in total.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And then you must release it and administer baths and ointment-medicine for its alignment.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the structure (of the shoulder) is deformed and swollen, it remains to loosen it for several days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of a broken arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "double bones", of which one is small and it is the one that follows the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the others [are] large, and this one is beneath, toward the small hole.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Occasionally only the large one breaks, or the small, and sometimes both together break.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small bone is broken, the restoration and healing are easy.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more difficult than when they break together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If only the small fracture has been broken, it should be slightly extended and aligned.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 If it is the large bone, it must be pulled harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 and stretch it towards the wrist, lift the thumb of the hand higher than the others, let the small one lower than the others, and let the patient lie crosswise on himself, and let the wrist be above him, so that the patient suffers no labor;
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then the ministers extend their arms to the part below the hand, or at the elbow, and another minister to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then set the patient straight, according to its best shape.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if there is a fracture in pieces, put each one in its place; and if any of them has slipped out, pricks the keyhole, and you cannot restore it to its place, then saw through and remove the bone, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And as for breaking an abscess, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter.
si pren la cure.	 Take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 If at the beginning of restoration, abscesses appear raw, apply the dressing made of rose oil and white beeswax, not too hard or too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 and place the dressing gently on top until the raw abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 Then remove the beeswax and apply the poultice of milled powder with egg, then place the hot stones, and the stone for breaking should be stronger and slightly larger than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that he must have 6 or more bones or arms in various positions:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 either the break is in one of the bones, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 and hold the fracture higher than elsewhere, and at all times less when aligning, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 let the bandages that are above the fracture be soft and moist, not hard or rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 and let the thread, with which it is held together, be of flax, not too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the member and the joint afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 If any bad accidents happen to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is relieved.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 Allow the limb to rest, do not restrain it.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then continue the bandaging, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones dislocated, or similar things, take care to do so.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, so that it does not pass through, then you must soften it with a poultice for a short time, and leave it like this for some days until the urine flows through, and then bandage it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things mentioned above happen to the patient, do not release him until twenty days have passed.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 Meanwhile, bind his hands to his neck, make his neck even, watch for movement and displacement, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 know that this fracture is restored within thirty or forty days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the remedies.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	In the back of the hand and fingers, there are few fractures, but rather many bending multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the hand's plant is broken or bent, the patient must sit with crossed arms, straight and evenly positioned in front of him.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 then place his hand on the extended cloth, and stretch out the broken bones with the help of the ministers, aligning them as evenly as possible until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And apply the plaster and poultices, if an abscess does not come, then insert a probe according to the size of the wound.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And be wrapped in a linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 If the break is at the opening around the abdomen of the plant, make a ball of cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken part.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then bind a long piece of cloth, and the probe should be as big as the size of the hand and bind it as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is on the outside, it is necessary to place a splint above and another below in the limb, so that the hand is straightened and bound tightly, then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 If the break comes in one of the fingers or at the joints, if it is a nail, make it even as necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And bind with the hand and if you see one, insert a small straight probe to lift the break and hold it still.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the fracture is at another joint, such as in the index or one of the others, align it and lay the limb with the healthy digit that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Tie them all together securely, for motion is of value, or you place a splint on it, like a pouch does.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 And be careful in the restoration and placement of the abscess heat, and care for what comes there, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one sees it when it turns forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the restoration is that you tie the ligament above the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies on his back, then each minister extends their ligament equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And this is when the break is in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the fracture is close to the root of the hip, it may be one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments on the opposite side of the fracture.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 If it is near the knee, then the ligaments around the knee should be separated, and the tendons below should be extended.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then place the mirrors the bone equal to its two hands, as it should be according to its natural shape, and then place the splint and the ligature, unless an abscess does not come forth.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is an abscess, let it heal by itself, then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The ligature is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 You must wind the bandage above the fracture and bind it firmly in two or three layers, removing any excess, then bend the leg until the heels come to the root of the knee, and insert the long thread between the calf and the leg, below the groin, and bring the end of the thread up.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then turn towards the leg and thigh and bend it, then put on splints for the break, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Use soft fabric cloth of about 8 inches between the leg and thigh to equalize the binding, then begin to bind firmly for three or four times around the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 and as you move up along the splint, gradually loosen it.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then insert two threads that you put between the leg and thigh, bind three splints above them, then go below the top thread to the joint, until you reach the foot.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 And hold it still in place so that it does not move from its position, then leave it like this, and let there be no abscess or swelling or other such thing.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it occurs, dislocate [the joint] and reposition what comes out, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 and if there are bone fragments that protrude, they must be pulled out, if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 and if it cannot be pulled out, then the limb must be cut open and the fragment removed.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 and heal [the wound] as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 Sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that rods must be inserted, as in the shoulder or arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 Nevertheless, when restored in this manner, it does not hurt the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is healed within a few days or a little more or less, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the knee joint
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not really a fracture, but rather a split or piercing, causing pain at every wound and this hurts greatly.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 And the restoration is that the ends which are rounded are made even with each other, until they are united as much as possible;
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then place the arm-band, and put a round stick (if necessary), and hold it as needed, then check all the positions mentioned in other broken places, such as an abscess or similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Put to every accident whatever is necessary until it becomes healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that there are two bones in the leg, of which one is called "mastodon" and the other is called "wolf.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And a break in the leg occurs similarly to one in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are all the same. If both bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen well;
et torne desoz.	 and turns underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then apply extension, make it even, and tie the joints equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 but nevertheless, if the break is misshapen and there are several pieces, the extension should be less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 align it according to your judgment.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two splints of willow wood that support the leg on both sides and are as long as the leg from the knee to below;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap both splints around it and bind them in the middle, so that the leg will not be able to bend to the right or left, and thus it is good;
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And no one applies the bandages to the long part of the leg, and it is fastened with a rod, and they put the leg for restraint from movement, and properly done is this in the break where there is pain.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess or another accident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 if it is cured when it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but sometimes breaks occur in the bones of the foot and toes, and it requires certain treatment in many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 If there is a bone fracture in the foot break, and you see the bones pushing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground, as if he wants to walk, and now put your foot under his, where the bones are lifted, and then press it until they return to their places.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then place the pillar and stopper on top, and put a small table under the stomach for two hands, then pull it forward, then when you have wrapped cloths around, and other things that you may need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, untie the bandages, for you will find the bones even, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said regarding the hands.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then insert a stick broken in two across the shoulder, and it should be slightly larger, then place beneath the joint that I said, and hold it in place.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 If there are two or three, or more, break them, then place a stick across each shoulder according to its size, wrapped in one piece of linen cloth, and hold the joint under the arm.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 and remain on top of the joint above the belly of the arm, so that it is well covered.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things I said about other breaks, as I have mentioned.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 Treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone in the thumb
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the natural bone of the female pelvis is broken, make her sit with her back leaning to one side and hold her from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then fill the bladder with the patient's wound linen, also as large as a bull's eye.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then turn the woman and lift her back little by little, and then push the linen until it reaches the opening of the wound, and return the bone to its place with the bull's eye.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wants to urinate, remove the linen, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or thereabouts.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 The break will be healed, and if you see it, take a bladder of goat's skin, attach a tube to it, and insert the entire bladder into the wound.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Then blow into the tube forcefully, until the bladder is inflated inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 Nature will heal the fracture;
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then fill it with cotton, and leave it for several days until it heals.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the arm bone is broken in a man or woman, restore it as we have said in the thighbone;
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And these fractures should not be concealed from those who study and practice this art, and read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For fractures indicate in many cases the right path for restoration:
enten le donques.	 Therefore, let us proceed.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In the thighbone, when it is broken, take an owl's gullet and insert the thighbone;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap fabrics around it, and leave for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	for the one who has a breakage with wound, particularly if it is large, such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or something similar, that it should be treated now, so that the sores mentioned previously bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healed, apply vinegar to it, if you have none else, then begin again to heal the breakage in that same hour, or on that day, if an abscess does not come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If an abscess comes up, wait until the ninth day for it to be soothed, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause a bad incident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears exposed on the edge of the wound, you must set it gently in place with light pressure and extend it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 And if the extension does not present itself for you to make it even with your hands, then straighten it with this tool which is of iron, having seven or eight inches in length, and the width according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 Also, it is necessary for the mirror that he takes III or IV, according to what he needs in each cure of breaking.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 and be round and somewhat large so that it does not bend at the compression on the member in your work, and be sharp in front, and thick from the middle to the point.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palanch", which means that the crooked shoulders should be placed on top of the bone appearing at the head.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 And push it back once until it returns, and make them even with each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 If the break is subtle and the instrument cannot properly take hold of the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot push the bone back, as we have said, use a suitable tool to strike or cut it, be it an instrument for cutting or sawing, at your ability.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then reshape the part that is stuck in the bone with sharpness and small scrapes.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is set, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 Make it return to its place, then wet the linen cloth in black astringent wine, and clean it carefully if it is hot.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 And do not put any medicine or oil on the wound that would cause rot and corruption to form.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then administer the bandage when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open and cover it all around, according to its size, and be careful that the wound is not constricted by the fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times have the foolish ones done this, and have brought the sick or dead upon the patient or corroded it once.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And let the bindings be softer and more pliable than other breaks.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you fear that a bad event may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the site, do not put needles on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But wrap around [it], instead of needles, hard cloth, and bind it.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And when you see after one or two days swelling at the wound, remove whatever you have put on it entirely and apply healing ointment for wounds such as tetrafarmacons and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And it is necessary that you dislocate the member twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the bone moves down gently but gradually.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	If it passes many days and cannot heal but the bone keeps moving, since there are small pieces of bone, which is why you should press the wound with pressure, and remove all those dislocated pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula or any kind of corruption comes at the place, you must treat it, according to what is said in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and open above the member, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, and similar large members, do not draw it out, for many times death comes, but leave it until it can be pulled.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 By chance, (it) may happen to him after 20 or 30 days, then treat the wound if possible.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The coming sores on the sore (translated as: 'the sores that come upon a sore')
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 We often see recovery after the breaking of bones, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to see the deformity of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 And by chance, the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Therefore be careful when we treat him:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 if you administer medicines that are sticky such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocola, acacia, and similar substances, take any of these things, or all together, and mix them with a sticky wine, or with an abundance of egg white or watercress.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And set it on the bed in a basin, and hold it firmly, and do not loosen it for many days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then dislocate (it), and begin another, until the nodes are removed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or hold onto a well-made wooden piece.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the properties of wood are such that it removes all inflammations from limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the nodes have turned into hardness, as a stone, it is necessary to remove it, by hitting it from above, and making the excess appear.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or you scrape it with any shaver, until it is removed, and treat it until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which is weak after being set (or treated)
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the bone fracture has been restored, and remains after limbs weak and delicate, this happens for many reasons.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 Because one (the joint) was tied too tightly, and it was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 or because there were too many ropes, and the nutriments could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 porque hay mucha corriente de sangre;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 For too large movements, not at all in its hour;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 or because it has little blood in its body, it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the treatment consists of making the patient eat, and making the body thin, until the blood is multiplied in him;
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and give baths, and give joy and happiness;
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then put the pitch on the member, so that the pitch attracts a great inflammation, and it rots often with cold water, until the inflammation reaches the member;
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 and returns to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	The member twisted out of health [or order] after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the form of the member is deformed, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 Do not believe the foolish who say that one should break a limb completely anew, and many fools have done so in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 And this practice is condemned, causing great harm, and possibly death by chance.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Nevertheless, if the knots and tortures are fresh, it is necessary to loosen them with hot water or softening herbs such as mallow leaves, roots, clover, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 And make a plaster of mollifying substances, such as darnel well does, and take the root of mallow, steep it in walnut oil or sesame oil, and apply it on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 Take ripe figs made into a paste with wheat bran, and similar medicines that soften the sores.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is opened by rubbing continually and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 If the tortuosity is hardened and swollen like a stone, and iron treatment is needed, it must be covered up to the bone, and cut through gently with a sharp, thin instrument.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And apply cushions and bandages in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, it must now be reset without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if one delays, the joint swells, and there is danger of putting it back to its place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 Therefore, it is not advisable to move it at dawn when it is swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Often causes spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 Nevertheless, when this occurs, clean the patient, then let him rest until the abscesses are all appeased.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then immerse the affected limb in warm water and oil, then gently move it, and treat each member as its treatment is appropriate in its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 It rarely happens that the jaws are dislocated outwards, and the dislocations of both can occur in two ways.
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are slightly displaced from their places and softened a little;
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, with saliva pouring from the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a small dislocation returns with various positions.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is whole and complete, you must quickly reset it without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 And in such a manner that the minister holds the head of the patient and pushes one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 And the other hand must be folded back, to keep it even.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 instruct the patient to soften their jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the mirror set even again, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 And if the reset is difficult (or impossible), especially if both jaws are dislocated together, then anoint them with hot oil and water, until they can be easily reset.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not hide the resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they are reset equally, and the mouth of the patient closes well, apply a soft cloth made of rose oil and wax, then tie it gently with several threads.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 And let the patient sleep on his back, with his arms between two cushions so that he does not move to the right or left, nor exert himself, but take light food until the pain is removed, and the jaws are healed.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then eat lightly whatever he desires without exerting himself to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be properly set within an hour and are not returned to their places, then fever and accustomed sweats occur, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this (should be understood as "And if you observe it"), then know that it is destruction.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many times the person who experiences it dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	Of the collarbone
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The collarbone cannot dislocate towards the chest and ribs from the inside, nor can it dislocate outwards; however, it sometimes does dislocate, which is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and extends his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 then press the shoulder firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then put on the splint and bind it tightly.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the head of the shoulder should not be dislocated.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if it does dislocate again, reset it to its place, as we have said.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then put on the splint and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And likewise, the head of the spine is reset when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	The dislocation of the shoulder   (from the previous sentence)
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the spine can be dislocated in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 The first way is when it dislocates at the bottom of the neck.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 and the second one is at the thigh part;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 and in case of dislocation above, it happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 do not dislocate behind for the shoulder, and do not dislocate inside for the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 often dislocate downwards towards the buttocks, especially in those who have little flesh, as it can jump out quickly from there;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 in those who have enough flesh, it jumps out slightly and returns slightly.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance happens to some men percussion or breaking, and swells the shoulder with an abscess hot, and believes that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you should test it, as long as you are sure;
et adonques encomence la cure.	 then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 Dislocations are known when they occur downwards towards the buttocks, and there is a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find obvious differences between them;
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 You will find a hollow in the neck of the shoulder, and press firmly on top of it, as if it were an egg.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 The patient cannot bring his hand back to its normal position nor make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 And if it is dislocated upwards, it should not be hidden, because you can feel it clearly when pressed.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 This kind of dislocation is not difficult to reset when new or if the infant is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 The method is that the attendant raises the patient's hand upwards, then places his fists beneath it, and forcibly moves the joint upwards to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 The attendant raises the hand and extends it upwards, then places it.
si venra hastanment.	 It will come urgently.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 If it does not come as we have said within a few hours, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and apply a soothing and calming ointment, such as a decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a piece of linen equal in size, not too soft nor too hard, should be placed under the shoulder. The hand of the patient should be held by an assistant, and the head of the shoulder should be straightened carefully, and the arm of the patient pulled out.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And another assistant holds the head of the patient so that it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 That shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocated in this manner, reset it accordingly.
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and you must be present a person larger than the patient.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and he should be on the opposite side of the dislocation, and push the patient's shoulder below the armpit, lift the patient's arm upward so that the patient hangs from it.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 and another servant pulls the patient's hand downward towards the stomach.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, he cannot lift anything heavy, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 And the dislocation can be reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is that a long needle is placed in the ground, so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, neither too thick nor too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 then it is placed under the patient, but with padding on top, and the patient should be standing straight.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Then extend the hand downwards towards the opposite form, and the joint will return to its place quickly.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not return due to everything we have said, then do this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a stick from two arms of great length and four fingers in width, whose head is rounded for easy insertion deep within the anus, following this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 Then lay the stick's head on a piece of cloth to prevent it from hurting the patient, then insert it into the patient's anus.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 extend your arms over the stick, and hold the handle of the stick, with your forearm at the end of the arm, then place your hand on a stool of large width, and let your hands hang down, and leave the body hanging from the other side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 The dislocation comes now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in, in whatever way that may be, you must place an equal sphere of wool underneath the shoulder, then apply the plaster made of milled powder, with incense and egg white, all over the shoulder and around, then hold it underneath the shoulder carefully, and twist the linen around the plaster, and bind the hands to their neck, and let them remain in that position.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 It is necessary that he fart a little while the limbs are comforted, for it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 And then move it more after five or seven days, and move it.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 If it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture which has come or for some other reason, then you must apply fire cauterization at three points, as it is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days, and the jointure does not hold and cannot lift the arm upwards, then understand that the nerve at the base of the shoulder has been severed or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And understand that the jointure will never be fixed in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 The dislocation that is towards the foot and limbs, or behind, is made by force and extension of hands, and another remedy is administered.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal it as long as it remains healthy.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes swelling in the member and it gradually moves, then the patient should use baths many times until the swelling subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	The cost of dislocation is...
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated at points, and at points it returns.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 and it is dislocated from all parts, both in front and behind, and the dislocation is not put back, for it can be seen clearly and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 and it is dislocated according to each form or shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the sick body with healthy one, make sure to see them clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm nor touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it in the same way that an abscess comes out, for if an abscess comes out, it would be difficult to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 And by chance it cannot be put back entirely in all places, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 It is better than other dislocations and it causes greater pain, and by chance death may come from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration is such, when it can be returned, that you extend your hand to both of yours;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 and the arms be spread, and the hands to the mirror according to the measurement around, above and below, and push the joint together at their peaks or at the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is in front, it returns when you double your hand over your hand, and bend the root of the palm that is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 and if it does not want to return to its place, then administer a strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and it is that the two ministers extend the arm and mark it with the two ministers so that it does not move in extension.
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 then turn the arm from each side, then when you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when the doctor joins the joint with his hand, he should oil it to soften the joint, then push the joint back into place until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is in its place, put on a plaster of dry ointment with egg white, and hold it in place, and fasten the arm to the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is firm in its place, remove the ligature and leave it be;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 And if you see that the joint does not hold well, reapply the plaster and ligature, and leave it in this state for some days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if it feels pain after the reset of the joint, and it becomes motionless, wash and rub it well, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Place a fat sheep's wool on the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when it bleeds, wipe the joint gently, then place the wool back on, and then make it enter water again.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 If you see, place warm damp sheep's wool with butter on it and hold it there.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	The dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand dislocates easily, more than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Immediately, it must be returned to its place, in the same hour that it is dislocated, unless the joint is swollen or there is an abscess hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the resetting is that you put the patient's hand on a table, extend your fingers, and place the eyes so they are even, with the palm over the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Indeed, you must look if it is in its place;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Then place the patient's hand on a table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's hand on the table, and have them put their other hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, press down with plasters to soothe abscesses, and let it rest in that condition.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if it cannot bear it, and you cannot put it in place after any days, then the dislocation persists;
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 The patient must not move his hand as long as it is paralyzed and cannot exert any strength:
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 Therefore know that the nerves or the arteries have been cut:
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 There is no other remedy but to use fire cautery for this case, and perhaps nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is at its place, put on the plaster as we have said, then strain it and leave for 5 days, then release and let it rest.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move properly and there is no swelling, wet with warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 Sometimes the thumb of the hand is dislocated on both sides, sometimes at the back of the palm or the belly:
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then place the thumb and push the dislocation back into its socket until it comes back, then hold the head of the thumb, and pull it towards the side where it is disjointed:
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 Leave it for two days, then equalize it on that day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 Then loosen it if necessary, as we have said, and dislocate it for a day, make it move, and reattach it after that.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this often, until it is narrowed, and do the same if it dislocates from the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same when it dislocates from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	And also for the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, and if there are multiple dislocations without any treatment, death quickly comes to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 The signs are that the excretion jumps involuntarily and cannot be held, and many times a member becomes swollen, either the two knees or both arms or the head.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And many times the spleen becomes silent in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 That which becomes silent at the backside is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The cure is that you inspect if the gilbositez has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 if it has not had any treatment or healing throughout.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And that which comes from falling or blows, or similar things, the old ways of healing said in great words, there was no benefit in all this.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 but I have condensed it according to my intention and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the case of the gilbositez which comes in front, there is no remedy or healing.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 and similarly that which comes directly to the side, and can be cured only by the one which comes at the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 And it is that the patient should be extended on his face in a flat position and have something held under him to prevent him from bleeding.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then stick the torch into the patient's head, on the ground, and tie a thread beneath the patient's elbows, ankles, knees, and wrists.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 and two assistants know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, between the two torches.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 And both torches should be firmly pressed as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine formed until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return by this cure, take a board three feet long and curved at the bottom, place the patient on his side, and press the top of the board against the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And place the mirror on top of the other head of the table, and press firmly until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if you see, do as the treadle which turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And it is that you insert two thongs on the head of the patient from one arm, and between each thong, inside and outside, there should be a palm's breadth of space.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And let each thong have the pivot where the treadle moves, and let the thongs be firmly in the ground so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each of the two thongs, there should be another rotating thong, as in gears, and have two small thongs of a palm's length for turning the treadle.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then tie the tendon that is among the ankles towards the neck, and the other tendon towards the feet at the other neck, and each of the ministers turns his neck to the entire tendon, and the masters align the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is aligned, put a drying plaster with egg on top, then bandage, and then the cast made of a board three feet long, which takes care of the swelling and the part of the spine, then tie a rope as we have said, use the patient with gentle treatment until he is well.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if anything comes at the end of his health, it is necessary to administer softening and soothing medicines with the bandage that we have said before;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And sometimes they administer a piece of wood, and sometimes the appearance comes at the lower part of the spondylus (spine), and it is thought to be a dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 And that is the bone opening, so one should not have any presumption.
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 By accident it may bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Know that the joints of the neck and shoulder come apart only through dislocations, not like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 And the joint of the neck is dislocated in four parts.
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 Inside and outside, front and back.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 Further inside it is more dislocated, but less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of its dislocation inside is that when the diseased leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased joints open wider than those of the healthy, and the diseased cannot bend their knee in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the joint that is swollen with abscess heat, because the shoulder of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of one who comes to discharge (or expel), is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the signs of this condition on the front part are that they should stretch out their leg according to fulfillment.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 In any case, the knee should not double in pain and if one wishes to make it walk, it cannot do so beforehand, and it holds back its urine, and the ankle swells up and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of one whose condition is behind (or posterior), are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and the leg is twisted more than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the hip of the thigh is at the place below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The recurrences of this dislocation-like appearance are that you observe whether the dislocation is old and remains in its position without any cure.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 And it should not be that there is any presumption about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in the one where the dislocation is fresh, and this is one of four types of dislocation, hurry up that you return the joint, and push it inward and outward, and move it left and right;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 Perhaps it will return on its own and does not require any other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply a strong splint and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or tie it to the thigh using a bandage.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and another helper extends his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands underneath the knees, then ties it with a strong bandage around the calf.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and another one ties the head with the bandage;
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And they stretch upwards and downwards all at once, as long as the patient is raised from the ground only once, and remains hanging there.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This way of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If that does not happen, then you must give treatment for its similar symptoms.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is at the shoulder joint, you must hold the patient on their healthy side, then place the rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb that is under the angle (arm pit), then pull the rope upwards towards the angle, and towards the elbow.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then take another minister (helper) by their arms, and embrace the diseased thigh's large part, extending it in a wide manner.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 It will return to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this kind of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 If you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the injured leg should be extended two fingers' breadth more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 Then it should be suspended from above with a beam, and there should be two arms' length between it and the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 Then instruct the assistant to grasp the thigh and another assistant should be hanging with the patient, who grasps the thigh firmly, as the joint will return quickly now.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is facing away, let the patient lie as we have said in the case of one who has gout, and pull the rope up over the injured leg properly, and also over the thigh.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then put two hot iron rods, one at the head and another at the feet, then insert the iron rod between the thighs of the patient in the shape.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 and plant damp cloths around it so that it does not blister the patient, then each minister extends towards him, and the mirror puts his hand equal to the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it comes back, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If it does not come back, place him on a table and press as we have said in the case of gout, and make the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the sick leg immediately, and as I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 and the mirror places his pain on top of the angry dislocation, then presses with the other hand, and stretches it down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is to the rear, it should not be stretched down, nor lifted up from the ground, but it should remain as when a horse's harness is dislocated to the rear, as we have said in the lying down on two horses.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And it (the affected body part) should be placed on its side (or flat), and the limb stretched out as we have said before, and it must be pressed against the joint on a solid surface.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And the patient will extend their legs, and they should be even (level).
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then adjust the thighs, place the affected leg, and tie it with a bandage so that the affected limb does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And rest for three or four days, then untie it, and place the affected leg again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 If you see that they are level (equal), tie it as before, and let it rest for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then untie it, and make the patient walk slowly, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	Of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The genou (knee) can become dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 that is to say, internally and externally, and backwards.
et ne desalue point devant.	 it does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, then you know that it is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 and the restoration of all (the dislocations) is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his front, and place his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 then take hold of the knee with both hands, pull it straight between your hands, and bend the two sides of the knee outwardly.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And another servant extends his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he bends his leg gently at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 Then apply the plaster, and hold the leg bent at the knee for three or four days, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Do not move the patient, let the limbs be comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not present, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hernia, until it is healthy.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes swollen, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 The sign is that the ankle is swollen and it protrudes in the direction where it has been dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The corrections are light, and they must be stretched gently to their hands when they are merely swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And if it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright and hold the servant only by the leg above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then take the foot towards you with your right hand, then with your left hand twice, then lift it up and push the foot up strongly.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do this twice as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot.
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 if it returns, that is good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 if not, then repeat the work, because it will return.
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 and if it cannot return like that, make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and insert the probe firmly into the ground between his legs, and tie strips around it so as not to cut the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 then the attendants mark the leg, and another attendant extends the foot to his hands or to the chain, so that it lies on the neck of the foot.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 Then extend each instrument equally, and place the patient's legs together close to the patient so as to hold the patient while stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then grab the dislocated joint with both hands, and another instrument hold the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is in place, put the padding and muffler on top of it, hold it in position with force, tie the foot to the healthy leg, and watch the nerves that are above the back of the ankle, so the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, tighten them again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Untie it on the third day or the fourth, and have the patient walk for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if it goes towards that point, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess swells up, you must treat it as we have said elsewhere, until it is healthy.
des dois	The two [things] (or parts)
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two [things] are dislocated, they must be stretched gently without strain, and it is an easy task.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 If the dislocation is on any side of the back or hip, you must make the patient sit upright on a flat surface such as a bed or table, and put your foot on the affected joint opening. Then press firmly with your foot until it returns to its place.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is level and there is no opening, put a table under the foot of the shoulder, then press firmly, and leave it for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Let it rest until it heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is treated, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 If you are not presumptuous in the care, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, do not be hasty.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 Use at first the cooling of an abscess hot, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of health.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as long as the abscess grows warm.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in its place, then apply cooling things to the abscess, and treat the wound as needed with dry unguents.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is a break in the dislocation and small bones dislocated, then set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And keep away from entering into fear, as I have said, for this will be harmful to you according to your Creator, and because of the wisdom of your weapon and body.
