O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	I have completed this book, my very dear son, which is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its content, and I have ended it by its explanations and its declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to me in a vision that I shall complete this book with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is forbidden in our region and is considered foreign in every way, science and knowledge are perishing and being lost, and nothing remains beyond small descriptions in books written by the ancients that have been changed by hands.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes error and vanity; intentions are closed off and knowledge is removed.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	 It seems to me that I should bring it to life together with the arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation.
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	 And I will come together with the forms of the fire irons for cautery, and other tools of the work with the arrangement of the explanation and preparation of them, as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands have been found in our time, the art of medicine has become distant.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And he who undertakes it should be versed in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to such an extent that he knows the judgment of limbs, their forms and joints and separations, and have knowledge of bones and nerves and sinews and the number of bones, and the movement and rest of veins and arteries, and the location of their outlets.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	 And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name without work is nothing.
et meismement en l’art de main.	 And especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	 We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things mentioned before, should take care not to err and not to cut men.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	 As I have often seen more than those who engage in this science abandon science and sense through experimentation.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	 I saw a foolish man who cut an abscess from a woman's neck, and cut the arteries of her neck.
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	 because so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	 And I saw another fool who removed an arrow from an old man, and the arrow was large.
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	 he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had been called before to treat him, and saw the state of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	 And I saw another fool who took care of our land's duke who had a broken leg, and with the break there was a wound.
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	 and the foolish man, filled with ignorance, set the break above the wound with strong bindings, and did not leave any slack to the wound, and left it in this state.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	 And he commands that he does not dislocate [it] at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	 And let it remain in such a way that the leg is completely swollen and the feet come to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	 I am called to come to him, and I hurry to come and dislocate his leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	 And when I dislocated it, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	 But all ways of corruption are already determined in the member, and cannot be healed.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	 And the corruption does not cease to pass through the member until the member is entirely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And another mirror which collapses and thickens an abscess, and then burns it with the wickedness of its power.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For when an abscess is pure of melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron unless it is in a place where one can remove all that has been corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	 And therefore, dear son, it is necessary that you know that work with hands is divided into two divisions:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	 namely, surgery where there is danger in many situations.
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	 And I will show in every part of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	 Therefore it is necessary that you protect yourselves so that foolish people cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	 Take your weapons in a pouch, and attack your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best method so that by the grace of God you may come to salvation and be praised.
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	 And leave the incurable diseases to a grave condition.
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 And remove your weapons from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	 Galen said in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 "Do not take care of evil disease, lest you be called foolish fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	 "The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and against medicine agues, and these chapters are arranged from the head down to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	 "and of the forms of instruments, and of iron for cauterization, and of everything that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	 "The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of boils and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	 "and these chapters are arranged and of the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	 "The third chapters are about fixing dislocations and twists, and similar things;
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	 And it is ordered from the head down to the feet, and the shapes of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Furthermore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I say the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	 I say that the quality of help, and the harm, is the longest and most subtle speech and the secret answers.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	 And many wise men spoke about it and agreed with this.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	 And they were satisfied with my words, because I am repeating myself.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	 I say that the cautery helps universally in every constitution or matter, whether it is about constitutions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	 meaning hot constitution with matter, and dry constitution with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	 In a hot and dry constitution together with matter, some said and declared that the cautery is of great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	 And others say the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	 that fire cautery is not good for disease caused by heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	 For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to treat a hot disease with heat or dryness;
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	 and he who said the opposite claimed that fire provides great help for hot and dry diseases that come in men's chests.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	When you perceive the body of the man and his constitution is with heat, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	 And in every way, do not interfere unless the one who has tested it and who knows through long experience the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of men's complexions, and their dispositions and causes of illnesses, and their symptoms and the time span.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	 as for other complexions, we have no fear, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the observers assembled and agreed on the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	Know, my son, that cautery combined with fire is one of the secrets of healing, and more powerful than cautery from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple and does not affect any other member unless named.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	 Burning medications come from one member to another by moving away, and they bring diseases of severe healing to the affected member.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	 and occasionally kill the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 The fire for its high temperature and the goodness of its substance does not cause this, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	 And I have found this through experiment and by the length of service and study I have put into the art, and it is above the truth in things.
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	 And because of this, I excuse the length of my speech, for I do not wish to deprive you of the secret that is revealed about fire, and the quality of the work, how it eliminates diseases from the body, as the philosopher says in demonstration.
or le recevez en vos pensees.	 Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, my son, that they agreed on when cauteries should be performed, and chose companions.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	 And I say that the cautery is useful in all times, because the harm occurring is beneath hidden by the help of the cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	 And similarly, when the cauterization is necessary for pain that cannot be delayed until a later time when greater harm may come to the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	 Do not think about it ever, dear child, as foolish people do.
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	 for the disease that is cured by cauterization has no return.
et il le dient ensi;	 and they say it this way;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	 but it is not as they think, because cauterization is not only a medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors causing pain, and is more effective than medicine due to the speed of its action and the power of its work and its lordship.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	 And sometimes, the disease comes according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its properties;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	 The superfluidities are accumulated in him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered at the site where there is little superfluity and moisture, as with cauteries for pain, and similar things, and that pain does not return.
mais ce avient poc.	 but it happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	 And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the end of medicine, and that is so;
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	 But they do not believe that cauteries are effective after medicine, but their intentions are false, and cauteries are called the end of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for a disease and they are ineffective, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not according to the intentions of foolish men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	 The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are softened more than those of iron, and they did not say this except for the quality of gold and the rarity of its substance.
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	 and said that the heat of the cautery does not cause pustulation, but this is not always true, for I have proven it, and found it to be true in some men.
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	 and cauteries made of gold are softer than those of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	 And yet, when you heat instruments of gold, you do not know if it is heated by the color of the gold and may suddenly cool.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	 and if it is overheated;
si font au feu;	 it burns up.
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	 And thus there is sufficient obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this reason we use the fire cautery that we have found suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I order you this chapter on the head down to the feet, so that the way is easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	Hot oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is beneficial for coldness and moisture on the brain, and it is used in the case of a disease called "soda," and for various humors that descend from the eyes and ears, and for many dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases caused by coldness such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	 The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a medicine dissolving the head three or four times according to the virtues, the age, and the accustomed capacity of the sick person.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	 and then place the head of the patient on the bed.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	 Then make him sit crosswise between your hands, and place his hands on a cushion;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	 Afterwards put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	 and where your middle fingers come, if it bleeds then warm the cautery called "olivare", of which this is the shape:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	 And place it on its right position marking it with ink, and make in drawing and pulling your hand little by little turning it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	 Then lower your hand immediately, and bring the joint back if you see the bone is a bit out.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	 and if you don't see it, continue the cautery until you see the bone as I told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	 Afterwards take a piece of silk, put it wet and soft cotton inside, place it on the joint, and leave it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	 Afterwards put soft cotton in butter.
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 And leave it until the burn is removed.
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon", until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	 And the ancients said, when an overwound stays open longer, it drains more.
et por ce si aide mues.	 and for that reason, it helps to move.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And they said to one of these that the fire cautery should be allowed to rest so much that a part of the bone is burnt, and then reset the burnt bone part and heal it.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	 And others say that the cautery should be made less frequently on top, and pushed as hard as a weaver's shuttle so that the humors are forced out from the bone, for this reason because the humors flow out when moved.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	 and the wound should be left open for a long time.
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	 afterwards it should be healed and soothed.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	 These two ways of cauterization seem not to be good in every case, except for some men who have fear.
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	 and it seems to me that I should let it move.
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	 For the shoulder is dislocated by continuous solutions of nature, as we have observed in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	 And likewise, when the shoulder of the patient is weak by nature, and the first indication of the cautery is safer and more effective for me, and from this method I operate together with salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	From the ancient pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	 When chronic pain comes in the head and lasts for a long time, the patient should use ear drops and pills called "cochie", and cleansing of the head with oil and ointments.
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	 And if the cautery is performed on him as we have said before, it does not work.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	 Be careful that the shoulder of the patient is strong in nature and not too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	 Then cauterize beneath that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	 Then cauterize the corn at each corner of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and do the cautery that is called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	 and it is the place where blisters are put.
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	 And align your hand so that you cannot see down to the bone.
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	 The patients feel much greater pain in this cauterization than with others, and I will speak more about it later.
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	 And the cauterizations of the corners must be more subtle than those used to cauterize the midline of the head, and this is their form:
dou cautere dou chief	Fire cautery for the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	 When pain suddenly comes in one part of the head and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is purged by various medicines, and the other treatments that I have said in the section on diseases have been done, but none of it helps.
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	 Then make cauteries according to two ways, namely with hot medicine and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	 The cautery with hot medicine is to take a pot of hot water, peel off the bark and pour it over the affected area in such a way that you can place the pot under the skin;
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	 And when it [the dislocation] is reset, let it be held tightly and left thus for twelve hours;
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	 Then loosen the bandage and apply garlic oil to the wound, and leave it as it is for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	 Then place cotton soaked in butter on it until it heals completely.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After treating the wound with a remedy until it is healed.
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	 And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines that I have written about or use a tenth part of those burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 Instruct the patient as follows regarding the iron cautery.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery in the shape as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	 It is called "clo" because the head resembles the shape of a cloak or has a small hump in the middle.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	 Place it [the remedy] on the painful area and hold your hand still while gently shaking it a little until the middle part of the bladder is burnt.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	 And lift your hand so that the arteries do not burn, which are outside, and let a profuse flow of blood follow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	 Place cotton on it for three days, and put it on top of it.
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then place dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	 And if you wish to burn out this abscess with the cautery called "cultellare," all at the tip, be careful not to burn the artery in this abscess that is not ancient.
de emigraine	of the migraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	 When treating an abscess as previously stated in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauteries before mentioned do not fit with the medicine or iron, then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it turns white.
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 And so, on the joint, draw a line half a finger's length long, and withdraw your hand once, hold it so as not to cut the artery nor reach the bone.
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	 And guard the jaw that is paralyzed when one eats, and let the nerves have no sight but the paralysis, and prevent spasms from coming to the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or if you are cutting with great fear, especially for him who does not know, and who is not experienced and proven.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	 leave the operation in mid-course.
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	 But I will tell you how to stop blood when an artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is suffering, cauterize it near the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals.
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	 and if you wish to administer the cautery as we have said or the chapter on artery extraction, use a cautery with two blades.
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	 And this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the cold pain in the ears from frostbite
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When the ear is painful from frostbite and it has been treated with dissolving medicines and other cures as we have said in the division, but the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", which is shaped like this:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	 After marking the affected ear all around, or both sides where the pain is present, move a little away from the root of the ear after you have marked the spot.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	 and have ten points around each ear.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the joint until it is sound.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	 The wound that must be cured by fire is not outside those that move from inflammation, as we have said in the classification of diseases;
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	 And do not perform cautery on similar cases coming from scabs and from nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	 When treating this kind of torture which mutes the flow of blood from eyes and purges of the head and gargarism, and it is not worth it; therefore, you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	 One in the root of the ear, and the other a little distance from the temple, and the third at the juncture of the two lips.
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	 and place the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make it cauterize towards the head of the ear slightly below the horn of the head, and another in the temple as long as a thumb.
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	 and leave the cautery so that half the hair is burned;
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	 And it is the shape of the knife: (The knife mentioned here seems to be slightly more delicate and the blade should be a bit thicker.)
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 after treating the wound as I have said before, until it heals.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	 When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, but it does not improve, and the patient does not have a fever, then perform four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	 Two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, and one at the elbow joint, which is called "wrist" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the stomach mouth:
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	 and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	of litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	 For this disease, give the patient great years and round pills for the brain.
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	 Lay the patient on his back completely, and place the mustard plaster (sinapi) on the occuput.
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	 and this is the method of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	 If you do as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	 If it is healthy thus, it is good.
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	 And if it isn't healthy, you should perform three fire cauteries on the head from neck to collarbone, with a space of one finger between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	 and treat it as others, and if you see that it is growing worse, and the patient is enduring it, perform a fire cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if necessary, perform another one on the two horns (temples), and treat it until it is healthy.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	 And let the cautery called "olive" be as I have previously said.
de la froidor dou chief	Of the coldness of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 The head should be cleaned for years and according to what has been said beforehand.
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	 After the head of the sick person, then make a fire cautery on the head and on each horn, and also behind and 3 times on the spine of the neck.
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	 and if you need more, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the disease is far away, make 4 cauterizations on the spine of the back.
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	 and leave it until the most burning part is burned, and wash your hand.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	 After healing until the sick person is healthy, and when the cauterization that is called "olive" has healed as we have previously mentioned.
de l’epilempsie	Of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epilentics should not use the cautery forcefully except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is first necessary to modify the skull with other treatments as we have said in the division when the patient is grown and endures to take medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	 And if it is an infant who cannot suffer it, make a gargle and chew soft foods frequently with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	 After the king's head is in a middle position, and it is treated according to what was said before, and the fire cautery is applied on the head, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 And if the patient is out and suffering, apply cauteries as I have said to those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and the neck, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is an infant, perform one subtle cautery as follows:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When due to melancholy are the superfluidities or corrupt and swollen fluids, then the cautery of such cauteries should be performed on him who has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluidities are declining towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him something to drink to purify the brain, as it was before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	 After the king's head of the sick person.
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	 Then make a bandage of linen well made, in the shape of a circle, and place it around the head.
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	 And tie the patient crosswise, and hold them firmly on all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	 After this (line), it is worth the use of old goat's milk.
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	 And the heating with fire should be moderated, so that one can place it on it without causing harm.
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	 After hollowing out the circle inside the head (skull), let it cool down.
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Do this to the patient once a week with good management, as long as he is healthy.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to perform cauterization, make multiple pricks throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	 This method of cautery greatly strengthens the brain.
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 Then place damp cotton wool in goat's milk and lard on top.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs that I have said in the division, then you begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or take a bath several times while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	 After that, instruct him to lean his head backwards, and perform the cautery in the head (skull) and two more cauterizations on each temple where the disease is present or not present in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	 And apply the fire cautery to all the veins and arteries that are beneath the chest, and let the cautery be long according to the width of the temple;
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	 And protect against bleeding, and if you see too much blood flowing out, stop it with your power as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	 And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and in making the incision with caution how to make it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	 And sometimes, a cautery or instrument is made under the two bones behind [the chest].
dou cors des larmes	tears of the heart
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	 When the tears of the eyes are old and accustomed to be above the veins, or have passed through the arteries that appear near the head outside;
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	 and it is seen that it is cold phlegmatic fluid, then make the cautery that I have said at the beginning of this work descending into the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	 I apply a fire cautery to the head, and I apply two fire cauteries on each temple, and I apply one fire cautery where the hair meets the bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	 And if necessary, cauterize cautiously above the eyebrow at every small cautery spot.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	When the tears of the body are within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	 When you treat according to what we have said in the previous section, but it does not help, then give the patient three cooked eggs to drink.
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	 Afterwards, you roast the head and apply an olive oil-based cautery.
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	 And make two cauteries called "clavilis" on each eyebrow, a little under the hair.
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	 And beware of the artery so you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery which is called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then perform cauterization using this cautery that is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 Here is its shape:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	 And if you wish to perform the fire cautery on two sorcerers as long as they are like sorcerers themselves,
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	 and do not let the hand go unless the third part of the paper is burned, as I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which points the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	 Sometimes, the hairs of an egg are converted to feathers and prick oil; and they make fire cautery according to these methods:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	 This is fire or burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	 The fire cautery instructs the patient to let their hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	 and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	 When they are born and become even, then put the patient in bed.
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	 Place a figure of the fernleaf on parchment that is as it is the stalk of the myrtle and the beginning of the sign shaved off from the hairs.
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 then put softened cotton bathed in egg white and musk of parsley on the oil, then heat the fire cautery as shown in this form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	 After cauterizing on the figure you have marked many times, so that the corners are burned there.
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	 And the signs of the health of the work are that you see the parchment recede and the hairs lift to the end of the oil.
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 Then lay your hand there, and leave it for three days, then put soft cotton in butter until the burn is healed.
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	 And if hairs come afterwards and the paper is softened, then repeat the fire cautery on that same spot, just as you did earlier.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	 And if the hairs fall out, then cauterize it until the paper returns to its natural position and becomes even, and do not let the hairs grow oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	 The medical fire-cautery is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make a parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	 Then take French soap and live coal, one of each. Grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	 and make it quickly so that it does not cool down, then spread it on the form in the shape of a mimosa leaf, and place it over the eyes.
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	 and if the patient only holds onto one eye, you must work on both of them.
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	 and place a cotton swab moistened with oil underneath an eggshell.
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	 and the patient's shoulder should be in your hand, and place your thumb showing above the medicine, and press the edge and move all around whenever the patient feels burning from the medicine, as it burns like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done so for a long time, give the medicine at your shoulder.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	 And when the bone is broken, lift the limb upward, and look to see if the piece of bone has been raised as it was raised by the action of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 If it is like that, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	 If it is not like that, then put more medicine on the limb or the medicine has not worked, as long as your efforts are even and your hands placed correctly;
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then place cotton soaked in butter on the wound until the burn is healed, then clean the limb with an ointment called "diaphensis" and others until it is healthy;
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if it is necessary for you to be careful about your work, keep far away from the eyes with great care so that no medicine reaches them.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	 And if the bone becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, then start the medicine on that limb which has been made soft by the bone itself, just as you did before;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 After the cure when it is healthy;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 and this is the form of the thorny plant, the nettle.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	 And know that human eyes are diverse in size and shape, according to your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	 And the right path should not be deviated from one who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On treating a fistula with cautery.
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the division of diseases, and your treatment does not help, then it is necessary that you perform cautery according to this manner.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	 Instruct the patient to put his head on your holy object;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	 and the ministers should grasp the patient's head between their hands in such a manner that it does not move or tilt its head.
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	 After placing cotton wool soaked in egg white or onion juice on top of the oil;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	 After heating the fire-tong which is this:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	 and positioned at the base of the head in a manner similar to the shape of a quill from a feather, along with the cautery;
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	 If it appears, it should be pointed from one head to the other, and if it appears, it should also look like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	 But nevertheless, this which is placed on top serves for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	 After pressing the fistula when it has opened, take out the pus and dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	 And if it is closed, you open it, and draw out the worms.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	 Then put hot iron cautery on it, and hold your hand on the cautery on the part of the nail below the oil, so that your hand does not move.
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	 Put the cautery in the oil fat, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come at the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, that would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	 If that does not work, repeat the cauterization again if necessary, and leave it for three days.
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	 After placing cotton wool in butter, apply the drying ointment until it is dry, and if after 40 days it is not dry, apply a corrosive medicine while the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 And the king according to what he writes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a way of making a fire cautery which no ancient person spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	 For a fistula (an abnormal passage or cavity between two organs), make an incision and open it up.
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 After putting camphor of the fine form given below in the incision:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	 and they put as much as a half-pint (approx. 946 milliliters) of liquid.
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	 Hold your hand with the camphor firmly, and let the patient not move at all, so that the liquid does not spill over.
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	 And it is necessary to apply oil to the patient, cotton soaked with egg yolk or walnut oil.
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	 The plug is drawn from the fistula, and health comes marvelously through it.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery as we have said, it is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then administer oil of roses or bring the fistula to the body heat as is appropriate in its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Often there are cavities in lips called "hairs" and also in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat the cavities as we have described in previous sections and the treatment does not help, then heat a small cautery scalpel of this shape:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	 And it should be put immediately into those cavities until it reaches the source.
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the wound with lime until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess in the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	 When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the teeth roots, after it has turned into pus and becomes inflamed and turns into a fistula.
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	 and you treat it as we have said in the previous section, but it does not help at all.
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	 Then it is necessary to use the cautery according to the size of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	 After the bottle or perforation of the fistula, hold your hand until the iron comes to its end, and where it exits.
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and do this once or twice, after treating what we have said in the treatment, until it is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	 if it heals like this, it is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	 and if not, it is necessary to discover the location and remove the rotten bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	 When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicine but it does not help, then put the head of the patient on your lap;
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	 After heating the cautery in this way, take a cane and place it on the tooth;
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	 And put hot fire cautery inside promptly, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth.
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	 After moving your hand, continue with the cautery as you wish;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	 Then fill the patient's mouth with saltwater, and keep it there for an hour and rinse far inside.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner the moving tooth is made stationary, the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupting moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	From the pain of the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	 When tooth pain comes from coldness or there is coldness and pus, and the medicinal cures are of no value, then it will be necessary to use cautery in two ways:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	 And cautery made with butter and cautery with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	 The cautery of butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or copper spoon.
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	 After taking cotton and wrapping it on the tip of a lance, and boiling it in butter, place it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it is cooled.
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	 and perform this often until its properties reach the root of the tooth, and if you see cotton and wool soaked in cold butter, place it on the tooth, and hold the hot iron to it until the heat reaches the tooth's nerve.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	 The fire cautery is such that you take a rod of iron or copper, and it should be thick enough so that the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	 After heating the cautery, when its shape comes later, place it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled.
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 Make it often, for the pain will be stopped on that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	 And it is necessary that the patient fill his mouth with good butter in haste for this cautery, and then hold his breath.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	 And make the cautery on the head that you wish, and according to what you are able;
et c’est li forme de la caine:	 and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	 When scrofula is from cold and damp conditions, and is not obedient to digestion by medications, then heat the cautery as described below, and have it two openings for the smoke to escape to the other side of the cautery.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	 And place the hot cautery on the abscess once, wherever it is needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	 And if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to its size, and leave it so for three days.
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	 And place dampened cotton on it until the arrow is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the wound with ointments and plasters, let it become clean.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The form of the shoulder blade:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	 When moisture prevails over the channel of the intestine, and especially when it comes from a cold complexion, then the patient should first be purged with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 After performing cautery at the root of the throat, be careful not to approach the throat itself, and do not go too deep but only a little bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	 Afterwards, perform the other fire cautery at the joint of the neck with the spine, and it is the cautery called "clavicle," as we have known its form.
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal the limb as we have previously said until it becomes healthy.
de la toust	tooth
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	 When all and scrofula are due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or itch, and the disease is old, perform two cauteries on the scrotum in visible limbs.
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	 And perform another cautery between the testicles.
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	 And let it be the cautery called "clavicle" according to the form that has previously been described.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	 And if you see, perform a cautery by pricking all over the cautery called "points" as its form is described above in the ear disease.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And let the points [of the instruments] be up to thirty, or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After treating the limb as previously stated, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauterization is lighter, because you make them in pairs of two.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	 Make sure the patient is lying on his back and on his side [alternately].
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	 then grasp the key that is within the tooth of your left hand [i.e., forceps or extractor].
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	 if the jointure is dislocated, then heat the cautery with two nerves [tongs] of this kind [hot iron].
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	 cauterize the key until it pierces the chest and produces a figure with four cauteries.
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	 this is done using the cautery with three nerves, which is why the figures of cauterization are [made up of] several cauteries.
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	 and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, this is the shape of the cautery with three nerves:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	Sometimes it is sewn up on this one nerve, which is why there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	 After place on the fire cautery, grind with ashes.
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	 after the patient has rested, and his limbs are not moved for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above [the joint], which happens little, then do cautery on the thick part of the cautery rod, or many cauteries while pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is reset, and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When in the stomach there are coldness and much moisture that increase its complexion, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and in the usual methods of treatment he does not benefit; therefore, the patient should be supine on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	 Then do three cauteries in the area under the spoonful of pus, on all the cautery sticks, and two cauteries outside the two costal areas so that the figure of the cauteries is at three angles, and with such space between one and another that they are not joined together when they emit pus.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 and the cautery points should be deep enough to prick the two parts of the body cavity, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without deviation.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	 And he who fears this cautery, cauterize by pricking and applying on the stomach at a point according to the quantity that you see fit;
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 Then cauterize the entire cautery which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound is complete, when it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	 When the liver experiences pain due to cold, moisture and great windiness, as it is forced out of its natural composition by excesses;
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	 And the patient is cured of what has been said in previous sections, but it does not help him, so the patient must be kept on his bedclothes;
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	 Sign the third cautery according to this form, shape and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondriac region, where the ribs of the chest come together;
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	 And let there be space between each fire cautery, the thickness of two fingers.
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	 And let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press too hard with your hand on all the cautery.
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	 Burn only the middle part of the curd, and make the patient straight on his feet.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	 If he cannot stand, let him be lying down, and extend his legs and raise his arms.
et c’est li forme:	 And this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	 If you so desire, you may cauterize these cauteries with a surgeon's knife, if you are skillful and knowledgeable in the art, but be careful not to burn too much because you will scorch the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And it should not go down to the boil, because the area is very subtle there, and only the knowledgeable can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	 When he has an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the fat of the liver or in the membrane:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	 if it is in the fat, the patient feels pain not very strong;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 and if it is in the membrane, he feels intense pain.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	 And when this treatment ceases, it is necessary that the patient rest on his head;
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 and then press firmly on the side or place where the abscess is, and then heat the iron similar to a coin, which is the shape of the following form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	 Heat the iron until it glows red, and bring it up to the wound until it is completely open;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	 after treatment according to the treatment for boils until it heals.
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 It is not advisable to use this fire cautery method by anyone who has not thoroughly studied the art of medicine, for many times these diseases have been caused by such practices.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Afterwards it can be boldly operated, and yet I think it is better to wait.
dou cautere de pleuresin	The pleurisy cautery
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	 They said that for cauterization at pleurisy, one should use the roots of Aristolochia, and in this manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	 Take a long root of Aristolochia, the largest one you can find, and it should be dry and as thick and long as your fingers.
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	 and wet it in oil, heat it up, and cauterize the cautery between the ribs and the collar, and make small cauteries a little below the beard.
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	 and the cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, in a slightly descending direction.
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	 And the cautery enters into the worst place, and the other on the stomach, and between the shoulders, and the two at the sides beyond the cautery which is between the shoulders.
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	 And do not press your hand, instead make it open as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	 And an old man said that no one uses the fire cautery similar to a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches the abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And jumps out of the pain, as we have said in the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or death of the patient now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	For the mouse cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatment, and it does not help, then they suggested four methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	 Of which the one manner is that you make three or four cauteries in a line according to the length of the abscess, according to the shape of the liver cautery that we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	 And do not hurry your hand to all the cautery, let the patient remain conscious on his back.
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	 And another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder.
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 and lift the incision where the worm is, or the patient's wound comes towards the left side; and you shall raise the edges of the incision according to the incision, according to the length of the body, and the cauterizer should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	 Afterward insert the two inflamed nerves until the incision is pierced from the other side, and then pull out the cauterizer, and in this way there will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 And if you see, cauterize with all the cautery at three veins.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 After the treatment when pus has come out for a long time, it is necessary to use the other treatments mentioned before.
de ydropisie	And from the dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 Cautery does not work on dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	 When the cure is carried out according to the ways we have said in the sections, and your treatment does not benefit, then it is necessary that you make four cauteries around the abscess, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back near the spine, and one at the worst place.
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 And let the cautery be close to the thick part of the sore.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	 After opening the cautery to pour the purgative for a long time, do not leave the care of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	 And healing would hasten, and the two intentions would be united with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	 The shape of the cautery for the belly is the clavel that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	 and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as previously described.
de l’enfleure des piez	the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	 When the feet are swollen in a person who is dropsical and filled with water, you must cauterize on top of the foot between the auricular and anular bones.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 hold your hand with the cautery without turning it.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not enter too deeply, so as not to burn the yellow fluid excessively; and let the cautery be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	 After making two cauterizations on both legs, one at the tip of each shinbone (cautery instrument).
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	 And let the cauteries be long, one under the thigh and the other outside the leg.
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	 Leave the cauteries over a long period of time to heal, that is if it is necessary (to leave them there).
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	 After healing from the other treatments that we have said.
de la menoison	In the treatment of the dislocated shoulder:
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	 When abdominal distention comes from cold and moisture, as long as the restorative and digestive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by means of treatments.
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	 And if you see the patient suffering greatly and with strong vitality, make a large cauterization on the stomach as mentioned earlier or stomach cautery, around the stomach.
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	 And three subtle cauteries around the buttock, every subtle cautery for nail, and two cauteries on the thighs.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the shoulder, and one cautery on each joint, and two small cauterizations on the stomach beneath it, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	Of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	 When piles are deep-seated, one or more, and are old and have thick cold and moist corrupted humors, and are treated as mentioned in the divisions, it does not help if you perform cauterization.
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	 Three on the spine of the back, which is completely displaced below the coccyx and protruding gradually in a triangle shape, and one cautery under the buttock.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	 And if you think that his stomach is cold and the meat does not cook, and one sees swelling in the face, then the face should receive a large cautery on the stomach as mentioned before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen with all the subtle cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 Leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After healing the shoulder when it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnivorous disease called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	 When you cut with a hot iron, if the cautery appears to be shaved, then put it all on fire over the place where you are cutting.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	 and keep your hand so that the cautery comes to the opening of the vein, in this way it will not tear.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	 Do this once or twice, and if there is much blood, then cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	 After the cure of ointments is profitable until they are healed.
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	 And if you cauterize with a large cautery over a burn, it will have more help.
de plaie mal curee	From badly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot bear incision or opening, we will speak about it in its place; this disease can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If a fistula comes, and it is swollen and filled with pus and decayed matter, you should test the whole tent in every way, and be sure that you know the entire tent how much it heals.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	 After shaving the cautery that appears to be like a razor, put it in the fistula according to the amount that it entered there, and continue the cauterization until the flesh burns and is burned, once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of skin needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 And take care of the nerves which are narrow, and of the great veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	 If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or intestines, beware of these places, and do not make incisions except in charnu, and think that it is not permanent.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	 After curing the place until it is healed, if the places are festered and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the place is completely healed.
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	 And if the matter has not been removed, know that the place is rotten and the bone is corrupted.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 And thus in one of these cases.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	 When cold pain comes in the kidneys, and of great windiness, and does not take a woman's form, then you must give it fire cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the cautery iron that we have previously mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	 And if we cauterize it in milk, there will be three cauteries in a row, and they will make more significant help.
de la vessie	Of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	 When the bladder is weak and cold or moist, so that the patient retains urine, then make a cautery in the area outside the bladder, where the hair of the testicle starts, both on the right and left side, and each cautery should be as long as the thumb.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	 and make the cautery behind the back, where you have need of it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	 and let the cauteries be like a nail in shape, as was said before.
de la marris	of the marriage
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	 When the matrix is cold and moist, it does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their terms are delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	 And when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	 Then you must apply three fire cauteries around the boil, as we have said the fire cautery of the bladder, and two fire cauteries outside the back.
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	 let the cautery be heated like a nail, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the itch
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	 When the viscous humors descend to the bone of the thigh, and for this reason it moves from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	 and the joints are found to depart from their place in the thigh region, then you must cauterize the patient over the bone of the thigh with a cautery similar to a circle, and the sign should be before the joint around the bone as it turns, so that the bone is within the circle;
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	 And if [the cautery] is similar to those with which one cauterizes the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	 And if this cautery is not present, make three large olive-oil cauteries, and make the cautery as deep as all other wounds.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 heal it until it becomes healthy.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain from the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	 When pain comes in the box of the back, it is from coldness and moisture, and the patient is treated with what we have said in the division, but the treatment does not help, and the disease is old.
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	 Therefore, you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere;	 After [doing] that, perform a cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	 And the method of the cautery is according to two ways:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 This means "namely, together with burning medicines and fire cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	 Fire cautery is according to many ways, among which one is as follows:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	 you cauterize on the boil of the haunch with three triangular cauteries according to this shape, and make a good depth and width, and have space between each cautery of the size of a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped.
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 sometimes it is done with cautionery in the middle on the top of the haunch, for which there are four according to this shape:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	 And if you see, if you cauterize at the circular cautery that we have mentioned in the dislocation of the haunch;
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	 But make it so that the circles contain the entire hunchback, and all the humps should be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the method for treating sciatica when the pain remains in the loin and does not reach as far as the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	 And if it comes up to the thigh and leg, make II cauterizations there where the patient says the pain is, and the fourth finger width above the ankle on the left side.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	 And let the cautery be a surgical instrument, and let the thickness of the coal be sharp.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If the patient feels that the pain extends to the thigh or near it, cauterize the place where they feel the pain with three or four points of the cautery which is called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	 And if necessary, do more.
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	 And if the pain is under the knee towards the thigh, perform a cautery with the surgical instrument or circular cautery, but be careful in all your cauterizations not to allow the cautery to burn nerves and large arteries, nor to do greater harm and constriction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen many who made fire cautery on the heel of the foot, and they let it grow so much that the leg was swollen all over, and the toes as well, and all the toes were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a belly solution where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, do cautery on one and the other, according to this method.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	 The wise men say about the cautery of the inguinal region, as follows: make a nail-like iron and its head should be as big as a thumbnail or slightly smaller, and it should have perforations or be one-perforated with a distance of the size of a nut.
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	 And let the joints above the two parts be over-sized, and also like nuts, and have a hinge made of iron there.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	 And let it be heated until it becomes all red and emits sparks, then place it on the sick person's chest, turning it to the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	 And apply the fire cautery once, and leave it for three days.
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	 Then make a plaster of butter and leave the wound open for a long time;
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	 Al-Bukassim says that we should use this cautery with caution due to fear of its sight, and it is not widely used.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	 And this is one of the good cauterizations, which can be endured, and there where it hurts him.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	 The cautery of medicine heat is to make the instrument between the joints in such a way as to cut through the edge of the opening, and it should be of iron or steel with a long shaft, and at each end have two noses, and between each nose the thickness of a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 and be opened outward and upward, and join together according to this shape:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	 After place the box of the iron heated in the patient lying on his side, and after put your hand much above the box of the iron.
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After pour between the two circles of hot iron which is heated in the firepot and leave it for an hour and let the patient endure the heat and the burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	 It bites like a bite from fire;
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	 And when the bites have passed, lay your hand with the instrument and lift the swelling gently, and leave it for three days, and put butter over it so that the blackness from the burn is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	 and let it remain for three days so that pus drains out.
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And this would be the final aid after treatment with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	 And if the pain extends to the thigh or leg, make the instrument that burns accordingly, as you have done in the swelling.
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And this is the method of hot burn, and I have written or treated it concerning the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take alkali and hot live coal, equal amounts of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	 If there is a small opening closed, ensure that the tip of a razor can enter it.
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	 Then place one pot upon another well weighed pot, and put on top of it alkali and salt and warm water until there is the right amount of powder above it when you have well pressed it with your hand.
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 And leave it like that until it descends warm and thick or the pot becomes weighed; then take all of that water, and pour it over salt and over alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	 And then it will become very thick and be used for the workings of various medicines and for other cauterizations of members.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 For it has the same effect as fire, and if other medicines are cauterized in this way, such as figs and honey, aniseed and salt with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure in which a nobleman was healed from the pain of the hernia and sciatica, and he praised it much, and said that no other treatment was used, and that he became healthy once when this cure was performed, and he bathed himself as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	 And in this manner, you take the green ground-ivy root, dry and powdered, and grind it with a little fat, then place it on the back, thigh, and leg where there is pain, and hold it.
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him lie down, and the pain will leave completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 And know that no one should use fire cautery of such medications unless after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	 And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is burned with goat's-beard (greater burnet), it helps very much.
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 The cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and beat it with old oil, and place it over the furrow which is between the big toe of the foot and the other one which is called the "fossicle".
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	 After taking dry goat's-beard and heating it until it is charcoal, place it on wool and leave it until it cools.
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	 And set it again thus, and do not stop doing so until you think by reason that it will come to the hinge, and that the pain is ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 And this manner of cautery is called "cautery of goat".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either by falling or from impact or excessive evacuation, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these cases are worth cauterization, unless it is due to the influx of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	 Afterwards, the patient must be purged with foul pills or similar things, which are made on the back where the pain is, three lines marked with a cross, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the potency and quantity that the patient can bear.
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	 And the cautery should be made according to the cautery which is called "points".
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	 If you wish, make three or four cauteries or five in the middle cautery according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	 This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its onset are that they have narrow throats when they cry and fear.
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	 and you will find it in the lower spine at the back and in its appearance which comes on other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this thing and intend to cure it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The fire cautery increases every part of the spine.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, cauterize around the spine with the cautery pointing to two or three lines, and let the tips be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the joint until it is healed as we have said, make sure you do not administer the cautery in the hollow of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of the pain of the joints
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	 When joint pains are caused by moisture spreading to every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which people call "gout" properly, and when it is due to coldness and medicines cannot heal it, then it is cured with cauteries in this way:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	 make the mortar of cautery around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil shaped as follows:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 And if it is necessary to prick on the pelvis, make the cauterization with the whole cautery, as they claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	 And if the pains come up to the knee and other joints, which happens frequently, make fire cautery on each knee 3 or 4 times on each part, with every cautery olive oil.
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 and if you need more, do more, but not too much that the charcoal from the fire is burnt out.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the knees and the back, administer the fire cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	 And if the pains are in the hands, make points around the wrist two fingers' width.
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	 and if there remains a point of pain at the elbow, make points on each joint and on the hair of the arm.
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains come up to the hips or shoulders, cauterize each part and take good care of the patient and consider remedies.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you take good care of him and cleanse him with purgation, he will be healed with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	From the cutting of the siphac
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	 When rottenness comes in the throat and the bowels descend into the chest, and this is new, if you wish to cure it, it should not eat anything that day.
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	 and use things that relieve the stomach, so that the phlegm descends from the stomach;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	 after doing so, make him lie on his back between your hands, and command him to press his lower abdomen until the bowels are repaired, and pull them to your sides, and sign below the rottenness on the bone of the thumb, and at a single sign that is similar to half of a circle above the chest;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 then heat the fire cautery in the shape as follows:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and exudes blood.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	 Then reattach the bones to their place.
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	 and the minister anoints his hand so that they do not return back.
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	 and work the thighs on the patient, place the cushion and the servant under his thighs, and another one holding his hands.
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	 then place the fire cautery on the spot with your whole hand, hold it straight and hold until you reach the bone; if you don't reach it the first time, try again until you reach the bone.
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	 and be careful that the bone does not split when making the cautery.
que tu ne le brulasses;	 do not burn it.
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 so that the patient does not die or suffer harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone during the cautery, your efforts are worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	 And the cauteries for children should be subtle according to their measurement, and for grown-ups, they should be as large as theirs.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	 After three days of care, treat the shoulder with butter until the burn is healed;
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	 After treating with other remedies until it is healthy, let the patient lie down for 40 days on his back so that the wound heals well.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And it is necessary to restrict his movements for a long time so that the boils do not emerge when he gets up to go to the chamber.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	 And after 40 days, when he wants to get up, a bed is prepared for him and he rests for another 40 days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	 And let him have good rest, that he should work little and beware of excessive drinking and eating, and of too much laughter.
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And when he follows this instruction, he will become entirely well.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I shall say after the treatment of amputation in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the abdomen (lit: of the bursting of the belly)
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	 When roundworms come into other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned the third degree.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	 After the cure according to what we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 and no one of the ancients has said that it should be cauterized at the cautery with three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the location and make a line above the roundworm, and another below, and then place your hand on the entire sharp-pointed cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and more mobile.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any member, either from falling or being injured, and that pain lasts a long time, and medicine does not heal it, then you should cauterize with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizing should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness, weakness, its virtue, its location for twisting, and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	 if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good.
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If that limb has a recurrence of the disease, then perform another cautery on it, because it is customary that it should be changed to the nearest member; therefore, you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient is not healed.
de meselerie	When the humors are out of balance due to moisture and heat, and one feels pain or discomfort, it must be purged through purgation. This involves taking a mixture of wormwood, myrtle leaves, and bread soaked in vinegar, which will help to cleanse and cool the body. After this, you should drink a cold water concoction made from crushed ivy, plantain seeds, or other suitable herbs, which will further aid in balancing the humors and alleviating the discomfort.
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The cautery is sometimes helpful to a great extent, and equally so the patient who comes from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	 Can you see the patient to be cauterized, take care if the patient is at the beginning of the disease, and if it has been cured according to what we have said in the division, neither draw nor remain, and if you doubt that corruption will affect the entire patient, then perform V cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	 Bring the head to you and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline.
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	 And place it on top of both horns, and the other behind the occiput (the back of the head).
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	 And leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out through it, allowing the vapors of the large humors to escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 And cauterize on the mouse (a swelling) according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	 And if the mixture is scattered everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	 If the mixture is clearly dispersed, then you must apply the cauterization using the cauteries as we have said above, and the cautery on the neck, and six cauteries on the spine of the back, and one large one and another small one on the crotch, and two more on the shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	 and two more on the sides, and two on the tendons of the thighs, and one above each joint of the hands and feet, and over the hollows of the hands.
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	 And beware of the nerves that are located above the last bone of the foot, do not burn them.
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	 Sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the knuckle, and one on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	 And know that when you perform more cautery, you provide more help, and it benefits them more.
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as much as the healthy do, because the body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it should be great and small according to the members and the joints, as you will find in the ways of iron smithing.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the shoulder with flour several times with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	 When swelling occurs in any member and is treated with medicine, oil, plasters and it is not cured, then apply cautery on the affected member according to the size and smallness of the member.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	 and let the cautery be a small incision in the thickness of the skin.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, if it is cured with liniments until it becomes healthy.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	 Sometimes, cautery is done on the hand, foot and back, at the root of the nerve that paralyzes the member, and in such cases the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And no one else shall interfere unless he is knowledgeable about the members and the nerves moving the body.
de albaras	Of ulcers or sores
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	 When the disease called "albaras" arises, and the remedy of medicine is of no value, then cauterize it with a cautery of moderate depth according to the size of the wound until the white becomes exposed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	 then cure it with flour and lentils with rose oil and banana leaves, cow's blood and swan's blood, each one in part.
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Mix all together, tie it up with a cloth, and apply to the wound until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	Cure syphilis by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins and you wish to stop it, if you cauterize, do so with the circular fire cautery all around the circumference of the boil.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	 And wise people would also say that a cautery is made in the middle of the boil;
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	 and this does not seem good to me, for I think that it should not be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have experienced it happening once before;
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 and a more proper thing is that it should be cauterized around, using the cautery called "circule", as we have said in our discussion on cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	Of the swelling which cannot grow
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati", and it does not want to heal or because of the excess fluid it produces or because the patient is weakened (meaning too old) and has little blood, or because of the cold;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	 And you see it hasten to grow:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	 Then cauterize it with many small cauteries, pricking around:
aprés le laisse ensi.	 After that, let it be as such.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Then it will hasten to heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see that the wound is pierced completely with all the cautery, heat the cautery in this manner:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 And put your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through, and let the cauteries be such that the patient feels no pain from them in this manner so that the course of the pustule is clear.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the patient has recovered completely.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another kind of disease called "corroding", and it is nothing but an eating away of a limb because it consumes them as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	 If you see this disease in a place where it can bear the cautery along with fire, then heat the small and large cauteries very hot, according to what is necessary for the place or the disease.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 After that, cauterize everywhere until you eradicate all the corruption, and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days and put on the affected areas softened cauteries made with oil until the burns caused by fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the cure of ointments generating heat.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	 And if after three days you see healthy flesh not growing, that is good;
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 and if that's not the case, then begin to cauterize again on the remaining corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	 And this dislocation has sometimes been cured with medicine instead of fire cautery;
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	 However, fire cautery is of greater aid, and I have already said the cure for medicine ague in the section on division:
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 Take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	The growing hairs should be allowed to remain long and equal on the feet;
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often happens that in the foot through an opening comes a disease called "close" according to our intention, and it is a large thing swollen which breaks the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries of this disease are according to two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 This is to know fire cautery, and hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	 Heat the fire cautery as you would heat a pen of hot iron, and make it from good iron to the size that can penetrate through all parts, and that it has fine edges;
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	 Afterwards place the heated cautery on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the point of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	 and leave it like this for three days until it begins to emit pus.
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Then make a poultice of bad wild herbs ground with oil, and leave the poultice on it all night, and the nails will grow out and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the wound with healing salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	 And if it is converted through the body and often occurs in hands and feet, then you must bring hot cautery.
et est en teil maniere:	 and this is done thus:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	 Take a cane of iron or wood, or a feather from a bird's quill, and place it on the nail and the blister, which means for treating warts.
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	 and place the cane on it so that it presses all around, then put some hot oil on it, and hold your hand firmly, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and let the hot oil penetrate deeply until it reaches the root.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	 and let the patient suffer a little bit from the bite of the hot oil for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 then leave it like that, and it will rot away completely at its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 As another does afterwards, while you cauterize all those on the body, then treat with ointments that soothe pain.
li cure dou trembler	The cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	 For those who shiver from cold or quartan fever, or any other ailment, it is necessary that you perform four or five cauteries on the spine of the back, one between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	 And the cautery or flesh, and on top of the stomach the olive oil cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	 Allow it to tremble, and hasten the health from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pus-filled boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Sometimes, from the body's outside appear baths of pus or boils that come from large, corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	 It is necessary at first when they appear that you perform cautery on each head of the pustule:
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 a subtle cautery of myrtle staff, from which the tip is held in fire, or of long root of aristolochia, or to the cautery lenticular.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	 And sometimes you cauterize at the beginning when they appear in this way, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluidities that come from them are resolved, and they heal.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when an artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	 Often there are great outflows of blood from the artery that is cut at the wound which goes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cauterization of a limb, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	 and it is a very harmful thing to let it pus out.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	 Furthermore, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your finger on the wound of the vein, and press it very hard so that the blood is stopped below your finger, and no more pus comes out.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	 Then put the olive oil cauterization of various sizes, both small and large, until they are all red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	 Then take [the tool], whether large or small, according to the wound and the location in which the artery is located, and place the cauterization on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cauterization in place until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps fiercely when you hold your thumb on the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take hastily another one of the cauteries that are by the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	 And continue to do this one after another until the wound is cauterized;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	 and be careful not to burn the nerve that has been exposed, and that no other harm comes to the patient.
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	 and know that when an artery is not cut through completely, it cannot be well stopped when the artery is large, unless by one of the four ways that we have mentioned:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	 or by cauterization, or by extraction if it has not been treated, or by tightly tying with thread, or by medicine placed on it that can stop the bleeding.
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	 and it should be tied and compressed immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever administers constriction tightly with fabrics or placing hot things on it, or similar things, does not benefit from it unless otherwise.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	 And if this happens and there is no eye or medicine present, it should place its index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and press firmly until the bleeding stops above the wound and above the vein.
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	 And it must not move, but the cold moisture should often be applied, very cold until the flesh is frozen and swollen and hardened;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	 Make inquiries ahead about the kind of cauteries and medicines that are needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	 We have told you in the first chapter about every disease in which there is need for a fire cautery, or a hot medicine, and the signs, causes, instruments, forms, and methods of cauteries.
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	 I have put that chapter on the head and I will go in this chapter along the same path for those things which are more easily found.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	Furthermore, as I begin this, it is necessary for you, dear child, to learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauteries, and because of this greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	 For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	 There is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to undertake foolishness.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	 Those who suffer in such a way that they die quickly due to the perversity and severity of their disease.
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 And of these one should have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	 And there are some who give you their sense, and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	 "Wait, I am ready.
et li maladie est despitouse.	 "and the patient is obstinate.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	 "You should not easily consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put greater consideration in your honor than in your desire, and do not rashly but wisely from what you are certain, and from what you can take and learn.
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	 "and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients so that health is turned.
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 "and this will help you to acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, our Lord grants you good understanding and righteousness; if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	I have divided this chapter for your convenience, speaking one topic at a time, as the cauteries were previously described from head to feet because you will find it easier to understand what you need in this manner.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water.
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	 "Know that this disease often comes to children when the head of the child is strangled too strongly.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	 And sometimes comes this from an unknown cause that one may not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	 And I have never seen this illness in adults, and all those I have seen hastened death.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	 And because of that, it seems to me that I should abandon the work in some treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	 And I see an infant whose shoulders are swollen with water, and the head grows larger every day until it cannot be sustained.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	 The moisture grew so much that he died, and this moisture is collected under the bone above the shoulder joint, between the cartilage and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	 The work is such that if the moisture is between the cartilage and bone, and the abscess is small, you cut a wide incision in the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	 And let it be as long as he (the patient) does, while the moisture moves.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	 Here comes the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	 If the moisture is under the bone, and you see the signs that I show you, the openings of the skull on each part, and it does not respond when you press it from inside with your hand, then:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	 If you must make three cuts into the skull in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after incision, remove all moisture from it.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	 After closing the cuts with linen and powder, put wine and oil in them, and leave it until the fifth day.
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 Then undo the cuts, and cure the wound with bandages and ointments, let the skull grow stronger, and give the patient dry meat of moisture until the limb is comforted and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	 And another way of incising is that you look for the size of the abscess and gather its pus.
car aucune fois est elle devant;	 Sometimes it is before;
aucune fois derrier;	 sometimes it is behind;
aucune fois en destre;	 sometimes on the right side;
et aucune fois en senestre.	 and sometimes on the left side.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	 Therefore, cut there where the abscess opens, empty the pus, and do it according to what you are able.
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	 and ensure that you do not cover the artery.
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	 And if there comes blood, let the patient die a natural death from bleeding and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of scrofula (a chronic disease affecting the lymph nodes, often in the neck)
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a disease called "cataract" occurs in the eyes or at its worst, and the disease is old, and the medicine's cure does not help at all, then the last cure is the cautery with which they will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	 Therefore, when you see them covered, let the patient lie on his back.
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	 After rubbing the joint with a rough cloth until the arteries appear, then grasp the patient's neck with the cloth.
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	 Then look where the veins are biting, and the joints of one and the other are next to the ears, and they are set in place.
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Then mark the joints with a sharp awl of two parts, then pierce one and the other with it to the bone, and let it be through the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula under the artery and cut it above, cutting through as two fingers apart.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, it jumps up continuously without stopping.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	 And if the arteries do not open to the touch, it is necessary that you measure the distance of three fingers, then mark the joint and pierce to the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	 And it is necessary to force the blood out by 6 cubits [a unit of measurement], and perhaps a little more or less according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery.
puis regarde la plaie:	 Then look at the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 If it remains on the bone without shifting, if the abscess does not open, then hold down the wound and tie it, and apply ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	of migration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When the old migraine comes and the acute catarrh, because of moisture from tears and heat in temples and aged senility, accompanied by similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicine, but none of it helps him; then we must open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	 And the manner of extracting them is that the patient should bend his head backward towards his temples, and listen to the artery that opens in the temple, as it opens well with its beating, and is easily found except in some men who are very cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	 and if it is found, the patient should pull his neck with some cloths, then rub the place with a sharp cloth, and wash the place with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 Then take the sponge that is of this form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	 Then peel the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then pull it up towards the prongs, and carefully remove the cloths that are underneath each part.
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 And if the artery is thin, turn it at the point of the uncinus, then cut off that part according to the size of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut, it will not heal completely in all places.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	 Draw blood from the six veins, up to three.
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	 And if the artery is large, you must tie it with a strong double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound's stitching, and there is a flow of blood.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	 Then remove the excess that is between the two ligatures at that same hour itself, and if you see, cauterize the wound with a hot iron until it reaches the bone, so that the shoulder is cut off.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	 And it is the grinding work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a warm constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	 For the cautery is aid to finish off the tumors (or abscesses):
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	 because it is of greater aid for tumors (or abscesses).
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	 For the extraction of arteries, one should fill the area with old cotton and place strong tents (bandages) above.
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when they are dislodged (or dissected), they should be cured with dry medicines that cause a burn and bandages until they heal.
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if you do not stop the flow from an artery as much as you can when dissecting (or operating), hurry to cover it with cautery or fill the area with vitriol and hold your hand so that it does not bleed.
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	 And if you do not have it present (the dislocated joint), place the hand on the joint until the bone is frozen, and irrigate the joint with cold water continually, and hold it in place as necessary.
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	 And the one that is more swollen and lighter in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein with this sharp cautery for two parts, but they should be well thickened to keep their heat longer.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the straw is too thin, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	 And there should be between the two blades of the instrument a thick space, and when you have positioned them on the two joints, and you press the iron hot upon it until it reaches the bone, and cut through the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	 And they should be separated between the two shoulders, because this cautery is not entirely soldered from one shoulder to the other.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 and this is the shape of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	 When the tears of the eyes flow out from veins that are above the head, and there is no benefit in treating with medicine as one does, you see the patient become agitated, and he feels his forehead tremble like a shudder.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	 And if they are thin and moist, so that the hairs of the paper fall off, and the paper is scalded and scorched by the heat of the tears, this treatment is necessary.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	 And it was called by the ancients "contused cure", and you make incisions at the back of the patient who has this disease in his forehead, then make three cuts on the forehead equally according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	 And one of the openings should be similar to how the entire front is pushed down swallowing towards the neck, and the others are the two chests through the paper, and keep away from cutting the arteries that are near the two chests through the paper.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	 and distance your hand from the connection of the two jaws, and let each wound be the amount of three joined fingers.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of linen for washing the blood, then insert the sharp spatula of two parts as shown here.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	 from the first incision at the temple to the second incision.
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	 and scrape all the flesh that is between the two openings to the full extent of the siphac on the bone, then do something from the middle incision to the other second one, and then extract this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert into the first cut the instrument called "culter," which is very sharp on one side and soft, not sharp, on the other, and its shape is:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And make the cutting blade pointed towards the chest cavity, and the cut should be soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the midline incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	 And cut all the eyelashes that descend from the head with the incision continuing up to where it opens the cavity, and then do another cut in the middle incision up to the other cavity.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	 And draw out equal amounts of blood, and press the place for blood taken.
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	 then put a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put on damp cloths soaked in wine and oil and alum, and ensure that pus does not come into them.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 On the third day untie the stitch, and apply a large plant of cooled mustard, then the healing of basilicon ointment with rose oil, and other remedies for wounds, until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	 When any person comes with an acute catarrh, you see the eyes swollen and small, blurred vision, and burned-out paper.
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	 and the hair is falling out, and the head hurts with sharp pain, and the patient coughs.
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	 Then understand by these signs that those matters and this catarrh do not come from any other place except from many veins, and the humors that cause it are those.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you must tell the patient to recline their head, then make a large incision behind the head and another wide one at the back of the neck.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	 And begin from the hollow of the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision go up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	 and remove your hand from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	 and when the bone is exposed, suck all the blood with a sponge, then open between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton in there, and sew it with linen.
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	 Then lay it on top of dampened cloths soaked in wine and oil, and beware of getting cold.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow around it, then treat with things that promote healing and encourage growth of flesh.
En teil maniere:	 In this manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	 Take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony, and make a plaster with them.
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	 And administer it on these wounds to heal thoroughly.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	 Everything that falls into ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	 or grain, or animal, or stone from a mine, or similar objects like iron.
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	 or seed, such as beans, peas, lentils;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	 For fluid flowing like water and syrups and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear bone (or any other way that does not align with the ear), does not fit in the ear, or does not grow within the ear, put the ear on a hot surface.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	 If you see the stone, if it releases a little drop of purple oil or castor oil, then apply extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	 and make him vomit with powdered gum myrrh, and stop the nostrils when vomiting comes, and put around the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	 raise the ear upward.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	 Many times flatulence occurs with this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 And if it does not occur, apply extraction with fine tweezers in the following way:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	 If it jumps out with tweezers, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	 if not, apply extraction with the narrow and curved onion of small size.
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	 If it doesn't jump by itself, make a canal of beeswax and push the head of the canal or ear trumpet deeply into the ear, and stop up the area around the canal with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the canal.
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	 Then draw it out carefully, as often it comes out forcefully as we have said.
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	 If it does not come out in that manner, take some kind of implement sharp at the tip and put a piece of cotton around it.
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	 Then press the instrument on the stone or whatever it is, and draw it out forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	 If it does not come out from all the things we have said, then quickly cut the ear in such a way that an abscess pus comes out and twitches.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	 And the manner of the incision is that you first let the patient drain his head, and draw blood according to the measure of its potency, then make the patient sit between your hands and turn his ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear at the fat or the place it depends on;
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	 And let the incision be as a moon, until you reach the bone, then extract it according to your power, and suck it quickly with your mouth.
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and the treatment until it is drained.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	 And if it is a grain that fills and swells, administer extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	 and if it cannot be extracted, then administer the thin subtle sponge according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 And make an incision of that grain (of the bone).
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	 But do not do this when you think that the grain is moist due to ear moisture, as long as you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Then remove it with subtle tweezers and warm water, as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In the ear, therefore, when water falls, it is necessary for the patient to use eardrops first and then stuff the ear with a large cotton ball.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let it lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, it's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	 if it does not do this, take many small and light stones according to the thickness of your finger, and heat them a little in the fire.
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	 and place the patient with an earache or abscess in it, and press on one side of it with your fingers from the other side, and push another stone on top of the stone that is in the ear.
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	 and do not stop doing this with one stone against another until it has completely drained out, and then it will burst out all at once.
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	 And if you see it, take the cord, and push one of the heads into the ear, and hold the other head in fire until the more tender part is burnt;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 then tie other cords for the rest of the burn as we have said before.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	 In the extraction of the beast, if it is small-bodied like a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said before in the classification.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	 but if it has a large body that can be felt, bring instruments for extraction of tweezers;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	 and it is the easier thing to remove that which is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	 In the removal of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said before and in the section on distillation, and the treatment does not help, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	 If there are any open wounds, take subtle forceps to them, and if they do not open, then take the cable from where this form is.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	 And push the more subtle head into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient has, then pull on the entire cable.
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 Do this often until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	 And if they do not obey and come out, stop up the cable with cotton as I said in the previous section.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	 And if they do not come out as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven to be effective in expelling worms, and you will find where to prepare distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if you pour oil and medicine into the ear with this instrument, it takes this form as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	 Silver or bronze is hollowed out beneath the small holes, and covered with a lid for pouring.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	 and to press from inside the distillation with an iron instrument well made for this purpose, and if you wish, take a scraper and wrap it around the tip with cotton;
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	 Then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicine you wish into the tube, and place the tube in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	 Then push the scraper with all the cotton into it and press your hand gently until the oil is distilled or the ear canal becomes clear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	 And the patient feels pain inside, and if it is an abscess, heat it with fire in the same way as one distills it in the ear;
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	 And keep that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Make a tube of silver or lead, narrow at one small opening and with a lid for distillation; use an instrument of lead well made for this purpose; if you wish to apply it, wrap a small rafer around the tip with cotton; pour your oil or juice, and any medicine of yours into the tube; place the tube in the ear; push the rafer into the cotton completely; press gently until the oil distills or overflows from the ear; heat the distillation with fire as one would distill it in the ear; ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicine will not be good.
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	 No child is born without some deformity in ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	 And the same thing happens in men by discharge from a wound or pus born inside the ear, and this discharge sometimes goes all the way into the ear, if one cannot see it;
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	 And sometimes the deformity disappears by itself, and one sees it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	 Therefore, if it goes all the way in and one cannot see it, it is a difficult cure in many situations, and in this case you must put the sick person's ear in the sun;
et regarde dedens:	 And look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	 If you see the eruption (abscess) apparent, then use this spatula of this form:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	 And be sharp and pointed at both ends, so that it does not puncture the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	 If the eruption is of flesh or bone from the ear, then take fine tweezers and gently remove it until all the char (pus) is gone.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the opilation (a foreign body) is completely in the ear, take a fine razor and heat it slightly with fire, then put it in the ear canal.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	 If you feel the eruption that causes pain in the ear, make a small incision gently, but be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear;
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 Then place a wick (tampon) in the ear according to the size of the opening and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	 Make a poultice every day until the wound heals, and take a cloth and soak it in sharp vinegar, and powdered vitriol ground upon it.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 And if you see an abscess on the ear, then you must draw out the pus and apply another cloth moistened with a salve made of rose oil and beeswax until the abscess is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then let it heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	If there comes discharge of blood, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the blood discharge which are either distillations or cauterization.
de la char des papieres	of paper pulp
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	 This is an aphorism that comes in papers about eyes when they are moist and dry; you must stretch them with tongs and tweezers and cut the roots with a spatula.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	 then apply powdered vitriol to it.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	 And if, without cutting, they burn with the slow cautery called lenticular, then they should be burned after incision is worthwhile.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	 and repeatedly repair themselves, no matter what is rooted there;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	 and when they are burned by fire, those roots are consumed and do not return.
de la gresle	from the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	 Many times come out of the eyes something that resembles hail in shape and hardness, and because of this, this disease is called "hail," and it is a collection of thick moisture on the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	 The remedies are as follows:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	 Take care if hail mutes from both sides, it is an easy thing to know.
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Then pull it open widely, then scrape each side lightly with a knife, then take hold of it with the pliers and crush it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	 if you cannot crush it without piercing the paper slightly, do not worry the patient at all.
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 and if the wound is large, gather it together with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 and if it is small, do not apply force, because the ointment will heal it soon enough and prevent scarring.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	 If the hail is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, take hold of it with pliers, and crush and press it from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	 If the paper is dislocated by incision, it causes no harm.
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	 And when hail is hit, apply oil of salty water, and heal the wound of those who suffer from frostbite until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the hails
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	 Exinach is a grease that adheres to the papers above, and it happens more often in children than in adults, and causes much discomfort to their eyes, and they come down with catarrh at dawn, and cannot endure the light of the sun because tears hasten towards their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 And because of this, they lie on their faces immediately and sleep above it, and their papers are damp under their eyelids that the exinach penetrates through the oil.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you press the joint with your fingers and feel the exit between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	 And the manner of the work is that the patient places their head on your hand;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	 Then take a linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size that can contain scorching from each part, then place it on top of it;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	 and press your hands together from both sides, so that the scorching is assembled within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	 then make a hole in the middle of the moisture using the spatula with a cut through wide, but not larger than the wound made in opening a vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	 and cut the skin all the way to where you see the scorching;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	 And in various positions, scorching comes out of the hole, in the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	 Pull then a small piece of sharp cloth between your hands at the fold, and turn your hand left and right until it is dispersed;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	 and make sure not to miss in the crack, that you do not come too close to the spurtulum until the oil, that you do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	 And if the incision does not open at the beginning of the crack, raise the crack slightly so it appears.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	 then draw as we have said, then wet cloths in oil and vinegar, and place it on the area, and press with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And for such men who break whey and place it on top to corrupt the moisture that remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him until he is healthy.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the joint becomes an abscess that is hot, then heal it with poultices soothing until it is healthy.
des poilz des papieres	hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	 When paper growths hair artificially (other than nature), and is nurtured, it harms the eyes, and brings on maladies such as watery eyes, and softening of the paper, and cloudiness, all of which causes the destruction of the eyes.
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	 And the care is according to four ways:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	 or by cautery with fire, or by medicinal poultice as described in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and stitching or by cantharides, as I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	 You must place the head of the patient in your lap, then turn the paper of the oil in your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	 if it is turned over, that is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	 if not, push a needle through all the way on top of it;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	 and pull out the thread from the edge of the paper where the hairs grow under these hairs, and draw the thread up to the top of the paper, and turn it over with the razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	 Then they make an incision in the area below the paper, below the hairs, spreading all over with a spatula, from the large tear until the small one.
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	 Then draw the thread, and put a small tent of cotton and linen under the paper, then make a mark on the paper in the shape of an anchor, just as the mirte thorn, and it is necessary that the figure should be according to the amount you intend to raise the paper, which is designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	 And if it is necessary to cut a large amount of paper according to the softness of the paper.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	 Then spread all over with the spatula on both lines that you have marked, and start from the large tear until the small one.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	 And let one of the openings near the natural hairs be by the root, then push the onion into one of the two angles of the wound, then peel off all the skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	 Then bring the two lips together with a stitch of a needle and all the woolen thread, squeeze out the blood, and remove any superfluous threads on the two scissors to anything sticking, if you wish to do so.
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	 And if this is not done, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days;
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	 then heal the wound without stitching with dry and binding things because paper revives at the edge of the wound and the assembly of it, but the stitch is spoiled (as they say of the ancients), and this is a work without fear.
et si a une autre maniere:	 And another way:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 and you make the paper of a figure that is like the fennel stalk, as we have said, three times perforate according to the form that is here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then make it even on top of the small powers according to the following form:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	 and if you are unable to hold the pliers and the thing is not even, take a needle with thread, and push it through the figure:
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	 and push the other thread out of the large hole, and the second thread out of the small one, and equally assemble the threads between your fingers:
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then straighten your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have signed, as we have said, then sew together the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal it until it is healthy:
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	 And if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with wax and similar calming ointments.
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	 Sometimes the hair of the head is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	 it is necessary that you use what we have said about incising.
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 but stitching in one or the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	 The cure for dogs is as follows:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	 and you convert the head and make it inside as I have said, then make two dogs from craft, and two thin threads of the same length as the head and the width of a feather.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	 and tie up the heads of the two parts where you hold the threads.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	 then assemble one and the other skillfully above that which covers the head of oil, and hold the two dogs formed by the parts.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	 And leave it so for some days; the skin that is being stretched will die and rot, as long as it festers through it.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 If it lasts too long or if it becomes inflamed again, heal it until it is healed.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	 And when the wound is stitched up and the paper is raised, the hairs will no longer grow.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 This is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	 The work is as follows: take a fine needle and insert the silk thread into it.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	 Then connect the heads together delicately and each other finely, and let the length of the threads be a palm in length.
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	 Then order a fine thread of silk, short, and knot its ends.
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	 Then place the patient's head on your lap.
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	 And let the patient's head be exposed to the sun so that the work may be clear, for this is a subtle and delicate work. Then place the needle at the entire length of the thread next to the hair root, and make it pierce the skin quickly through the natural hair as much as you can pull it over.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	 Then pull out the hair up to the thread, and insert the thread into the hair, if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	 Then pull your hand until the hairs come out through the thread with the natural hair to the skin.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	 And if the shoulder is dislocated and the hairs do not come out with it, you will draw the dislocation under all the thread that you have ordered, as long as the dislocation comes out of the hole above and you see it through the oil's vision.
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	 then you will draw the dislocation and the thread, close the oil and leave it closed for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and a blister grows over them.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	 and if the hairs are small, let them grow with long hair from nature, and boil it with what you leave, until it is stretched out and then strain it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	 When this disease called "alecrat" or "porriture" comes in the oil, it happens in two ways:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 One natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or by cutting, or by similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 And the method of work is that you cut through the joint, separate the sides of it, put threads of linen inside it, and tie it until it heals.
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 And you must not use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	 For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	 But work with things softening, such as fenugreek;
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 and the arsenic of water or salt, and linseed cooked, and dittany root boiled in any oil, and wrap it in a linen cloth, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	 And the treasures of your care are such that you must be cautious not to suture it as it was before;
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	 And this task that we have said is not useful unless adjustment of this disease, so that it does not recur as it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	the pus that comes in oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	 The accidents come from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things;
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	 and the procedure in this task is that you take a needle with double thread, and pierce it through the flesh, from the left eyebrow to the right, so that the threads come out into two eyes of the flesh;
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 then pull the flesh up to the needle and hold with a broad spatula.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	 And if the shoulder figure returns as it should, it is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	 If not, take the rasp and put it in the gap, and turn the shoulder, and make two holes on the inside of the shoulder.
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	 and the heads of the two holes from the two corners of the incision that you made, should be made at an angle so that when they are assembled, the shoulder figure will be like the figure of a letter which has the name "Greek".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	 then remove that cartilage, according to the thickness of its sides, from what was previously the shoulder, then join the two separated parts with a thread of linen.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then let it heal according to what we have said about softening medicines and bandages until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	 And if the patient comes from a cut or stitch or cautery, then you must make a deep incision beneath the hairs of the affected area, as described before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	 Then sew together the two sides of an opening, as I have said.
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	 and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very varied in shape, and wise masters prepare tools with all their power to restore the figure to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	 and the patients themselves, according to what work and instruments are needed in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	quickly of the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	 When the suturing occurs in such a way that the paper above is sewn with the white of the oil and cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the tip of a knife beneath the paper and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	 And the extension is with forceps, as long as you grip what is at the end of the subtle spoon, which should not be too sharp nor too pointed, so that the patient does not suffer from the sharp spoon and harm the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	 And your incision, from where you peel off that assembly, should be light so that the skin returns according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	 And the entire assembly is healed, and once in acute oil it becomes infected, and from acute sweet milk and pus.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	 Then put a flax tent between the skin and oil, and place above the oil wool soaked in abundance of egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And on the third day use pus and things that harden until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	the tip of a razor blade
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	 Know that the nail has two kinds:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	 it is nerve-like and resembles hard soap, and another which is not nerve-like but resembles white moisture that has frozen, which when touched with iron and cooked in the tongs cannot be hammered.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	 and both grow towards the large ulcer, and gradually increase until it covers the entire eye and all light and oil movement.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	 And the method of incision is that the patient places his head on a clean surface, then opens the eyes.
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	 and lift the paper with your hand, then hold the nail in the tongs of small jaws, and place it above.
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	 Then take a needle, and put horse hair or ox hair, or strong thread on it.
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	 and bend the tip of the needle slightly and push it into the nail, and pierce through with the whole needle, tie the nail with thread and stretch it above, and shave all the skin surrounding the nail, from the root to the nail bed, down to the cuticle and silk, then grind the rest at the root of the armpit with a fine spatula and small forceps, leaving the natural flesh or skin, so that through the incision no sweat comes out normally.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	 and sometimes the nail grows into the curve only, and with thread, as we have said.
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	 Then scrape off all the soft putty-like substance that is in this shape: [the original shape was not given, so the translation assumes that the context makes it clear what is meant by "this shape"]
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	 And ensure that the soft putty-like substance does not touch the soft flesh and break it, and that the skin is not pierced.
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And after the incision pour oil a little bit of boiled egg white is poured, and let the lidarge solution remain until the next day.
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat that which is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	 And if the nail is not nerve-filled and you cannot push the needle, and the unguent cannot enter, this type of nail is often treated with medicine.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	 And if they grow as I have mentioned in the section on this topic, and you see it covered, then open the oil from the patient, and take a small amount of soft putty-like substance according to this shape.
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	 And scrape the nail above gently, and if you see that it does not soften at all and the reason is pursued, distill from your mouth into the collyrium oil made of litargyre and red collyrium powder and apply the oil until the next day.
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	 Then proceed with the other work according to this same method, until it is completely dislodged.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing contradicts in the oil, as in an abscess, then milk it, and first treat the abscess with heat until it is healthy, then continue the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	 And if the appearance of the skin around the nail harms the oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and cut a small part of it and not too much, so that no tears come.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	 Then distill into the red collyrium oil made of litargyre.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh which grows over the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	 In some men, a red spot sometimes arises, cover the prunelle (anterior chamber of the eye) and hold it with paper and turn it towards the duct, and it looks like a boxwood rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	 And the operation is that the patient places his head on your lap, then he works the eyes, and therefore all that skin around the area should be shaved suitable for this purpose, and hold it with strength.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	 Then take the first piece (of skin) and go all the way shaving to the end, and be careful not to cut the eye during the operation.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	 and make the incision with a spathamel (a type of blade) as we have said in the incision of the nail and the small forces of which one separates the skin, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	 and when the incision is completed and all the skin is removed, apply the oil of oil (liniment) ground or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put it on top of cotton with egg white, so that it is secure from infection.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	 And if there remains something and the wound is deep, and you doubt about the abscess being hot, then leave the oil and treat the abscess with cooling substances.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 Then return to your work when it is healed, and thus do as charms are anointed with oil in this manner.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	 But it is necessary that you make the treatment of each oil weak through natural ways.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	 and by accidental means, in work with iron.
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	 And do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this member is soft for this work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Red veins that are covered by oil become visible and they make their work (the task/affliction) evident and weaken the oil every day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	 Therefore it is necessary to first check if the oil, in which the sebaceous gland is located, is open and has no other disease except the sebaceous gland.
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	 Then, hold the neck in this manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 instruct the patient to place his head in your hand, then support the chin all around according to your wisdom, and let the hands be subtle and double in this way:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And may there be two openings in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	 then the hands support the chin gently and carefully, squeezing the blood slowly after that, until you see the veins moving away from the oil.
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	 and be careful not to pierce the oil with the tips of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very eager in your work so that you do not injure anything except the veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	 and when you have done this, if it condenses green and red oil to cure what remains infected.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you cannot catch it in that hour, apply a soothing ointment over the oil of calming things on the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is alleviated and assured that the abscess has healed, then continue as before until it is healed;
et c’est li forme des forces:	 And this is the form of the cautery:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula from oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	 The instrument is called "arissati" (orificator):
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	 When you treat it by cautery and burning medicine as I have said before, and it is not healed, there is a tool in it where you make an incision over the abscess, where it should die, and drain all the moisture that is there until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	 And when the bone is exposed, you will see the corruption and blackness; if the knife is ready with all the instruments as described here;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	 and it is called "sharp head", and it should be made with iron as the handle of the knife, pointed like a chisel in the shape as presented here:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	 And put it on the rotten bone, then turn it between your hands and press your hand a little so that you feel that the corruption is pierced.
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	 and do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal extracts.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 if the joints are swollen and pus forms, and the body of the bone is also swollen, and remains thus for 40 days without moving or becoming abscessed, and no serious accident occurs, it is known to be healthy.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	 If there is no other remedy, the only device for returning the fistula to its place is according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 and it is that you open the bone for the second time with iron, and with hot medicines, and when it is opened, take the iron fork according to this form, and let the iron prongs be at three angles, and the shaft be narrowed up to the head as you can see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	 then place it on the bone by the rim, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the iron fork completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it through the vein if he holds his hand on his neck:
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	 and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows hard and stiffens the joint, the matter goes to the neck:
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 It is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	From the flow of oil
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	 When all the eyes are open wide in every way, and it does not cause disturbance to the ship or any reduction, then you must bind the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	 Then heal the healthy parts, then apply ointments or oil with iron for help, then put oil made of asafoetida and aloe and incense and saracolle on it, then strain the oil, and smear the oil over bandages and cloths.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	 and the manner of cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of the other according to the quantity that the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	 Then strain it from above with a hard bandage and begin to compress wounds without cutting with iron.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	 Then release the wound oil and allow it to be strained for a day and night, and if it softens, you must strain it strongly.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	 Then remove the bandage after the day and night, and if you see the oil healing, that is good.
se ce non;	 If not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then begin the poultice and cloths and bandage and dressings until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The breaking of a rotten cloth
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	 When ruptures occur in the inflamed cloth, open it up and bring forth paper as if with the grain of resin, and it is easily visible.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	 Then if you see it covered, the treatments are such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area from below up to above, then insert another awl or double thread from the side of the wound.
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	 And make it pierce through, leave the first needle according to its position;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	 then take the thread of double yarn and tie a part of the eye around it, tighten it well, then remove the needle and put moistened flaxseed oil on top of it;
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 and leave it until the thread heals with the eye, then heal the oil with comforting things until the wound is healed;
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 and sometimes the wound is bound by the eye on each side of a circle of cloth until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	 And if the eyes appear large, pierce it with a fine spatula that comes from full oil, correct the moisture abscess and drain the eyes, and put it in immediately.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then straighten it until it is sound.
de la bowe de l’oil	of the oil bowl
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not far from the eye which is assembled in oil, resembling an ulcer draining, but it is not an ulcer.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	 and the manner of its appearance is that you make the patient sit on a prepared seat upright, then take hold of his head with both hands from behind, and move him so that you see the bone come up to your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	 then it should be pressed in, without draining and open the light, and the patient should see things as he is accustomed.
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 if it does not drain below, know that it is an ulcer, and the draining of the bone is not as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and press it against the horny layer of the eyelid at the conjunction with the cornea and the eyeball, until it bulges.
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when it has protruded, let it be distilled in sharp hot oil mixed with honey or aged oil and fenugreek, or hot oil and honey, then let it be cured with another remedy until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	waters of oil (literally: "of the oil")
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	 We have similarities of the eyes in their division, and that which must be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 if it works according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	 You must make the patient sit between your hands crossed, away from light because of the sun, and let him hold the oil and squeeze it very tightly;
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	 Then put the paper of oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if they are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	 Then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called 'almagda', or in your left hand, if they are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	 Then put the point of the instrument through the crown by the thickness of a thumb in that hollow part of oil to the smaller tear duct, then push the instrument called 'almagda' firmly, and hold your hand until it pierces through the hollow of oil, and feel that almagda enters into the empty space.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	 And it is necessary that the measure of the way almagda should be at the end of the measurement of the space which is from the pupil up to the end of the nose.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	 And it is the crown of the ear.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 If you look at the bone in this paper by the brightness of the perforated parchment, then place the instrument up to it or the sharp point, and press down along another way after that.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 The patient should now press down on it (the shoulder), so he sees the instrument before him in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	 After a little rest, and if the sharp point rises along the second way, apply the force with the instrument, and when it is pushed in and it does not rise anymore, gently draw it out by rotating your hand slowly.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 Then replace the sharp point a little with beeswax, and cut off that oil inside.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then put on it (the shoulder) a cloth or wool soaked in rose oil and egg oil, and bind it with the healthy oil.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We, and those of our time, place on top a mixture made with plenty of eggs.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	If the oil cannot enter due to its hardness, as there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped like this:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	 Therefore, pierce only the conjunction and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then push it in as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	 And in the completion of the work, the patient, the sleeper, lies down facing his back in a dark place;
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	 And he should be kept from all movement, and take light food, and not move his head to the right or left, and tie him according to his position for three days;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	 Then untie him in the same dark house, test his sight, and make him see some things, and then tie him again for seven days;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 And it is not necessary that you do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but it is necessary that you lighten it, because the pain increases quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	 If an abscess comes up, you should untie the oil before the seventh day, and direct it to that which soothes the abscess;
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 And when it has been calmed [the dislocated joint], separate the eyelids and place on its face an ointment to cover for any duration of time, and remain there in that dark room evermore.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	 And then gradually leave the house, one step at a time, and return to his quarters.
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And understand that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	 And one came to us who was from the Yrach [Iran], who told us that in their country they practice the amalgam process, by which the [mercury] juice is drawn, but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, nor have I read about it in the books of the ancients;
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	 And perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	 And these are the appearances of the forms of almadga, because those who do not know them see them.
et soient d’arain proprement:	 and are properly speaking:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And the head of oxen of this same subtlety shall have four corners pointing.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh over the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	 Sometimes there are born or are born worms that are dissimilar, from which some seem like scorpions with many feet.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 and if there are any like this or if the worm is swollen with such color, and if the worm is soft of bone color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	 Therefore, for those worms that are soft and not swollen, you must make the patient sit between your hands facing the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	 and open its nostrils, and pour vinegar on these worms, and pull them out forcefully.
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 Therefore hold what you can sustain on the pointed spur of a needle-like instrument from one side, as long as you know that the body is completely ossified.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	 And if there remains any substance that cannot be held, open it all to the finest and lightest instruments carefully, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	 and if no abscess is formed or pus has collected, use the help as necessary.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	 and if it is malicious abscesses, hasten and burn them with the cautery until the pus is drained and all the flesh is charred and burned, then pour in oil or alcohol and vinegar.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	 If the urine works, and moisture reaches the palace (brain), know that it is healthy;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	 And if moisture does not pierce as it should, know that there is new flesh in the bone above, which prevents the instrument from cutting.
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	 Then you must insert a small piece of flax thread, and it should be soaked in the hands, with space between each stitch no less.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	 and place the patient's head in the thread through his nose as far as possible, and pull it out smelling until it comes from the nose.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	 and many times children in schools do this, and it is easy for anyone who wants to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 Then hold the head that comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth with the other hand; know which is which among us who are the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	 Make it so that you know that the flesh has been corrupted, then draw out the cord, squeeze the blood, and moisten the cord in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in place as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	 keep it for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes everything that remains of flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	 and then put a piece of flax in its place for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, where oil and medicines are distilled.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	 And it should be made of silver or copper, resembling an open lantern, similar to a piece of flax, and lead it thus.
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	 And if you see, make a narrow channel, let the instrument be full for cleansing the head.
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	 and hold the receptacle at the head when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	On the flesh over the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	 Often in the head, a disease named "telul" arises, which grows and becomes large over time, until it can be seen with the eye.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	 And because of this, you must cut it at the beginning and completely remove it, then place the fire cautery or burning medicine on it.
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	 And if you delay cutting it until it becomes large, beware if it is hard, of such a color, and poor sensation.
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	 Do not touch it with iron because it is an abscess hardened, for when you cut it once, much harm comes to the patient.
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	 If the abscess is touched with softness, not of a fire color, and you see that it can be completely covered, empty the patient and soothe him with fear, and treat the area with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the neck is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when swelling comes in one of these cartilage joints, it is of little use for most men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	 Therefore, it should be noted that if this happens, observe whether the wound is fresh with all its blood;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then press the two lips together in a stitch, and treat it until it heals.
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	 If the lips are already separated from both sides, you must excise all the affected parts until they heal, then press the two lips together in a stitch, bind it and apply powder of dragon's blood, and incense crushed.
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And put on top of the powder a piece of plaster of strong or another adhesive plaster, and leave it until it hardens by itself, then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	 The method of stitching is that you gather the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	 or with needles, as we have said in the belly stitching;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	 or with thread, as I have told you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	 In men there often occurs an abscess hard within the lips, resembling grains of various sizes, both small and large.
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	 Then you must turn the lips, cut above each one, take them with forceps and crush them in each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Then apply the mortar of vitriol after the incision, while the wound is still bleeding.
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then soothe the wound with dry remedies until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the chin
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	 Often, a bladder-like growth appears on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus".
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	 You must hold it with forceps and cut off its root, leaving the bone or blood vessels exposed.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	 Then apply powdered vitriol or other constricting and drying agents to the wound.
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	 If the growth returns after the incision, which often happens, you should cut it a second time and cauterize it.
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	 if it does not return after cauterization.
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	 And these are the shapes of the instruments for covering [or bandaging].
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	 Sometimes, pieces are assembled on the jaw bones, within the mouth between the gums, which are ugly and harsh.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	 And sometimes teeth turn black, yellow, and decay as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth rot.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	 You must make the patient sit between your hands and hold his head in your lap, and pull out or scrape the teeth where they appear until there is nothing left.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	 And do the same with blackness and greenness, yellowness and other stains, until they are cleaned.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	 If you remove those that are at the root, it is good.
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	 If not, start again on the second or third day and continue until everything has been pulled out.
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	 Know that teeth require different shapes of instruments for pulling out, according to what the work shows, because the puller who removes teeth has different shapes than those who remove between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	 And these forms and others are ready for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	 It is necessary when curing the tooth of its pain that you delay drawing it out as much as you can, for this must not be done at all.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	 because it is a very high substance up to which there is no excuse for cutting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is forced to draw teeth, you must be certain about the pulling tooth.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	 Many times the patient feels pain and believes it is a holy tooth, and draws the good tooth.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	 nevertheless, the pain does not go away even then, until the bad one is removed, for we have seen it happen with holy people.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	 and when you are certain that the tooth is rotten, it is necessary that you scrape around the tooth in all places. Spathulum strongly to protect the gums from all sides;
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	 Then move it at your elbows or subtle tweezers at the first poke and poke, until they are well dislocated, then firmly hold the tweezers.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 And have the patient's head between your knees, and hold it steady so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After straightening the tooth correctly to break it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	 If the teeth are pierced and eaten, you must fill it with cloths where the wounds are.
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	 And if you hold it gently with tweezers so that it does not break while being pulled out.
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 You must cautiously work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 And be careful not to break it, and leave a part behind, and the pain for the patient will return from the root even greater.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	 And beware that you do not act like the ignorant men who, through their haste and recklessness, break the cart [shoulder] sometimes, and do not bring what we have mentioned.
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	 But sometimes, due to the root cause of this great disease, it comes through the urine or because the cartilage breaks, as we have often seen;
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	 and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the place with wine or vinegar and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	 and if bleeding continues from the wound, which often happens, use the place with ground vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	 The shapes of instruments that initially quieten the tooth should have long points and thick handles, so that they do not double back as you pull out the tooth;
et ce sont les formes:	 these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And be large enough that they do not bend when drawing the tooth and made of good iron, and be pointed to hold the tooth in place.
de la racine des dens	of the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	 When the root remains after pulling out the tooth, it is necessary to put cotton moistened in butter for a day or two on the place until the place is softened, then insert the pliers called "algefri", which give the appearance of a beak;
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 And within it (should) be made similarly as a chisel, this is its shape:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, you must peel back the skin entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as a palindrome, in its place.
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	 And it should be long and thick so that it does not break easily, and if the root jumps through it, that's good;
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	 If that is not the case, help yourself with all tools, from which these shapes will follow afterwards:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if one uses the instrument with two prongs, its form is as follows:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments that are in front of the teeth, for this tool appears to be large pincers. Here is its shape:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	 Let this tool be long so that it cannot break, and know that many dense tools are required;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	 and also other tools, which are not counted.
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	 and the wise masters will find their own tool by themselves, according to what their work and the illness indicates, because there are some diseases where ancient teachings did not mention any tool due to diversity among them; and if it breaks the cart or other bones, where it could be, he should search for the tools that are needed, which I have told you, and help himself with gestures, from which this shape follows:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	 And let them be large and firm to hold the bone, so it does not slip away, but rather can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	 And then restore the joint with the appropriate medicine, and if there is putrefaction in the bone, and it is small, remove everything.
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	 When the teeth appear not according to natural shape and the form is ugly, especially in girls, it is necessary that you know if the teeth are misplaced after the tooth has come out, and it is not in the correct position, and they cannot be straightened or filed.
adonques lou raie;	 Then remove the tooth.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	 If it is in front of the tooth, take this tool whose shape is like a small beak, and made of sharp steel at the end.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the handle of the forceps should be used gently for many days due to the hardness of the tooth and because you do not move the others, and if it is possible, file it down with a small file in the shape as shown here:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	 And it is similar to the limb from which they make needles;
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	 and in the limb, let the tooth grow slowly day by day gently, so that it does not move until it falls out;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	 then the plane at the end with any grinder, and if the tooth is too sharp and it bites the tongue, you must file down the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt the speech;
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out.
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	 When the tooth falls out in front due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew food without it falling out, and you have treated them with constricting medicines, that is of no use;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	 therefore they should be held together with a gold wire, for the silver threads become green and rot, but gold does not change.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	 And let the size of the thread be neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth.
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	 And if you wish to align the teeth, take the thread and double it between two sound teeth, then place the cheeks between the front teeth, if there is one or more of them, as far as you see soundly up to the tooth on the other side.
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	 then resume the covering until the part where you began, and hold your hand gently and carefully, so it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 and tie the thread to the root of the tooth so it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	 Then hold the cheeks with the thread using tweezers and assemble them, and insert them between the sound tooth and place it so it does not pierce the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	 And then leave it as tight as it can stay for a while, and if it dislocates, or the tendons run, hold it with another thread.
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 If it lasts and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two roots, as you can see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	 And when a tooth falls out, put it back in its place freshly, as we have said.
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	 And do not interfere with it if one is not wise and patient; sometimes the form of a tooth made from ox bone is done and put in the place where it lacks, and it is held as we have said, and it lasts and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	 Sometimes this link comes from beneath the tongue or naturally.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	 by accident of a welded wound.
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	 and the procedure is such that you open the patient's mouth, hold their head still, and pull the tongue.
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	 then catch the nervous link firmly with a wide instrument, as long as the tongue is dislocated from its position, and if it is hard or notched, which is a deep wound, press the forceps and tightly grasp the linked part.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	 and make sure the cut is not too deep, as there is an artery beneath it.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	 and when you have finished, lift the red and warm or cold piece upwards, then put a tent of linen under the tongue.
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 And the worms the patient every night, so that the limbs cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	 If there is a discharge of blood, put on the wound Vitriol powder.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	 And if the wound opens up, cauterize it with the cautery known as lentiginout, which is good for this purpose.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 Then heal it with another remedy until it is healed,
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	 And if you see a spot of pale, black or hard color, which the patient does not feel, do not touch it because it is a cancer.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	 And if it is swelling with pus and there is moisture, throw in onion juice, and with a thin spatula, loosen it from both sides.
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	 And if the bone protrudes in your work, place boiled vitriol on it until it is burned, then return to your work when you have drawn all fire.
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then raise the limb and cover with linen and let it heal with other treatments until it is healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	Abscesses of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	 Sometimes boils come inside the throat which are called "godath," and they are properly called almonds; when you treat them as we said in the division, and they are not healed, take care.
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 If it is a hard abscess of small size and dark color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also for the flow of blood.
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	 But let it (the dislocated joint) remain until it dies, and then you will separate it, or it will break by itself;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it (the abscess) is of white color again and the root is subtle, prepare the instrument to cover (it), but first check whether the abscess pus has subsided and been pacified.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	 Then make the patient sit in the sun and his hands should be in your clean ones, open his mouth and take him by the jaw with the tongs between his hands, press his tongue under the entire instrument, as shown here.
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 and made of silver or fine brass like a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	 Do you press the tongue with the entire instrument and see the abscess? If so, take the awl and push it into the anus and pull it out above as much as possible;
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	 And pull no thing with the thread, then tie it on the instrument, as shown in this form, which seems like a loop.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	 And if the head is curved and twisted to one side or another, and they are very sharp, and it is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold it with pliers of this shape:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	 And on one side it shall be called "pull", and on the other side "push".
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And when you have bound one of the nuts (knuckle bones), bind the other in the same manner, and after making the incision, gargle the patient with strong hot, sharp, and warm water, and if bleeding occurs, continue gargling the patient with strong hot water, or cooked apple cores or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the wound is stopped.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then let the treatment continue until it heals.
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	 And sometimes other abscesses are born in the throat besides the two tonsils, so treat them accordingly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	 And I treat a woman with an abscess that was born within the throat, to be specific, the small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 And I had tightly closed the throat so that the woman could not exhale due to the blocked passage, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had stayed like that for a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess had risen so much that it had burst through both openings of the nose.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	 I therefore hastened and pierced one of the tonsils, then pulled it out forcefully, taking out a large piece of pus.
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	 Then, you should reset the other side of the dislocated neck, and open the mouth and press the tongue.
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	 Then, you should cauterize this abscess, cut a piece of it out, and let only a little blood come out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	 And thus the conduit from the woman's throat was cut open, and she began to drink cold water and then wine, and continued to cut away at this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	 The abscess grew again and filled the place where I had made the incision, becoming very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	 Then I trapped it and burned it inside her throat.
ensi demora sens croistre;	 It grew slowly with pain.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 And I separate these parts, let God heal them after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	 When the vein retracts to the anus and is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 And if it is beneath large and round, it is called "vein".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	 When it is treated as we said in the previous section and the treatment does not help, and you see that the deep abscesses are calmed, and it is subtle, then you must lance it.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	 And the round one which is not long is called "cyst".
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 If it is bloody or of yellowish color or black, then you must make an incision on it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	 Therefore, when you see it, according to the manner I have said about its color and length, make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we described earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Then insert the needle into the eye and pull it through, and cut it at the level of the two anvils that I have mentioned in the incision of the two almonds.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	 And you must not cover anything beyond the natural boundary.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	 for if you cover more than that, it harms both the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 After the incision, use what was said in the incision of the two almonds, and heal it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears to be covered, then you should use an instrument for the cauterization of the senses to alleviate fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 And the method of cautery is sharp fire.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	 The patient must put his head in your hand, and then press the tongue against the instrument we have said in the chapter of the fire cautery, and bind it with hot boiling pitch, so that it is not too thick or too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And using the lever of this tool, as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	 Place one end of the lever on the hair or the medicine and set the tool on top of all the medicine in the eye.
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	 And the patient should lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, but not to the throat or the nose.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	 Then hold the entire medicine with your hand and press it on the eye for half an hour until you see it become swollen and the biting of the medicine is relieved.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	 And if you see, take cotton and wrap it around some instrument, wet the cotton in the medicine, and press the instrument on top of the cotton in the canal above, until the cotton adheres to the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	 And often do this as long as the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and lie afterwards for 4 or 5 days.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	 If you need to repeat the cautery of this medicine, do it again, and after the cautery let the blood flow out around the eye with a swab made of cotton in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And it should be anointed with cold water, and cured with gargles until it heals.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	 This cure is better than incision, not the cautery.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	 If it is cured by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, rue, and chamomile, and assembled them all or some of them in one pot, add ashes, and make it boil.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	 And let the head be well glued with strong earth, and within it have a hair-shaped instrument according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	 And let it be of silver or iron, and push one of the heads into the patient's mouth until the steam rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is putrefied:
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	 After the beginning often occurs, as long as the eye dries up, and ensure that you do not perform this at the onset of the abscess's eruption, for many things may occur.
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 and do not perform it before the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	 And if this is not present, take a cane and put inside the head of an eggshell, so that the mouth of the patient does not become too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 for the eggshell does not let the vapor burden the mouth, and it is good care along with health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	 Many times it happens in the throat that a bone or fish spine, or any other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	 therefore you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue against the sun with all instruments, so that you may see movement of the thing;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	 And if it does not open by itself and is replaced in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as soon as the food is cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	 possibly if the matter arises through vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	 or if the patient swallows a piece of sponge, a piece of naval, a radish root, or a dry crust of bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	 and tie thread to the sponge, then swallow it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	 and when it reaches the place, it will be drawn out, and then you will pull it out;
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	 and if it does not come out as we have said, take the instrument of yew wood in this shape:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	 And let the instrument be arched at the top so that it can enter the throat more easily, and let the handle be raised;
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	 And beware not to touch the epiglottis, let it remain intact, nor push any bone inside.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	 It is beneficial for the patient to move the instrument, because it must be moved or the thing will be damaged.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	 if you push it downward, or pull it out fully so that the instrument is equal on both sides, until it comes out.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the throat vein
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	 Sometimes the juice is used as a medicine, as I said in the division, through the use of medicines.
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 And when it does not help at all, then look in the throat of the patient towards the sun, then press the tongue against the instrument I told you about.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the blood, draw it out very slowly with a small lancet, or fine tweezers suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a thick cane and push it into the patient's throat, then push or pull on the end of the cane with hot iron and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And let the patient be treated with water throughout the day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	 Then take a full glass of cold water, open the mouth, and pour it in without swallowing, and move it around with your hand frequently.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 And as soon as the wound feels cold, it collapses (or falls).
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	 And if it does not collapse as we have said, you should suffocate the patient with certain means, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 Do this often, for it will heal quickly.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	 And the method of fumigation is that you take the pot in which there are hot coals, and it should be covered with a cloth pierced in the middle, and in that place put the head of the instrument.
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	 Then throw your fumigation, and the patient places the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth so that the smoke does not come out at all, but comes to the nostrils.
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	 And the nasal cavity should now be filled, and if it does not drip, the fumigation should be repeated many times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	 The patient should suffer thirst, eat salty and sour things, and not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 And then it will be necessary for the dripping to cease by this means.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	 And the shape of the instrument with which the nasal cavity is treated is as follows: when it can be seen, resembling curved tweezers to enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	 And let it resemble a beak of a saw, and it shall have abrasiveness of lime, so that what it takes, it cannot release.
et vez ci la forme:	 And here is the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	 Many forms of abscesses are similar to those recalled from this and the other book that follows, and they vary in piercing and cutting.
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 And it is in two ways, one of which resembles the same, and from what holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the cavities that are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses in the head are different from those in the cavities, and abscesses in hollow bones are different from those that come at joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	 And if abscesses are not to be pierced, until the bubble is ripe according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if of such kind that they must be pierced when they are ripe and do not die according to their completion, like abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 When an abscess comes near to a joint, and it is left until it bursts around it, in case the ligament and the nerve of the joint are corrupted, this is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	 For when an abscess is cut open in the main member (body part), and you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the main member.
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	 If the bottom (base) is cut open, then one should pierce it while it is still alive.
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	 and it is not good that you pierce an abscess without digestion being completed, except for one that is at the bottom (base), which should not perish entirely but should be opened up, lengthened inside, and a fistula should come forth.
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 and cannot heal in a long time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	 And it is necessary that you know the time of perforation of the abscess that is dead according to its completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, the disappearance of the fever, the decrease in pain and redness, the subsiding and reduction of swelling and hardness of the abscess head, and the other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	 And you must make it sit (the patient) where the perforation is or more closely to the abscess, and where it has opened up (the wound).
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	 And the perforation should be along the length of the body, and if the abscess is at the hand or foot, or in joints and nerves and veins, and in equal places where there is no swelling.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that break, according to the same member. (direct translation)
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 And when an abscess is in the charnel (or putrid) place, it is beneficial to let the perforation remain until confirmation through complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	 For if you pierce ahead of this (the abscess), it should be aligned with the body along the path of the pus, and filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 And by chance, harden the lips and plunge deeply into it (the abscess).
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that is pierced according to the width of the body, according to what the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	 You must bring small abscesses, small pustules (or boils).
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And in large abscesses, large wounds, and many splits according to the likeness of the size of the abscess.
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	 and if such abscesses require incision and covering.
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	 when it becomes as a rotten cloth, and is spoiled, you must treat it as one treats babies:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	 and if such have been cut into three angles or are treated like the thorny plantain, such as swollen abscesses from the armpit;
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 and if such have been cut in round shape, or other shapes and seem to be covered.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	 Those without a head, like a superficial abscess, must be pierced completely;
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	 And when the abscess is large and it has collected much pus, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus in that hour, but draw out a part of it;
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	 Then stop the abscess until the next day, then draw out nothing wrongly;
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	 do this several times in large amounts, until all the pus comes out;
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 always for a person of weak vitality, or a woman, or small children, or old men in decline.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The pus may sometimes spasm with the discharge of it, which may happen that the patient dies, and you need not worry.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	 Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and look if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	 And if it is a deep wound, bring in linen or old cotton bandages.
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	 And if it is a large abscess with much corruption, then you must pack in each one a bandage so that they come against each other.
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	 And if you have cut into the abscess a part of the skin and shaved it around, then you must fill it with old cotton or flax reeds without moisture, and tie it until the third day.
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then open (it) and treat the wound with ointment until it heals.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, bring cold water and apply it to the cloth, wetting it repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	 If the bleeding persists, bring government and care, and the powders that I have mentioned in this book, and if it is winter, and the limbs or abscess are very nervous, then you must put hot wet bandages and linens soaked in wine and oil on top.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if it is a dislocation and the joint is fleshy, then you must put it on linen soaked in cold water and oil, or vinegar and cold oil, until the third day, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it, as necessary, until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	 And one should know universally about treatments of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	 Or I have told you how to go before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses coming from the head, there are ways that are in bandages, similar to the bag of a linen sack, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	 There are some that are fat and others that have moisture like boils.
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 And there are those that are hard and stony at the base, and there is no doubt if the artery does not contradict it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of cutting is that you explore with all instruments called "intermissor", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they make a long incision.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	 And when moisture is emptied, scrape without leaving any skin that contains the moisture, for it will return again if left something;
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	 then immerse cotton in Egyptian balm if available.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	 if not, use water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving until the next day.
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 and cure those who remain alive.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	 Then repeat the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know for sure that it does not remain alive.
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	 If the abscess remains fatty, press according to this form, long.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	 And you throw out your intestines, and strip all parts, and put all your care into drawing force from outside where it lies;
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the arteries make you constricted, do as I have told you afterward.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And likewise treat the abscess if it is hard, and of cutting and caring for it as I have told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And cut above the hard abscess and moist it, it will be easier because there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	 And if any of these abscesses or boils has no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I treated or boil of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	 And found the abscess like a hard stone, harsh and white, and could not burst.
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 If they had struck it with anything, they would have made the same kind of wound as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	 In other abscesses or boils coming from the head or ears roots, they should be opened every day depending on location, to stimulate drainage.
et les cure si com il covient.	 And heal as required.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess appears at the neck, beneath the chin, in armpits, and sometimes it appears elsewhere on the body, they are swollen and connected with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	 Each scrofula is properly within its side, just like the knot and the abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And the appearances of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 Some contain moisture, and there are some malicious ones that do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	 In the one that you see with good position on the body, and resembling the color of the body, silent from all parts and not hard at the neck or the artery or the vein, and not swollen.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	 If you see it in this condition, you should cut through the top and peel off each part, and spread the two lips of the incision, if necessary, just as we have said about abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 And pull slowly and surely, make sure you don't cover the nerve or the vein, and let it not be the spatula-shaped instrument nor a scalpel that escapes the hand, and look not too far ahead, so as to not cover what should not be covered.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	 And if you cover the vein or artery and it doesn't heal over, place vitriol powder or some stopping powders into the wound, and close the wound.
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 And let it be until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound softened, and let it start to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	 And when the blood has stopped, return to your work until you complete it.
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 Then, examine if there are any small scrofulas present on your indication, and wash them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	 And if the root of the scrofula opens widely, do not cut that scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang through it, without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 Then apply the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, then heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 If you excise the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound and sew them now, for there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and pull out the pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	 Those scrofulas that are superfluous, pierce them where they have closed shut.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	 and pierce them in the same way as the one mentioned above, depending on it, then apply tents with ointment and similar things so that what remains of the corruption is corrupted.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the wound is well cleaned, anoint it with soothing ointment until it heals.
de squinance	The meaning seems to be about treating a scrofula (a chronic inflammatory condition), specifically when it becomes necrotic (rotten) and needs to be drained and sewn up. The term "de squinance" in the following sentence is not explicitly explained in this text, but it could potentially refer to the same condition or a related one based on the context. Here's the translation for this line:
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	 The ancients discussed the shape of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	 But I never saw anyone in our land who did it, and this is the writing of their speech.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	 To those with swallowing difficulty (squinance), it is necessary that the choke (epiglottis) be removed.
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	 And this should not be attempted by anyone, since all the veins and the mouth of the patient are near those who have an abscess in the mouth or throat or both.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the channel of the passageway, it is necessary to cover the epiglotte to avoid the danger that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	 Therefore, when we want to cut the epiglottis, it is necessary that we cut it below three circles or four, a small transverse slit between two circles or by the amount of the incision according to the size of the hyoid bone (syfac), not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 And if the loins are contracted at the section of the epiglottis where there is no cartilage, the veins are long in that area.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	 And if the master is afraid, then it must extend the skin of the throat in full length, then cut the vein until it reaches the trachea.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	 and remove the blood vessels if you see anything, then tie off the vein as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	 and it is demonstrated by the section of the trachea that gushes out through the broken place, and by the lack of voice.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 Leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	 And when the hour has passed where there is doubt about strangulation, gather the two lips of the wound around the vein, and sew everything closed except for the cartilage.
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then administer medicines that cause pus formation, while it is healthy.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up, and the patient is judged dead, and the wings are cut off.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	 Then perform a tracheotomy because the patient cannot swallow, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are kept from death;
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	 and for this reason the ancients would leave the wound open until the evil of the disease has passed, which it will pass within 3 or 4 days. Then they would command to sew up the wound and heal it, until it is healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 And I will tell you what I have seen.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	 I saw a maiden take a knife and stick it in her throat, cutting part of the windpipe;
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 And I was called to heal her, but found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw that blood was coming out of it, and I knew that it had neither opened nor conducted air except through the throat, and the veins were flowing through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	 I hurried up, stitched the wound, and cured it until it healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	 And it happened to the lady that her voice was hoarse, but she returned to her normal condition afterward.
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 For this reason, I say that in the case of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	in the throat.
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	 This abscess is called "throat hernia," and it is a large one with a yellowish color, and it is often in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	 and there are two types of it:
naturez, et accidens;	 Nature and accidents;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 and accidental has no trickery.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	 And the accidents are according to two ways, one is like a fatty tissue and the other way is like an abscess that comes from us through an artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	 and there is fear, and it should not be done forcefully except in the small one, and prove and examine carefully at every incision.
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	 if you find it as fatty tissue, and it does not have any way out, hit it like one strikes the nose, and draw it out completely, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 and examine carefully in every direction, and cure as necessary, until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	 Many ways there are of us, which I will tell all their likenesses;
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 and it is necessary that I tell the difference between knot and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	 I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting, until the boil is passed, and the pustule is completed.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	 Then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	 With the knot there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains pus, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins as an abscess and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 And they are like this, either fat or moist, and very much of their color are as I said in the classification.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary, when you come to the treatment of the newt, that you test and examine first everything in the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its shape comes or the chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	 And the method of incision for abscesses is to take or more moist place that you find within the abscess, and turn your fingers little by little, until you feel the instrument has pierced through, then according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 Then extract the contents, and be careful that it does not spurt out.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	 If moisture runs out, let it coagulate, as I have said for other abscesses.
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	 If after extracting the contents no moisture comes out and it appears to be fat, then make a cross-shaped incision and take hold of it with tweezers, carefully peel it off gently from both sides and draw out the sac containing it.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 And if you cannot draw it out healthy, draw it out piece by piece so that there remains nothing.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	 For if there remains something, it returns many times;
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if a little remains and does not distress you, use the wound with some corrosive powder, hold the wound tight, place something hot to ease the abscess and heal it with other treatments until it is healthy.
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 And if the abscess is large, make two holes in the wound, and treat it with lard or other appropriate ointment.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	 And if the vein beats against you or another, hasten and use broken vitriol on the place, leave it for two or three days until the wound purges, and let the boiling of the blood subside.
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	 Then return to the original state of what has been dislocated.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	 Here are the forms of the cautery instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	 large, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	 And there are three squares that are called 'albaret', and one that is called 'breb', and there are three ways of them:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	 large, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses with fistulas;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	 and they are like the needles with which you sew sacks, and they are of citron wood, or iron, or silver, and those that are yellow are more effective, and they are sharper for surrounding the swellings of a fistula with a black plug;
et sont de III manieres:	 they are of three types:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	 The shapes of the onions are very similar, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	 Large, medium, and small [things]
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	 and if they have one hump with three forms alike;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	 and if they have three humps, and are the same in three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	 and if they have two humps, and one hump only, and are of three kinds.
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 and all these are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	 The head of these things is sharp, and those who do not cut at all from one side, which we scrape the nails with, because one does not strike the vein or the nerve;
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	 And from these incisions the ulcers are tied up in bands, so that the patient does not harm himself at the opening of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	 They are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	 large, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	 Only use it in the flesh of a man, such as the limbs, arms, breasts, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 And sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling fists of plasters, in this form to drain blood.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed at the site that heals quickly, at the veins, and sometimes returns according to this large form.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	 Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, until they resemble breasts of a woman.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 They remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of the line b.j to g.
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then scrape off the fat, apply medicine to the wound with soothing balm, then bring together the two edges of the wound for stitching, and heal it until it is healed.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	 and if the limbs bend downwards due to their size, like it often happens in women (when they become wide), then divide them into two pieces above, with two similar cuts.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	 in this way one piece will be holding the other at the end of both pieces, so that the larger piece encloses the smaller one according to this shape, from this line "b" up to the line "g".
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then scrape the skin between the two pieces, remove the fat, and apply what was said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for healing, until it is healed.
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	 If the patient is not healthy or if the incision is not fully made because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, you must fill the wound with cotton wadded in a corrosive ointment.
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 And let it heal as it consumes the remaining meat and fat, then treat it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the saddle (a type of boil)
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the saddle are types of hard scrofulas with ridges, and if they contain moisture within them.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those containing moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the whole boil which is in the abscess is emptied, place old cotton on the wound, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and apply an ointment to it until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, make incisions in it as we have said for scrofula, and if pus forms in the wound, apply fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the cutting of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	 When an artery is cut and the skin above it becomes sutured, there often occur abscesses, and the same happens with a vein that swells and forms an abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	 And if it is recognized in this way when it concerns an artery, the abscess will be long and deep.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	 And when you feel it with your hands, you should squeeze it tightly.
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	 And when it is due to the vein, it appears clearly apparent.
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 It is foolish to cover this abscess and especially when it is under the armpits and near the angles or neck and in many other places, and they are very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	 Therefore the iron cure should be removed, and the one on the head should also be removed, and in the case of an inflamed artery, make an incision above the skin with a long blade.
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	 then open the abdomen in one piece and carefully separate the artery from the ligaments, until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	 then insert an awl beneath it and make it penetrate until the other side, and tie the artery with a doubled thread in two places as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	 Then leave the joint between the two ligaments of an intromissoire until the pus within it breaks open, and the abscess should be broken.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	 then apply the treatment that causes a swelling, as long as the ligament is breaking.
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then treat this with liniment until it heals completely.
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	 and if the abscess is for the sake of opening a vein, then you must paint your hand with whatever can be obtained from the abscess all over the skin, then insert the needle under the place that you hold in your hand, and make it pierce through, and there should be double thread, so that you pull it from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	 then tie the abscess, as I have told you, or a ligament of one part to another between the two shoulders with thread.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	 And if you doubt that the thread does not go through, push another needle under the abscess at the incision of the first needle and hold the thread in four places;
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	 then press the abscess until the excess goes out, then press the pus and leave what is connected.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then put a damp cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then give it treatments of tents (bandages) and liniments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	From abscesses of the flesh
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As in arteries and veins, abscesses come to the nerves when they are struck or due to excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	 This happens more often in the shoulder and thumb and in all places where there are joints, and it is the serious abscess, and its color resembles that of the body, and it occurs in many different positions with pain.
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	 And when it is strained, the patient feels pain, and it does not go completely through the body but under the flesh.
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	 It should be completely silent from all sides and does not go forward or backward, neither underneath nor above, and the one in the joints should not be covered with iron.
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	 In case it contracts.
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And if it is on the head or forehead, scrape the skin with the spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	 If the abscess is small, take tweezers and hit it at its root.
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is large, suspend it to the incision and peel it off, then open it and stitch up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	Heavy growths hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	 Sometimes happens in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease that is called "fungus" because of its resemblance to birds, and it has subtle roots and large heads.
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	 and it has small and very large ones;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 and I saw a man who had two bellies that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a small root, and were split open, and ran moisture continuously.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	 I weighed them and found one to weigh eighteen ounces, and the other six, and the work in the incision is such that you can see if the patient is moist, and the color of the arrowhead is white and wet and has a subtle root;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 If the head of the spatula is large and the fire cautery is present with you.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	 For at the cutting often comes too great evacuations of blood, and if it escapes from you, hasten then to cauterize.
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	 and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the iron incision, take well-made thread, tie it as we have said, and leave it for two days.
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	 then you hold it tight and do not stop holding the thread of yarn until the head of the arrow feels working.
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	 and if the roots are thick, you should fear to treat it yourself by the belly, but you can cover half of it well, then cauterize it so that it does not return.
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 Then heal the wound, and ensure you do not cover the yellowish substance which is of foul smell and poor sensation with milk-like discharge.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For it is an abscess swollen, and I will come to the treatment for gonorrhea afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the boil bursts out
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	 If the boil appears due to cautery of a wound or a fissure in the belly and some of the boils are on it, as happens in other routes, or from blood that leaks from veins or arteries as mentioned before, or from wind;
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 And if it is by the fracture of the sinew and by the exit of the bowel, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and it causes little pain, and has an open wound with various outlets.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is from the intestine, then it is more diverse. When you press it with your fingers, it retracts and then comes back, and in some cases, it becomes hard, and greatly swells at the entrance of the wound, and due to much labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing, and opens well when you press it with your hand, do not constrain it.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	 And if it is due to blood, the abscess becomes large and hard, and is filled according to a certain quantity.
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to windiness, it is soft to touch, and the work is such that you look to see if its appearance is due to blood from an artery or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 It is necessary that you let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For it has doubt and fear, as I told you in the chapter of abscesses, concerning the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	 And if the appearance is due to the intestines or the belly, you should instruct the patient to lean their back, and be extended straight, then hold all around the belly.
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	 then command him to press gently between your hands, then go around the place you have signed with all the spatula, then spread half of the abscess above with a large spoon.
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	 then tie it around with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk firmly, and let the patient be in a relaxed state.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	 then open half of the extended abscess with the thread, and insert your index finger, and try to find the intestine.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	 if you find the intestine tied with the thread, untie it, and push the intestine out of the abdomen.
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	 And if you find the boil, take it to the onion, and grind off the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	 And if the artery causes you problems or the vein, go there gently, then return to your work and take two needles, insert two thin wires through them, and insert the needles around what you have made in a cross shape so that you make it pierced.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	 Then hold the abscess to three leagues above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the skin as much as possible, and separate the dead flesh from itself.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	 or you grind it when it is soft and can be pierced, then treat it as necessary, and cover the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 Draw out the blood or the moisture that you find, then treat the place as needed, and bind the place.
dou chancre	of the abscess
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	 We have described in the section the likeness of a scab, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how to remove the iron cure.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	 And let us speak about scabies in the armpit, and great caution in its treatment, and they say that when scabies is in a place where it can be shaved like a scab that is on breasts or thighs, or similar places, it should all be removed at the beginning.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	 And when it is large and old, one must not approach it, for I never knew anyone to heal it.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	 No one has ever healed (it) before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	 And the operations, when they are in place and can be removed as we have said, are that you cleanse the patient once of black bile.
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	 then make him purge if there is apparent overfilling, then set the patient in good position to perform the operation.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	 Then wash your hands and scabs or boils, and the head of everything from all sides, leaving nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 Allow the blood to flow freely, and anoint the place well with your hand or something else, and if the bleeding opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the wound is coagulated.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then, cure with another treatment until it heals (or becomes healthy).
de ydropisie	And from the dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	 We have said in the division the similarities of edema, and in what manner the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each similarity, and the treatment that is done with medicine, and the one that is cured by iron.
si est eclites soulement;	 if it is ruptured (or burst).
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	 and iron should not be touched in these two similarities:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	 that is to say, tympanites and ophisarcos, because it is a deadly thing.
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	 Therefore, when treating this similarity of edema called "ruptured," if the treatment does not help, then check whether the patient is weak or has another disease besides edema, such as distension of the stomach and similar things.
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	 Do not touch with iron, for there is doubt.
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	 If you see the patient with strong strength, and he has no other disease except scrofula only, and he is neither too young nor too old, then you should treat it thus:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 Lay the patient on his back on your hands, and the assistants press the belly leading the water to the lowest part of the bladder, then take the curved spoon according to this shape:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through in two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	 at the tip, and it should not be so deep as to reach the intestine when inserted, and it should not pierce.
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	 then look if the dropsy is herniated towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	 If you need to make an incision, you must cut below the belly button three fingers' width right under the navel.
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	 and if the dropsy is due to liver disease, your incision should be on the left side of the navel.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	 and if it is due to obstruction, it should be on the right, and the patient should not lie on the incision so that excess fluid does not run to that weak place;
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	 Then pierce the entire skin with the instrument, push it and slide your hand all along the spatula between the skin and the flesh as when peeling an apple to the thickness of a nail or thereabouts.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 Then pierce the flesh down to the water level (which is the bottom), then pull it out and insert this tool here shown with its shape:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	 And it resembles a thin silver chain, made of tin or light iron, and has a small opening at the lower part.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	 and on one side there are three openings.
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	 and one on the other side, and one on each of the opposite sides.
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 and the head is cut in a feather shape, and this is the form of the incision that scribes make when cutting a quill pen.
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	 At the top of it (the head) is the alemel, so that when the instrument comes to the water, you should now raise it on the instrument.
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	 Then empty the vessel (or the third part of it), because if you look at more than necessary in that hour, accidentally, the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he will faint, or approach death.
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	 but empty according to its strength and according to the indications of the patient's condition and pulse.
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	 then pull the instrument and hold the water, it is now held for the caution that stops the perforation which is on the cyst, as I have spoken about, you pierce in this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	 Then begin the instrument again on the other day if you see the patient suffering and draw a little amount of water.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Do it every day, but do not let it heal too much, just a little bit of water.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	 If you doubt about the patient and let too much water, then cure it with burial or hot sand, and by sweating or bathing and in the sun, and anoint it with wine.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 and heal it with drying medicines until it is healthy, and cauterize on the stomach and liver and spleen after removing water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of the stopping of the vein
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born who do not have foreskins at the penis, or the foreskin is small, or it is not in its place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 If it is necessary to pierce through all the spittle very thinly according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	 then put or pierce the small hole in the bladder and bind it for three or four days until it wants to urinate, then remove the holes, make it urinate, and then return.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 And by chance it should not [be so], because the urine that comes out does not keep it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 For the person whose ulcer is small, it is treated with a poultice of cloth, as we have said, and it will open up.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	 Those who have no opening in their place are bladdered, because none are born with the opening at the tip of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate unless they lift up their penis.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 And they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot come to the marriage bed, and it is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	 The way of the work is that the patient lies with his back on the ground, and places the head of the penis and the base in the same position as a feather's tail, so that the opening is open, as required.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And beware of the flowing out of blood that happens often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding from those who are bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the genital sores
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	 Many times, this ulcer appears on the penis, it is an appearance of ugly sores.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	 and some are malignant and some are not malignant.
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	 You should gently take them one by one with a fine linen cloth, then strike and clean them all, and put cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment on top.
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then cure it with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the ulcer is malignant, with pus-like color and swelling, then you should apply a fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	 When you have struck it, and the ulcer is in the foreskin of the penis with part inside the skin and part outside, then you should remove the ulcer that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 And when it is healed on the outside, heal the inside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	 For when you heal it together, the genitals of the penis are not guaranteed to not be pierced, and blackness and decay come into the penis and testicles.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary to burn everything that is black and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour which is made from the peel of pomeranate seeds and vine leaves, and then heal it with other remedies until it becomes healthy.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if there is discharge of blood, bring the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	 The cautery aids in these conditions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	 this means the evacuation of blood and corruption.
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	 if the head of the penis is corrupted and withdrawn, it is necessary to insert or have the patient urinate through a reed cane.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	 if the foreskin is torn on the head of the penis, which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to injury or abscess, then you must shave it with an instrument, removing the skin until the ligaments are released and the penis is delivered from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	 And if it is painful to speak of this, you must cut off a small piece from the tip of the rod and skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 Then squeeze them well together, and place a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them so that they do not stick.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	 Circumcision is not simply the removal of skin as in other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	 However, when we perform this work of our own will, and specifically for infants, it is necessary to make the best work, and the easiest one for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients would not circumcise their children, for they did not practice it in their law, and we only have what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	 For I have observed that most of the masters and surgeons who performed circumcision around that time, used force and cut off too much.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	 If the hairs are fleeing because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is struck and the other below remains.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	 Or cover it up again, and the pain is doubled, and at the amputation that is deep cutting of the member is not assured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	 And at the amputation of the nail by chance escapes the iron, and spoils the work, and many times it grows so that there is no need for amputation, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	I have found the advantage of using ligatures in amputations, because the force cuts equally well above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	 For when you hold your hand, you cut equally at all times.
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	 but that the thread be well tightened around the skin.
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 And the method of the first operation is that you make the child think, if he can understand, that you do not make him pull on the thread around the rod except just so, and then let him play in all ways as he can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	 Then make it be between your hands straight, and press the forces between your hands or under your feet so that the infants cannot see, nor any of the tools.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	 Then place your hand at the shaft and blow or spit, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is out.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	 Then clean it well of the filth that has gathered, then tie the end point with a double thread, then tie it under the buttock to another thread.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	 and hold it according to the second tie at the pocket and the index finger, and press between the two threads, then pull the buttock quickly and draw the head of the shaft.
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	 Then let the blood flow freely, for it is the medicine.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And place powder on top and on the powder apply a glue made from cooked egg white steeped in rose water, mixed with good and fresh rose oil, leave it on until the next day, and treat it with other treatments until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	 The form of forces for healing is as follows:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	 The two shoulders are tender and sharp, and they are as big as the fist equally.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	 The error of mundification is when the kidneys within are incised.
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	 Therefore, it must be spread with your nail so that the flesh becomes an abscess.
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	 And press equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, then hold it with pliers, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	 If they pass more than three days, and what is below the waist is swollen, then leave it until the abscess subsides, and gently scrape it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	 Press as much as you can move, and keep away from the part of the waist, it will not harm him.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	 Therefore, treat the joint of things solidly closed wounds with powder, as we have said or treated powders, and if you apply too much heat, it will not help;
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 therefore, heal it, as we have said, when it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	The retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	 The retention of urine is by obstruction of stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or snow, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	 and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder or neck of the bladder, then it is necessary that the patient be bent over his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	 and let him place his feet on the back, extend his abdomen from above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as he can.
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	 And then, the flanks of the bladder are compressed towards the piercing of the stone above, so that the urine is expelled.
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	 If it does not come as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must provide extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is its shape:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And it should be of fine silver, thin and light as a bird's feather;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 And the cane should be one and a half palms long and fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	 And the manner of urine expulsion is to take a double thread, tie one end of it to a piece of wool or cotton, and insert the other end into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	 and remove the surplus of the thread and insert it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and rub the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and cold water;
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	 Then gently insert the syringe into the rod, until it reaches the root of the rod, then double the rod upward towards the buttock.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	 Then insert the syringe up to the bladder and make the patient feel it reach the empty place. This is not done according to this order, unless the person guiding where it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	 Then thread the string through the wool strands one by one, and let the patient urinate while doing so, then pull out the string and straighten the urine.
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorchures or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medicines, do everything with the instrument called "clepsydre," and its form is:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	 It is closed (or blocked), and if it has been pierced three times:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	 It from one side, and it from the other, as you see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	 and the joints closed by this way so that the medicine rod can stop the worm well without addition, if it can draw out the moisture, and push when necessary;
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	 and when you see to throw your medicine into the bladder, place the head of the cuestor in the moisture, and draw out the one that is there;
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	 if you draw out the moisture with the cuestor, and then press forcefully on the wound;
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	 if the worms enter into it (the cuestor), they will go to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	 and this is the form of the subtle suppository with which one treats the bladder:
si est ci:	 If it is here: [No direct translation as 'si est ci' is a conjunction meaning 'if it is here', not a sentence itself]
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	 And it is of silver or lead, and the head is higher.
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	 and beneath to the breast or the ligament falls down.
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	 Then take a sheep's bladder and fill it with the moisture you use to treat the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts with a good thread double, and heat the bladder full of that moisture over the fire.
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	 Then push the head of the bladder into the penis, then hold your hand on the bladder full of that moisture, until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	 and if you do not have the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle, pierce it roundly.
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	 Then insert the strong thread into these wounds, then form a circle like one forms a needle, and put inside it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and bind it in the instrument.
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 and do as you have done with the bladder, press it with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	from cutting into stones
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	 We have said in the division of stones, and their extraction together with medicines.
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	 and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in meat and all the signs, and in which stone one should work by cutting.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	 and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	 I will tell you openly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	 I say that the stone embedded in the bladder happens more often with children, and this is a sign that the water jumps from the bladder like water in its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	 And he opens the hernia, greatly irritates the patient's penis, and pierces it multiple times before bandaging.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	 And from such foundations, the treatment arises.
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	 And children's healing is light until they are four years old, and it is very serious in the elderly, and moderate in those who are between youth and old age.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	 And the healing of those with large stones is lighter than that of those with small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is necessary first to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes blocks the stone (arrow or bullet).
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	 Then take the patient by the feet, turn him upside down, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder, and shake it one or two times upward.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	 Then make him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands should be beneath his thighs, so that the bladder is entirely descending downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	 Then press and touch inside [the dislocated joint].
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 If you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to cut above the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	 And if it does not fall with the touch, wet your left thumb with oil, if the patient is an infant, or moist your finger, if the patient is a young man [or adult].
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	 And push it into its foundation, press the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pull it out of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 Then press upwards with your finger, and push it to the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	 Instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and instruct him to stretch out his right hand towards the opening of the incision, and with his left hand remove the skin that is beneath the openings in the place where the cutting will be done.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	 Then insert the large spatula of this shape:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	 And place it between what is between the cheeks (of the buttocks) and the base, not in the middle but along the left side of the naval.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	 And it should be straight above the stone (pierced by the arrow), and your hands should be at the base or the ground, and the end of the spatula along the width of the wound so that it is wide outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large.
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	 By chance the pressure of your hands that are at the base may cause it to leap due to effort.
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	 And know that there is this stone or one with edges and margins:
si est griés a issir;	 It is tightly closed.
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And if it has this shape, round like a plum and hollow, with the exit being light (or easy).
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	 For him then where there are angles and edges, make the cut larger.
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	 and if it does not jump out, then you must use pliers similar to a chisel at the top, in order to press down on the stone so that it does not slip.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	 or you push underneath the instrument curved slightly towards the top.
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	 and if you cannot manipulate it in this way, then enlarge the hole slightly with a drill bit, and if it does not break open, stretch it with glass.
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 and if there are more than one stone, push the largest towards the bladder neck first, then strike it, pull it out, and pull out the smaller ones afterwards if there are more of them.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, it must be made larger by making a bigger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	 For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	 either he dies, or urine comes immediately through where the loins cannot be joined.
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	 but nevertheless make an effort to drain it, or break it with pliers, until you draw it out in pieces;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	 and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense, aloe, and dragon's blood, and bandage it, then lay on top a damp cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in olive oil and cold water or rosewater, to cool the inflamed abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 then lay the patient on his neck, and do not unbind the ligature until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen [the bandage], moisten the wound well with oil and water, then apply the ointment defyndicon and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	 If an abscess or corruption comes in the wound and freezing of blood in the bladder occurs, causing urine to be retained, which is known in this way without jump with urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	 Therefore, push your finger into the wound and draw out the blood, for if it remains there, it will cause the bladder to swell and burst.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then clean the wound of pus, dirt, and linen, and aid it in all ways that you know, until it is healed.
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 And it is necessary to tie both thighs when you treat him, and apply the remedies on the appropriate place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	 If the stone is small, it should be guided by the sperm and inserted with a probe, and if the urine cannot exit.
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If you treat as I have said, cut it many times; he will be excused from the punishment due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already proven this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron fork according to this shape and sharpened at four angles on one thong:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	 Then take the thread and tie it around the shaft of the arrow under the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder;
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	 Then gently push the awl into the shaft, until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	 and turn the awl in the stone slowly, bit by bit, until you can pierce the other side of the stone;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains inside the shaft that is within the stone;
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	 It will soon break and jump out with the urine, and the patient will be cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	 If you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, then tie the thread under the stone and the other above, then insert the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal it until it is sound.
de la piere des femmes	of the woman's stone (meaning: uterine stones or ovarian cysts)
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	 If a stone should be introduced into a woman, and if such a thing happens once, it is a grave harm, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	 the first reason is that perhaps the woman is a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	 And the second is that it cannot be found a woman who knows well how to uncover herself in front of mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	 And the third manner is that unfortunately one cannot find a woman who knows well in this art of hands.
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	 And the fourth manner is that the woman's stone (womb) is deeper than the man's, so it requires a more profound incision, causing great fear. If it is necessary to do this, you must take a skilled midwife, but if one cannot be found, even an experienced chaste maiden can be used.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	 and presents a wise bailiff in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command concerning the incision of the stone.
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	 And look very well if the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	 Then one must put his hand or foundation and feel for the stone.
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 If it is found, one should hold it under his hand and advise her to put her hand or press on the sick spot with her left hand on the bladder area.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	 If it is found, she should move it gently in and out from the bladder entrance to the root of the thigh.
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	 Then strike the stone against the root of the thigh towards the middle of the bone, where it is moved and feels the stone in that part.
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	 And don't move your hand above or below the stone, and it should be cut in the first small piece.
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	 Then push the shoulder towards the waist, if you feel the arrow is close to the wound so that the arrow can come out easily, and know that there are many types of arrows.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 This means, small and large, sharp and blunt, long and round, and those with barbs.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 Recognize the symptoms to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	 And if the arrow escapes, put broken vitriol at its place and hold it for an hour until the wound is cauterized.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	 Then return to your work until the arrow is out, and have tools that I told you for extracting the arrow in men's help for you.
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	 And if the arrow escapes and it is the artery that is cut, put powder on its place and hold it with straps and bandages, do not try again, leave the arrow and do not pull it out, otherwise the patient may die.
puis cure la plaie.	 Then heal the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood is relieved and the wounds have healed, return to your work until the stone is expelled.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	 Gravel is nothing but an accumulation of moisture or white chalk that is under the eyelid, which contains the egg.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	 and is called "white chalk", and sometimes it is properly within the egg's membrane, if one believes it to be another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	 and it is the eyelid's skin between the white chalk that we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	 and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this aquose is due to weakness that comes from the kidneys, and this matter is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	 And sometimes it comes from a blow on the eyelids, and this moisture can have many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	 or it is yellowish discoloration, or without redness, or black, or white watery, and this happens more often.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And these are the signs to recognize this assembly; for if it is as white as we have said, then it is an abscess, long like the shape of an egg, and does not open its eyes, because it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	 And if there is moisture in the very cloth, then it is an abscess like part of an egg, and for this reason one thinks it is another egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	 And if the moisture is between the skin of the eyes and the white as described, then it can be easily felt.
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 Therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, prove it with all the intrusive pressure, so that its form is as described before.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to this which follows the intrusion, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	 And when we cure it with iron, the patient should be purified to the extent of our power and the fullness of his body.
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	 Then place it on its back, on a small raised object, and put many cloths under it.
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	 Then lay it on its left side, and instruct the attendant to sit on its right, and extend the rod along one of the two ribs of the neck.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	 Then take the spatula of lard, and cut the hide of the neck along its length until you reach the base, making your incision straight through the skin up to whitish fat, and peel it off gently according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	 Then make a large hole in the whitish fat with water, drain all the liquid, and then put your fingers in, and lift the whitish fat.
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	 And do not touch the heart of the kidneys, but only the bladder.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	 Cut or in pieces delicately the ribs of it, because if you do not cut it skillfully, the water will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	 And if the egg jumps in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work with the bladder.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then assemble the two kidneys at one stitch, then heal it as with other wounds, until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	 And if you find the egg corrupt from another disease, it is necessary that you tie the vessels that are suspended, suspecting the discharge of blood.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	 Then cut the kidney with all the suspension, and draw out the egg, and heal it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	 And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that these are two branches.
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	 If the other part is joined as you have done with the first, equally, then suck out the blood, and put in the wound moistened linen in rose oil.
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 and place another moistened linen in wine and oil on the two openings, and put over them coverings, and tie it above all the thread that is according to this shape:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	 Then take two coverings, use them of woven linen according to this appearance and assemble them by sewing in the girdle of the braies, and one of the heads take up on the foundation until the back, and the other at the part of the handle.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	 And the other bone of the two upper chiefs, and all is gathered together in the loop of the collarbone;
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	 Sometimes this remedy of fire cautery is in place for an iron-sized wound, and it is that you take the subtle cautery scalpel and press on the skin, and let it be heated as we have said, so that the white pus containing water becomes exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 if you take the cautery in this form, and pierce that pus-filled cyst with it, and scrape it off with this heated scalpel.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	 And press in all ways as you can, until it is thoroughly burnt.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	 and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	 And know that this work is more healing;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	 And move cautiously to avoid bleeding, and moisten the surgical procedures.
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And if anything prevents you or an abscess swells or bleeding or anything else occurs, treat what is preventing you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	 And if the patient is afraid and does not wish to endure this procedure due to its terrible nature, perform perforation as I have told you, and it is that when you are completely certain through the signs we have mentioned that the anus is the place, place the patient on a raised seat.
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 Then pierce the abscess in the part below with a spatula wide enough, and make the perforation along the length of the body.
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	 And let the wounds be wide, so that all the sharp corruption may flow out.
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	 Then place cotton on the wound, tie it and let the rest of the corruption flow out, then heal it until the wound is healed.
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	 And if the white cloth does not allow the corruption to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a feather or the instrument used to treat the corruption of dropsy (as described before).
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 Widen the wound and check that the corruption returns, and collect it for six months or thereabouts, and when it is collected as described before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the knees
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	 Check that in the section of this remedy there are many variations in its preparation, which makes it seem that it is more effective to leave it as it is.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 And I will tell you the work and the similarities of an abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	 Many abscesses come in the body, and particularly in the bones;
et c’est par mout de cas.	 And it happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	 It is due to excessive sour and acute fluid spreading in the joints or from impact.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	 The color of the abscess follows the color of the body.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	 There is no pain, but it is a serious abscess.
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 And sometimes an abscess becomes hard and stony, of such color, and once in a while comes from the artery or swelling of the vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	 When it is due to an artery, it is known by the hot composition of abscess when you press with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 And you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	 An abscess caused by swelling of the vein is known by its composition upon touching with fingers, and can be safely cut into on this appearance, and on other similar cases.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 And it is that you squeeze the core of the neck, then raise the egg above, and pull out the yolk through the white part, and release the suspending ligament from all parts of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	 If the egg is already softened with these new characters, then you must therefore draw out the egg and crush it.
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 And if it is outside the white part or in the vessels within, you must release all that softness and crush it thoroughly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	If the birth of the placenta is on the back side, then you must crush the whole thing and draw out the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is done, apply the wound with dampened wool soaked in rose oil and wine, then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	Of the abscesses of the knees
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	 This is an abscess wrapped in an envelope resembling a boil, with the softening of the necks, and the patient becomes very quiet when he goes.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 And the cure for this disease is as precarious and dangerous as previously mentioned, and yet we will tell you its work, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	 You must make the patient sit on an elevated seat, then push the suspension of the balls (testicles) downwards towards your hands, to all the surrounding parts near the penis, and mark them with the master's hand, and stretch them out fully.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	 Then, using a sharp spatula, cut deeply across the testicles towards each other until they are exposed, and then flay from both sides as we have said in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	 then insert a needle with doubled thread, and tie it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it directly to the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	 then cut them in half straightway, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupt humors.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	 Then treat the wound as one does with other wounds where the flesh is not eaten by one of the eyes (maggot);
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	 because in this way there is no harm, and if all the maggots come to life, it is necessary to draw out the maggots from all of them;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of maggots, and dries up and cannot help itself.
de la routure dou syfac	From the cutting of the siphac
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	 The outcome of this incision is by the opening where pus comes out, or the extension on the belly in the area of the inguinal region, because the intestines descend through that incision to one of the eyes (opening);
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	 and this opening is either the pus-producing area, or the extension of it, and these two ways of death come from multiple causes:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	 or of percussion, or of a jump, or of a fall, or of lifting heavy weight, and similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	 and the signs when it is of dislocation of the spinal column, are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not happen suddenly.
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 and the abscesses are equal up to the fullness, because the spinal column is following the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the symptoms are when it is of the section where the intestines are cut open, which brings on sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously beneath the skin near, and this is due to the exit of the intestines and the body expelling them through the opening of the incision.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines burst out from the anus and are retained within, causing great pain to suffer for the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, for which it is necessary to escape.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	 And the method of the work is that you instruct the patient to massage the intestines inside with their hand in the wound, if they can reach it.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	 then press on his neck between your hands, and raise the thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	 then stretch out the abdomen above, and beat all the hide of the swellings with a long stick.
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	 Then insert a thin reed into the groin area according to what is necessary for opening the wound, and let it be such that the testicles can come out.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	 Then scrape the scrotum that is underneath the skin of the scrotum, until the white scrotum becomes exposed all around.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	 Then insert your index finger into the scrotum, where the scrotum is between the white scrotum that is underneath the skin of the scrotum and the second scrotum, and separate it from what is behind the egg (testicle) and the second scrotum.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	 And move the hand to the scrotum with the white scrotum raised up towards your left hand, and lift the testicle away from the entire scrotum towards the groin.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	 Command the minister to stretch out the neck upward, and release what is behind the ligament.
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	 If your fingers feel intestines entwined or hard lumps, and if you find anything, push it into the belly.
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	 Then take a needle with a thick thread made of 10 strands and push it into the back part of the lump which is behind the skin.
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	 After the neck, catch the tendons that appear to have four threads.
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	 Then assemble them one on top of the other in a cross shape, and tie the lump that we mentioned was behind the skin of the joints with a strong knot of two parts.
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	 Then wrap the heads of the children, and tie them with two strips, so that no vassals who nurse them can enter into it, except an abscess cloth comes.
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	 and put the linen directly over the first one in the same direction, for two strips of that length, then leave a gap of about an inch at the end where the kidneys are.
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	 and after all the other one according to the roundness that the egg carries;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	 then sew in the part that is under the skin of the kidneys, so much as there is without correction and curvature, as we have said before.
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 Then bring wet linen in oil and apply it to wounds, and there bring the linen that we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the white ones are cauterized as we have said, after incision, due to fear of bleeding out.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	 For this often happens, and leave the ligament until it chooses to move itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	 And if it delays in falling off, then immerse it in hot water and put on what has been said until it chooses to move itself;
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 Then heal the wound with another treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	Of a fleshy hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone who dares to heal by iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	 And the ancients said that it is made like a splint joined to the bone, in such a way that you tie the splint, after cutting it slightly below.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	 Then fill it with something, and treat the abscess from what opens up, until the splint moves.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	 At times, rot comes in worms, as we have said, and opens the limbs.
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	 And it does not open any of the intestines like worms, and if it opens, it is little, and repairs itself every hour.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	 Moreover, if it remains too long at that place, the wound or abscess grows, as long as the intestines continue to open.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	 This occurs due to the extension of the abscess that is in worms, as we have said, because it spreads and softens the limbs and opens them.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	 And the treatment is by cautery, as we have previously said.
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	 And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	 And it is that the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then press the affected side swollen with a large space according to the size of three fingers;
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	 Then extract the sinus that is underneath the skin where the abscess is, then take the rod and place it on the visible side of the sinus;
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	 and press firmly on the abdomen, then cut the two sides visible in the sinus along the rod towards the head;
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	 then remove the rod and do not cover or extend the sinus or anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of intestinal worms;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 then heal it by the treatment of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads (of a wound), if they burn and heal the wound, let it remain open until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The blister is constricted, and has no appearance in the rupture, and the cautery is moved to this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the knees
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	 Often the scrotums of some men are softened due to charms that are inside them and it is visible as pus.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	 And it is necessary, when treating him, to make the patient lie down on his back, and strike the softened skin over the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	 Then bring the two lips together to one stitch, and if you see, cut the excess skin softened by the moisture at three or four stitches firmly.
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	 Then strike between the stitches, and the wound is treated like other wounds until it heals, and the thread is sewn.
dou chastrement	The correction or punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	 Know that amputations are condemned in our law, and for this reason I do not wish to speak of them in this book.
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	 And it is necessary only for two reasons:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	 One reason is that the surgeon should know how to answer if asked about an amputation and its treatment.
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 And the other, because we often have need of corseting some beasts to help us, such as goats and sheep and cats and others.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	 Therefore, corsetings are made in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 or by attraction, or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	 In the one that we make by attraction, we seat the beast in hot water until its privy parts are softened and relaxed.
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 Then hold them with your hand until they are set and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	 For the branding, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, keep the eyes fixed so they do not move until they heal.
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	 It is necessary that you mark the animal, and press the hide of its hump with your left hand, then tie the noose, and strike each eye with the iron spike when you have skinned them well.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	 and leave any small piece of fat and the fine fat that is on the vessels;
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	 and this method of castration is different from the one made by attraction, because at attraction there remains possibly something from the testicles, causing the animal to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 then heal the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	 Hermaphroditus follows these two ways among humans:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 one way is when the two testicles are open as in the figure of woman's nature, where there is hair and sometimes in court he urinates.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And another way it is with women, and it has above the penis like a rod and they copulate.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	 And the healing of man and woman is such that you bandage all the adjacent sores, and heal them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 In the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the scrotum skin, has no cure.
de la tentigene	of the tension
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	 An ulcer is an adjacent sore on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 and some women have it as large as a hand, and that is the healing.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	 It is necessary that you dye the excess of the ulcer in your hand or with onions and cover it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do not go too deeply, that bleeding does not come forth, then heal it with another healing until it heals.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 And to another sore that arises at the mouth of the wife, and it swells, and by chance jumps forth, and is similar to a cowpox, and for this reason they called it in ancient times "cow disease".
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 It is necessary that you cut it, as we have said in the prescription, and cure it until it heals.
de erratique	Of the dislocated joints
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	 And errhine is when the nature of the woman is not perceived or the wound is small.
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	 It is natural by birth, or accidental due to disease that comes upon it.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	 Or it is a sore attached or shallow or deep, and is caused by fullness in the wife, or in the sides, or under, wherever it may be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	 They avoid conception, childbirth, and by chance flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 And the knowledge of these things is through the observation of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the obstruction is close to appearing, either at your hand or at your side.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	 If it is a small ulcerous sore and it is near the livestock, hurry and treat it thus:
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	 Put your two index fingers together and have her lie on her back, with legs spread.
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	 then form the two livestock so that the ulcerous sore becomes round and is covered by the lips.
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 then take wool, wet it in oil, and put it on the sore, and make her lie down each day so that it does not heal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 If it is hard and thick, you must cut it with a spatula resembling the leaf of myrtle.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	 If the covering is new flesh, press it at the onion and pound it.
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	 and prepare the remedies to stop bleeding, such as cucumber juice, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with many eggs.
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	 Then bring a broad strip of linen, so that the wound does not close.
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	 and make it long, and bring a dry tent of linen.
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal with other remedies until he is healthy.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when in marriage snow comes, it should be covered in this manner, unless abscesses are aggravated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For to the aggravated abscess in marriage, one should not touch to do it.
des emorroides	Of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins, which without cord usually do not close, and when hemorrhoids become old they swell.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 And we have said in the division the similarities of them, and the signs, and I will tell here those which receive healing.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and throbs, when they are full in marriage, and do not appear to touch, should not be cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those who are at the mouth of the vagina, they can be felt, are those which one can cure.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	 Therefore, you must put the woman in a cold house, then pull out the swelling with tweezers at its roots, then sprinkle powdered medicine that stops blood, such as cinnamon and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	 Then press his feet against the surface for an hour, then immerse them in cold water.
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 And if there is bleeding, make him sit in a decoction of sumac bark, pomegranate rind, ivy and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and oil, and apply it as a poultice on his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if bleeding stops, that's good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	 If that doesn't help, make him wear cupping glasses on the back and around the breasts without cutting.
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 Then take linen cloth, wet it at the bottom with plantain or marshmallow juice with old wine, and apply it to the affected area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when the abscess has healed, treat the area with ointment until it is clean.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	 And that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, if it needs to be covered as I said, cover it with lard.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then treat it until it heals.
des apostemes de la marris	the abscesses of the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come in marriage (a metaphor for the body), such as carbuncles, painful abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	 Therefore, in this treatment, I will explain the hot abscess that comes in the marriage which is not the kind of abscess that wraps around.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 And if you wish to know the work of iron, look whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	 Then do not hurry to pierce it, but let it die until the pain is alleviated;
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	 Then make the patient sit on a chair, or two chairs where he can lean, and support his back and place his feet at the sides away from the leg.
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	 Spread out his thighs, put his arms under his knees, and tie them well with a strong rope.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	 Then apply the bellows towards the right side, and bring the instrument used to open the bladder, from which follows the form.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	 It is necessary that when you bring this instrument, you first pierce the right side to know the depth of the bladder, so that what enters inside from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	 And if the wound is deeper, it should be covered with linen cloth to prevent pain.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 And you should insert a cotton swab into it and stain the wound.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	 When an abscess opens and it is soft to the touch, it should be covered with linen cloth and treated with sputum.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	 And when the bladder is emptied, you should place soaked and oiled linen bandages or dried green oil-soaked linen in the wound.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	 Place the linen fabric deep into the wound, place it outside the wound and above the wound a clean linen bandage moistened with vinegar or honey.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then treat it after two days of ointment application, when it is healthy.
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	 And sometimes lift the wound and the limb with cleansing of water and honey, then with water or licorice roots and long arum roots are boiled.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 Then return to ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed in a marriage (scar tissue), you must be careful not to burn it with iron, but rather treat it as we have said in the previous section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	 Firstly, in delivery, it is necessary to recognize the signs of natural childbirth, and when you see the woman dilate down below, and desire to smell the area.
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	 Then the child hastens to be born.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	 Then you recognize that the delivery is natural according to its form, and the infant comes out with its head, and the afterbirth follows.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	 And when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press on his stomach so that he urinates quickly.
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	 for if he is vomiting on his head, then the child is born with him, and the husband cleanses himself of his superfluidities through good cleansing.
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 and this that comes in another way does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	 For sometimes it comes on his feet, and the intestines or shoulder, or hands, or on his belly, or backside, and is turned by accident on his neck, and in other bad forms.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 it is necessary to consult with someone wise and skillful in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the forms of how to help them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	 If the child comes out naturally on the head, and the woman gives birth with difficulty, and the strength of the child is weak, make her sit on a saddle, or let the women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	 and mix its oil or fenugreek with boiled water, and then insert the little spatula-shaped plaster into the mixture:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	 and cut the second skin, and scrape it with your nail as far as the moisture that is inside escapes;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	 and bind the woman's belly until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cleanse the woman with muslin of fenugreek and oil of mummy:
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	 then make her bind herself and fast for forty days, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour:
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 Instructions for the thigh.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	 If the hands come out (of the joint), you must gently pull them back a little at a time.
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	 and if they cannot go in, place the woman on the bed, and lift her legs upwards.
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	 then tilt the bed onto the ground, and bind the woman so she does not slide when tilting it downwards.
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 and if the hands cannot go in and the thigh is dead, cut the hands with the knife placed before you, extract the child, and reset the dislocation evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the birth of the child upon its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	 When the thigh comes upwards on its legs, push it upwards.
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	 and then turn it a little at a time until it is level.
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 Then take the piece [of bone] and extend it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	 If it can jump up as high as the hips, command him to take hold of it, and make it vomit out with force.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 if it jumps forward, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit until it is according to the natural shape.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	 And if it does not jump forward as we have experienced, say take mustard of great height, oil of cumin, and melted resin, and grind them all in the mortar.
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	 and place the nature of woman inside it [the mixture] and spread this ointment outside, then make her sit in a cold bath until below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	 and when she has been softened [by the bath], apply the collar of myrrh to her, put it on, and leave it for an hour.
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 Then make him sit on the chair, then make him cough and hold his mouth and nose, and he shall gently press his stomach, for the child is about to be born now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the child's excrement over its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	 When the baby comes in this way, place the midwife's hands here and there.
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	 Then support his neck and hang his feet below, and he lies on the bed.
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	 Fold her hands here and there, then hold her hands above on the stomach, and push the cushions aside until she is prepared below.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	 If the child does not come out, take its feet and pull it gently, then push the stomach upward, then put your hands there.
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	 Pull the baby little by little.
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 Command the woman to take herself when the child is issued.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	From the delivery of the child that comes forth with one hand wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	 It is necessary to skillfully reattach the hand.
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	 If you cannot reattach it, make her stand up and go.
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	 If it cannot walk, place it on a bed, and bend its legs.
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	 then administer the mustard plaster as mentioned before;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	 and if it does not give birth, make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand.
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 and deliver the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and tell her to hold it until it becomes firm.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Of the birth of the child on its neck, and if it has spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	 You must press its hand, then turn it little by little, and extract it gently.
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	 and when it is equal, place the natural mustard plaster of high altitude and oil on it, as we have said, then tell her to move little by little.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	 And when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to take hold of herself.
et la fai esternuer.	 Make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in the same way, support her all the second time.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	 When the feces come out in this manner for all the digestion, take the feces with your nail until the moisture is voided.
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	 And if the infant presses against its face and neck, take it by the buttock so that it is not retained, and let the infant die.
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	 Then push the child back in, as much as you have placed it, and command the woman to take hold of herself once.
adonques si istra legierement.	 After that, pull it gently.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	 Know that twins are born often, and sometimes four or five are born at once.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	 And this is not a strange thing, happening often.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	 Dislocation is an issue arising from any disjointment of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury. The head of the shoulder dislocates due to moisture, and when it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation. In the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, many die. For in the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow. And this is not a strange thing, often happening.
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	 I know that they multiply and are driven away by the leech who discovers them, which is tied to the bowl.
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 And sometimes they emerge naturally like teeth under the skin, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	 And if it [the dislocation] protrudes forcefully, treat it as we have said, and let the balm be subtle, and do quickly and gently whatever it does.
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 and perform such actions that bring salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children.
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	 Sometimes they [dislocations] are formed in the hand or in the foot or in the arm or in the thigh or in the back or in the chest or in the neck, or more often up to the fifteenth, and they are all formed like a child by the measurement of the sage man, and it is necessary that the balm knows all this, for sometimes similar things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 do as it requires.
de l’enfant mort	of a dead child.
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	 When curing the woman of a dead child or an empty womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come out naturally, and you are forced to work with your hands.
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	 It is necessary that you know if the woman is of good health, and has no illness or fear of death.
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	 The woman must lie on her back, with her head inclined downwards and legs raised.
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	 The minister should hold her by both arms, or tie her to the bed so that she is not treated in the delivery of the child.
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	 Then anoint the mouth of the woman with moist oil mixed with myrrh and cumin, and then anoint the midwife's hands with those oils and musks.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	 Then push gently into the woman, seeking the place where she pushes out the afterbirth that is suitable for this purpose, and be careful that the infant is prepared to be delivered on top of its head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	 If the onions are inserted into his eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the armpit or near the sides, and if the insertion is below the nipples, it is pierced or pricked and the sides are injured.
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	 And it is necessary that you squeeze the onion with your right hand and place the shell between your left hand fingers, and push it gently to the full extent of your hand, and pierce the onion in any of the places mentioned above until it reaches an empty state.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 and this is the form of the onion:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	 then pierce it opposite the other onion, or the third if needed, so that the extraction is equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 And then equal it by moving from one side to the other, so that it moves out, and hold the humerus (upper arm bone) in place with teeth, as shown in this figure:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	 And if there remains a part of it, the healer should press some oil from his fingers and push that part into it, and pull the other part.
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 And if there remains no part, place this splint or higher up, and continue until it completely comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	 And if one hand comes in front of the other and cannot be returned by squeezing, then you must wrap around it with cloth until it comes out completely.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 Then put the thumb in the joint of the flat part or at the side, and you should do the same with the other hand to both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	 And if the child's head is large and it is narrow at the birth canal, or if there is a sharp assembly of the head, then you must thrust the pointed spatula between your fingers, and push and draw out the head;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	 or you grind it with the instrument called "almidach," from which the form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this one;
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	 and in the same way do so if the infant has a large head naturally;
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	 then pull out the bones with the pliers, and if the head pops out and it is held by force, it should be cut until the moisture that is in or near the birth canal is removed;
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	 and if it cannot come out, you crush it into pieces where you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 If [the patient] is swollen in the belly or beneath the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture subsides.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is on its feet, it is a light attraction, and the direction towards the mouth of the womb is gentle.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	 If [the swelling] is hard to the touch or over the ribs, you must probe it with your hand.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	 And they make the abdomen or the anus, as long as the moisture inside it is corrected;
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	 And if another member has been broken and the joint remains, then push the bale's hand fully into the incision of the hernia, and pull it out until it reaches the mouth of the hernia;
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	 then insert one finger or two, and pull forcefully;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	 and if the mouth of the hernia is narrowed due to hot abscess that has come there, then it is not necessary to work on it, instead, you should provide moist and fatty substances;
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 and apply plasters, and soak in warm, softening, and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	 And if the intestines are on the side, and you can place it evenly, then apply what we have said in the live child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if they do not have power over it, pull it apart into pieces, and leave nothing of the remaining part.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	 And when you have done this, apply as we have said in abscess poultices that come during marriage.
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And if bleeding occurs, bind it tightly and apply other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose womb had been dead due to an infant being born, then another one was placed on top of it, and the death of the other was prevented.  (This line is referring to the survival of a second fetus after the first fetus died in the womb)
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came into the armpit, and swelled until it opened, and began to suppurate greatly.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was summoned for treatment, and for a long time, I could not heal the wound.   (Literal translation)
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong adhesive plaster, and an bone came out, and after some days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled greatly because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	If I think it is the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	 I wish to treat the wound, and remove the bone as much as the woman is in a better condition.
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	 And if the woman recovers for a long time, then a small amount of vinegar on the wound can be applied.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 And I have never heard this chapter to be for any other reason than when the master finds something strange that he knows how to treat.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	To bring the dislocated joint back to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	 Here comes the form of the pressor, which is used in books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	 and turning the heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	 However, the horns should be more subtle than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	 and the mouth of the rod should be wide, and the sides of the trees should be, and long one and a half palm;
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	 and between the two ligaments there should be two joints of this same rod, which are fastened on both sides, half a palm or a little more in length;
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 and these two joints are pushed into the mouth of the mallet to open when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	 Another form, resembling more subtle and lighter, should be made of rod of ebony or boxwood, as the resemblance of pliers;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	 and tell the patient to make two shoulder rests, as you see, of one palm length, and two fingers width.
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	 and when you are about to open the woman's privates with all the instruments, make her sit on the bed, legs hanging down and knees apart, then place the two shoulder rests beside her in the opening, and hold the head of the instrument under her thighs.
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 then take your hand with the instrument and make equal incisions, according to the amount that you see the opening of the woman's privates requires, until the man does what she wishes.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	 This instrument is covered entirely and has multiple similar forms.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	 And when the mirrors have been prepared, the work becomes more urgent, and higher for humans because of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disperse the instrument unless you have arranged it, for its necessity cannot be excused.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	 When the afterbirth is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold back her breath and then make her vomit bile, and then hold her hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 If she jumps due to this, it's good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	 If this doesn't happen, take the pot, and make it perforated or covered, and put therebs that can open the mouth of the mother, such as rue, anise, chamomile, wormwood, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	 All these herbs or some of them should be boiled in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	 Then put a chain or pipe through the hole (pot), and hold the other end in the wife's mouth, and heat it until the vapors enter the wife.
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 Then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	Then immediately apply the second one.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	 And if she remains after this cure and does not defecate, as commanded by the lady, tell her to moisten her left hand in oil of sesame or musk-scented water, and then apply it to nature (anus) and encourage her to defecate again.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	 And when she has found it, take it (feces) and stretch it out little by little, so that the wife does not object to extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	 But you must move it gently from right to left, and then pull it.
si venra et se desaerdra.	 If it comes out (of place) and dislocates.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	 And if the mouth of the womb is stretched out (dilated), we have said the treatment for expulsion (miscarriage), and the fumigation of herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	 And if it is not all as we have said, make sure you do not pull (on the fetus).
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	 But it is necessary that he who is at the mouth of the womb, you tie him to the woman's thigh, then cleanse (the area) with a pessary ointment.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	 If it gives birth and comes forth (the baby).
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 However, if she gives birth but a bad smell comes from the stomach and head, burn the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	 Therefore, it is necessary to use appropriate fumigations for this:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	 any of the ancients have tried the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman to retain the flowers and the afterbirth is as follows:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	 And it appears like glass, and put the thin head in the nature [i.e., the fire], and the broad parts above the fire.
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 and let the fumigation be over the coals, and let the tar be burned until it is spoiled, and start another one.
de percier lou fondement	To pierce the foundation.
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	 Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but rather closed with some subtle stopper.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	 therefore, at the birth it is necessary to pierce the stopper with a suitable tool, and not with a sharp stylus, and make sure that the afterbirth does not touch it.
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then put a soft linen cloth soaked in wine and oil on it, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	If you doubt that it will not reform, then put or pierce a plaster of lead, and let it remain for many hours, and remove it when the wound appears to heal in rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	 And sometimes this stoppage of a sudden wound or abscess comes...
si covient coper celui soudement:	 you must cover the sudden wound:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	 if it is treated, as we have said of the willow bark poultice.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the foundation
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	 Fistulas that come under the foundation are nodes, and those that come out from under the foundation and go in the space between two parts, or more than one fistula;
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	 and when that node is old, it works, and also moisture awakens swelling or subtle boils, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent;
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 And are recognized by those who are aware of either evacuation or windiness in the patient when he makes an evacuation, and possibly jumping a step.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	 And if the fistulas that perforate reach up to the bladder, and up to half of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	 and reach up to the knee joint, and up to the ankle of the leg.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	 And thus, one recognizes a fistula persisting at the base, but not persisting:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 and it is that you insert your index finger or base into the fistula, and insert a fine needle of ivory or iron into the fistula where there is no twisting.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	 If it has twisting, then you insert a tent of fine fabric, or horsehair, as far as you feel the tent or hair on your finger.
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	 And if you do not understand it, there will be no purulent discharge, no windiness or worms, as we have said.
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	 know that it does not pierce at all;
si te haste dou curer.	 hurry in the treatment.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is open up to the bladder or up to the channel of urine, if it gushes out urine and cannot be sealed with medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	 If it is pierced up to the knee joint, it is coming out at the level.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	 if there is no curvature and the pain disappears around it, then it is already bowed, and neither medicine nor salve will help.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 And in these Persian fistulas, there is no remedy except hard work and the folly of those who meddle with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	 In those that are not Persian and are not old, in the hope of health through fire, as I have experienced, the patient lies on his back before you.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	 And raise the legs up to the thighs, and have the thighs inclined towards the stomach.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 Then push a tent of pitch or wood, if there is curvature, as far as you know where the dislocation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	 If the patient feels it around the base, then you must push your index finger in, then if it feels as though the dislocation has passed.
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	 and be discovered or feel through your finger the socket or the bone, then know that it is passed.
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 if one does not work it no can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	 It is said that one can heal some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	 And help that one does, if it is heating the cautery thinly according to the width of the fistula, as it was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	 And push everything hot into the fistula, until it comes out from the bottom.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	 And do this two or three times, as long as you know that these charred objects resembling a bird's feather should be burnt.
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 And then heal it with moistened tents in butter, until the charred object is gone; then heal it with ointment made of burning char and resin.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	 If this cannot be healed otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	 and if the tent penetrates but does not reach the bottom where the fistula is located, place a thick covering of charcoal or soap between your finger and the tent, so that you see the fistula through the cover made from charcoal.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	 If the head of the fistula at its beginning, advances towards the tent and then applies the cautery afterwards, until it reaches the tip of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	 The tent will be released, and pulled out.
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 Then cut away those hardened charred areas that resemble a bird's feather, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the limb goes away by itself, and breaks through [the skin], you shall cauterize it with fire or medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	 For the fire cautery brings about two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	 which is to say, the burning away of these hardened areas that are joined together, and the stopping of blood and the drying out of moisture.
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	 Then treat moist tents with butter or coarse oatmeal until the limbs swell, and the charred areas burn in the butter or oatmeal.
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 Then treat the wound with ointments made of hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	And when it is restored, it heals and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	If a fistula comes up to the full depth of the foundation and is removed from the body, push your finger or foundation into it, and examine it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	 If you feel tempted, and between them is the cloth or linen or charcoal, which is almost to be pierced, there should not be outside it any means of deceit and false hope, by the administration of one of the three ways:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	 or you cauterize it as we have said, or you strike it to the bottom, or if you can boil it and treat it as first recommended.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	 and do not go too deep, so that you cover the foundation holding structure, and let the exudations come out through the will of the wound.
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	 then treat it as we have said.
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	 By chance, if it is healthy, remove that covering and clean it when it is cut away from the foundation, either by force or by some other instrument pointed.
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	 then disinfect the infected flesh in the wound as much as possible;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	 then study to restore the wound, and keep the fistula in the part farther from the foundation.
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 if it is easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	 And sometimes fistulas are like this:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 and when you push the tent in the fistula, it is where it touches the foundation of the skin above, take a pointed tent like this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And insert one twisted thread into two, and push the tent with the whole length of the thread through the fistula as far as it reaches on the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	 if it is pierced in the margin of the foundation inside, then pull out the thread of that perforation, so that you push your finger or foundation.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	 And draw the head with thread, and bring together the two shoulders together, and hold one to the other, and leave it for a day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	 And keep it restrained until the threads hold the joints that are between together and heal.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 Then heal the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not burst on its own, make it burst in all possible ways, unless it is too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it should not be covered with a plaster if it is too deep, and then heal it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	 The shape of a spindle with spikes for making a fistula is very sharp at both ends and cuts.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 And not sharp on the other side because one should not hit what one should not hit, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	 The emoires are according to two kinds:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	 or they are inside the foundation, like resin, and there are small and large ones, and near the surface there is blood, and there is one or more, and they are pushed away from the foundation and at the head of the foundation.
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	 But those that are dislocated have little moisture, and yet there is still some citron juice or blood, and they have the color of the body.
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	 And the treatment of those with them inside the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to strain for urine in rooms, until the foundation subsides and the urine appears.
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	 hurry up, and pierce it with tweezers, or hold it with your nail, then strike at its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	 and if the tweezers cannot hold it because of moisture, take a cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel skin.
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	 stretch them with your hands, then strike and sprinkle some hot powders in place of the cautery.
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	 or you cauterize them as said in the chapter on cautery, afterwards you treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	 and if the foundation cannot come out, you must clisterize the patient with biting and harsh clisteria to clean the area where the foundation is, so that it can come out openly.
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	 but if the patients do not prepare themselves, and if their threads are too long for the foundation, the treatment is easy.
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 and it is that you grab them with your fingernail or pliers and break them, then treat them as we have said, until they are healed, and until they fear the incision by iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	 It is necessary that you make the stitching in this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	 Take the twisted thread and stick it in a needle, then pull the thread above and pierce the needle from another side, and twist the two ends of the thread below the needle, making sure it is wide enough.
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	 and straighten the thread, then knot it, pull out the needle, and do the same for all of them, and leave some space for blood flow.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	 then place the damp cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the foundation and cover it, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and leave it until it stops bleeding, and when it has stopped, heal the wound and other treatments until it is healed.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	the drying of the wounds or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Often the drying of wounds occurs in the intestines due to natural constriction and when the disease is old and medicine no longer helps.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	 It is necessary that you scrape off the skin with a spatula or your nail, so it doesn't become wet.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	 Then heal him when he becomes healthy as needed;
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	 and if it cannot heal, then start the shaving more forcefully than before, until it heals well, and blisters;
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him when it becomes healthy.
dou fremit	great trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	 Fissure is a small appearance hollowed out before the body, and goes in deep;
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 And sometimes it strikes the breast, and one feels it like death trembling, and spreads through the whole body, and more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	 And the treatment is that you take a reed from an ostrich feather or a strong bird feather, and place it on the trembling, until the purple circles encompass the trembling everywhere;
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 Then turn your hand all around the neck until you grasp it entirely; and put it in fully, and pull out the neck from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you wish, do this with a chain made of iron or steel according to this form, and be careful beneath and pull above.
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	 Do not pierce, rather hold tightly and press.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	 And if you see, cauterize the neck, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of a clyster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	 Sometimes, one does a silver or pitch clisterium, or melted wax or plaster.
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	 And sometimes they make these small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are made.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, when it is used in the treatment of children and those who are weak and suffering, they are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the enema, whether it is large or small, should be above wide, or the belly should be bound in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	 and there should be an opening or the abdomen tied, as you see, and the head inside pierced;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	 and on one side they should be punctured, and on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	 And let the belly or the one put the medicines from a beast's bladder or parchment, and it should be pierced all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole, then put strong thread through these holes, twisted in X or around, and assemble the belly like a goatskin.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	 And when the medicine is inside, tie it with a strong thread to the instrument in front, then cleanse (it).
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And this is the shape of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	 Let the medicine not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cleansing cloth with oil or egg yolk, or similar thing, then put it gently inside.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	 Then the minister pulls it out with both hands until it is completely visible, then remove the cleansing cloth, and make the patient lie on his back, and if the medicine appears, press it as much as possible.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And if (the patient) sleeps for an entire night, it is (more of) help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cauterize it in case of disease of the intestines, and the medicine hastens to heal, keep applying it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	 If the hemorrhoids are either foundation or abscess, then let the enema be as subtle as for a child.
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 and this is the form of the subtle enema when the skin is tightened:
des plaies	wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	 We have said in the division, the treatment of wounds.
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	 Or you will be told about remedies for hands and medicine, according to the completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made, and according to the places or wounds where they are made, and from how they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	 Things by which wounds are made are by impact of stone, cutting with swords and knives, or spear or staff or arrow, or similar things.
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	 or those that are made according to the rules of the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, or head, or chest, or stomach, or liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and I shall begin with the simple wounds of the head, for this reminder will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	 If a simple wound occurs on the head and the bone is not broken but it has been caused by an arrow or similar things, and the skin is completely torn and the wound is large, you doubt the formation of an abscess; warmly incise it:
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	 immediately make it drain from the head itself if blood comes a little bit from the wound, and let it drain in the opposite direction of the damaged part:
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 remove the patient's bloating caused by wine and heavy food.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	 If it does not want to drain, let the patient's meat be reduced, and let him not drink wine, nor eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	 And place it on the wound if an abscess comes up there, cotton wool soaked in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	 If there is no abscess, place it on the wound if it is fresh with all its blood and not moving due to air or wind, I will tell you what kind of powder a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the wound has moved due to fire, place some healing herbs on it until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large like the size of a sword and cannot be closed with stitches, join them by sewing, as I will explain for abdominal wounds.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	 If the wound is opened to the bone, fleshy and does not hold together, bind it up.
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 Then treat the wound with medicine, replace tough flesh where there is skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as cooked tests (beans) and wheat, also cabbages and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	 And if you find or cut through corruption that is not bone, strike it all with the knife and throw away the rotten part, then heal it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	 If there is an artery in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped with medicine, then tie it and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if that does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	 If these wounds are small and simple, the healing is easy.
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	 And you put this powder that causes the flesh to heal as soon as the worm has moved it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	 The method of making the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	 Take incense one part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	 dragon's blood two parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	 Live flesh in three parts and apply the fine powder on the wound, and hold it open shaped, until it dries well and joins all its blood.
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	 And then tie it up well, and let it heal by itself if it does not swell.
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 because the medicine is not to be stopped until it heals.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes they do this with just boiling water, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the wound has not yet opened.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	 And if the wound has moved [healed], in that case do not put this powder on it;
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	 but place some digestive herbs or barley flour made with water and honey on it until it is healed.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal it with other treatments until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	 If a bone break comes with the wound and it is small, remove it with fine tweezers;
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And I shall tell you after the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	Of the collar wound
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes from the neck and it is simple, without a difference between it and the one on the head, but if the nerve of the neck or the artery is cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	 If it is the nose, there is no other remedy but to let it heal naturally and not put anything binding, because it harms the nose and makes it retreat.
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	 And do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nose is cold and its continuation with the brain which is the highest member.
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 But the medicine should be soft like boiled chalk washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and also boiled and washed again in sweet water, and other similar stones moistened in this manner.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, tie it up with strips, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	 And if the wounds are deep and swollen and full of pus, pierce or cut it lower.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	 And if the arteries are cut, bleeding occurs, then tie it off, and cauterize if necessary.
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	 And if the spine of the throat is cut or glands, and the conduit is kept, so that the meat goes, then keep the gland above the throat's cartilage, but do not touch the throat, instead return it to its natural shape.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then apply traction gradually and leave it for some days, then heal with hot poultices until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	 And if the wound presses into the bone, open it.
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	 And if there are bone fragments, pull them out entirely if possible, and those you cannot remove, leave until the wound is healed and the opening is even.
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wound is fresh, sprinkle the powder I have mentioned on it.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	Of a wound from a lance or knife   (This line suggests that the text is discussing treatments for wounds inflicted by weapons.)
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	 If it is a spear or sword wound and the wound is deep, check if gas escapes from the wound when the patient breathes in:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	 Therefore, know that the wound is lethal;
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	 And if it is not penetrated through and the wound is fresh with all its blood, do not put any powder on it immediately or bind it because the blood will dissolve it and return to the heart, killing the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	 but apply an attracting ointment, and reapply it twice daily;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	 and if you don't have an ointment, place a piece of old cotton on the wound to draw out moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound for three or four days, or more;
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	 if no spasm or severe tremors of the heart or any kind of coldness comes on.
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 And when you see good positions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Then release it from bandages and other treatments until it becomes healthy;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	 If it cannot heal, then open it, from now on know that there is a fistula.
si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the wound as it should be treated.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	 If the wound is from a sword cut or knife, and it is simple, or worse, on the front or the back, treat the one in front.
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	 If it is large, stitch it up.
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	 If it is small, powder it and if it has penetrated the bone and broken into pieces, remove the wound and pull out the parts if they are separated.
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	 If they are not discharged, let the wound fester, align the extractions.
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 And for other wounds on various limbs, the judgement is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the abdomen
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	 The abdominal ruptures are great and medium-sized and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	 From the large wound the intestines can once jump out or the intestinal nerves, which causes the internal inflammation;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	 And the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one, because it is harder to put the intestines back in if not done carefully from the start.
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	 Because the intestines swell quickly when they feel the cold, they return more easily if stitched in carefully, and because of this, a medium-sized wound is better, since the intestines are stitched back to their place more easily than with other wounds.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	 And know that the hernia of the belly is according to four ways:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	 The two common hernias occur in the abdominal hernia, and the hernias of other body parts and the other specific hernias are common to other injuries.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	 And yet they are more specific with the abdominal hernia, and I will say one of them and explain it.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing of the intestine protrudes, and it is easy to put back, this is one of the four ways:
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	 And when it is cold, heat it up in some way:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	 Soak a sponge or a linen cloth only in hot water, or cook in boiling water and cypress and thistle, and warm the intestine until it is removed.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And sometimes do this with restraining wine, and boil it to make it stronger to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	 And when you see the swelling diminish, moisten the intestine with either hot or cold water and vegetables that are cooked, as it quickly closes off the opening.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	 If it cannot enter, then make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used for hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	 And the first treatment is to moisten it, as we should not cut too much unless absolutely necessary.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	 And this is the instrument to break (or split):
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 It should cut within the hollow part and not bend, and look at its shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines leap out, put them back in place according to their natural shape in their proper place, if you have the power to do so, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	 When the wound is wide and it is in the part below the belly, you must make the patient lie down on his back, and put his legs higher than his head:
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	 If it is in the part below the belly, put the head and feet higher than the parts below, and so if the wound of the belly is in one of the two parts, be mindful that the affected part should be raised higher than the other:
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 And thus you must treat as I have said for large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	 For small wounds, take what is appropriate and gently administer the treatment with your hand, touching all the wound with your fingers and pressing the lips (or edges) together:
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	 And this is the common way of stitching, and you should take a needle or more, according to the width of the wound, then leave from the edge of the wound a distance, and sew with a needle where the good thread is strong.
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	 Pierce the two shoulders of skin with two awls, which is underneath the skin, from that part, until you have pierced it, and join the two heads of the awl together in four.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	 then draw a double thread around the needle from both sides, then join the two edges of the wound together, and leave a space, and sew another stitch.
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	 then tie the thread as you did with the first stitch, and do not stop doing this according to the number of stitches needed, until the entire wound is tightened.
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	 And the needles should be of medium thickness, neither too fine nor too coarse; for fine needles pierce through the whole flesh, and excessively thick ones cannot enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	 because they should be of medium thickness.
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	 and it is not good to push the needles too far through the flesh and skin, lest they pierce and open the wound before the suture.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	 then bind the heads of the needles to prevent them from pricking the patient while sleeping, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to hold them in place until the wound is healed.
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	 and this way of suturing with needles is more suitable for small wounds, for in large ones, two needles should be used.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	 The second stitch is common, and it is that you assemble the two bones of the skin and the two bones of the thigh together with a needle that has a strong medium-thick thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	 and when you have pierced all four bones together, you withdraw the needle from the part where you began, in the manner one sews garments.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	 and place a distance between each stitch the thickness of a finger.
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 This stitch is for men, and I sew a wound that a man had in his belly, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and inside were intestines that were two palms wide, and the wound was within the belly.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine when it had been twenty-four hours away, and the wound healed up to fifteen days, and it was cured, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	 And they had judged him to be dying, but it was a miracle.
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	 and did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where no such thing was found nor any medicine.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 and placed cotton old twice a day on the wound, and washed it with water of honey until it was healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	 Now I will tell you the two proper ways of sewing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	 take the needle and thread it from the outside part to the inside.
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	 when it has pierced the skin straight through, then put the end of the thread or sew where you have stuck the needle, and pierce it from the inside to the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 And the understanding of this stitching is that you sew it like a tailor sews fur, and that you leave one opening at a time, and then close it from the other side, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	 The second way of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is like anyone who join two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the suture to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	 Insert an awl or end of the mirror nearby, and pierce that spot only, leaving the two ends of the suture.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	 Then turn the awl and pierce it from the outside to the inside through both ends of the suture.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	 Then pierce one and the other from the outer part to within, in the two shoulder blades that are opposite each other.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 and this is the twisted method of stitching and the most common one.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	 Galen said this word, and no one disputes it, that the belly should be stitched with two needles, where there is thread in each.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	 and one needle should be thrust from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew gourds.
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	 The judgments of the wound are as those of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	 And it is that when you find the fresh wound filled with blood, as soon as the arrow has moved it, then return the intestines and the bowel.
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	 Then put a healing powder on top of it, and if the arrow has moved it, then put any available ointment on it until the wound heals;
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	 and sew the flesh, join the sides, and mend the wound.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then heal the wound as with other wounds, until it is healed.
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 And if you have no medicine, put old cotton on it as soon as it begins to ooze, move it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	 For you need no other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple.
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	 And if you doubt that the wound is spreading to the principal members, it is necessary that you moisten a light linen in warm oil or rose oil, and put it around the joints, and beneath the saddle.
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	 If it feels pain or putrefaction in the belly, and it often occurs, then clisterize with black wine, and especially if the putrefaction comes to the intestines.
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 and pierce it inside, know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "yew" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the planting of veins in them, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	 And if the worm jumps from the wound, put it back as the intestine does, while it is still fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	 And if it is old and turned or black, you must cut the black area, so that blood does not come out of it, for there are veins and arteries.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 Then cut the part between the ligament and hold both shoulders hanging from the bottom of the wound to align the extraction when the arrow falls out, and the wound is opened.
de la routure dou boueil	Of the rupture of the bladder
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	 When the intestines are cut and the wound is small, it can be restored in some people, as I have seen that a man was speared or pierced with a lance through his abdomen.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	 and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, it became an abscess and turned into a fistula, and in it there was excretion and flatulence.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 I will treat him according to what I know, and I will not stop refining it until he is well, and the limbs are joined together.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	 And when I see them joined together, I doubt that the patient does not have illness in his stomach;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	 and it had no illness, but waited for better conditions, and food and drinks.
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	 And the experienced ones said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this way:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	 Take large threads and then gather the lips of the wound, and when the thread has opened the mouth, place it on top of the two lips so that it pulls out.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	 and then press the head, holding it so that it cannot separate, and put another thread after in the same way as before, until the wound is all captured.
et cout la plaie.	 And dress the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	 If the head swells in the intestines and brings no harm to the patient, and the intestines can be tied with a thin thread cut from the intestines of an animal, as follows:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	 Take the head of this thread from the intestines and tie it to the head of a thin linen thread, then put the thread into the needle, sew the intestine and remove the waste in the incision.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	 And this method of stitching swellings is not without risk or hope.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 And if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the internal intestines, there is no remedy or health, unless through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of a fistula or when it is
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it matures, is universally called "fistula", and equally when it opens and swells up.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	 And fistula is hard and white knot-like nodulation where there is no pain, and it is as hollow as a bird's feather.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	 sometimes clear-bright hollow, and other times thick.
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	 sometimes shallow, and other times quite.
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	 and I have spoken about it in the section on wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh, this is not due to anything but one of the NINE causes.
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	 namely, because of the small amount of blood or body;
ou por sa malice;	 or because of its badness;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	 or because there is hard flesh inside it, and above the lips, which does not allow flesh to grow.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	 There is too much pus.
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	 The joint is paralyzed, and the material is of bad quality.
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	 The medicine is not good in the treatment.
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	 Because the corruption is a kind of plague.
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	 The property in the region slows down digestion, and health delays, and it naturally dissolves slowly.
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	 There are veins or bones.
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Now I will tell you the cure for fistula that is made by handwork.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	 Fistula occurs in all members of the body.
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	 Because fistulas come from large veins, arteries, nerves, the small intestines, the bladder, any of the ribs, the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet.
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 And if it comes to the property of the main member, or similar joints.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	 All such fistulas are of grievous healing, and there is but labor and ignorance in it.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	 And if there is any fistula that does not come up to the level I said, and you have faith in its cure, and you know it, take a tent of wax or iron, if the fistula is straight, pierce it.
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	 And if the fistula is twisted, seek a subtle tent of lead, for lead bends with the twist.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	 And if the fistula has many openings and you cannot seek it with tents, clisterize it through one of the openings, for moisture is so short from one opening to another, and cleanse it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	 Then press gently to your power, so that you know if it is bone or nerve, and if it is hollow, and ask the patient carefully about the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	 and when you know truly where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or in any of the places that I told you, cut according to what I told you, and remove the fracture and the corrupt flesh that is inside.
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	 and then cure it until it is healed, and if the abscess is deeply perforated in the correct place, you must cut to the bottom as much as you can, then put dampened plugs filled with medicinal ointment into the fistula, up to its head, so that the ointment corrodes the superfluous matter that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And then put on linen bandages clean, until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 If it does not heal by this means, then cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the wound, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	 If neither veins nor nerves trouble or main limbs, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	 and if the bone is exposed and there is rot and blackness, as long as all the rot is removed, then treat it with clean linen bandages until it heals;
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	 If it does not heal and bends as before, know that you are not yet at the fountain.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	 if exposed and cut until you reach the bottom, remove all rot, then reset the joint;
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 And if it [the joint] is in this state, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	 If not, know that the corruption is too far advanced, you cannot reach it.
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	 if there is no other device than letting it heal naturally.
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	 and if there is a small corrupt bone that you can extract with tweezers, take it out using the suitable instrument for that purpose, and if there are several bones, take them all out without leaving any.
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, press, moisten, and warm the area, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	 If you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stimulating pus on the wound and wait until the flesh grows around the bones, then they will be removed more easily.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	 And if it is a large bone, as in the leg or thigh, press on the corruption only until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	 And if there is much corruption and it reaches to the bone marrow;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	 you must be covered with linen until the corruption stops spreading, and then heal it.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And I will tell you about a fistula that occurs in the thigh bone, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	 There was a young man around 30 years old who had pain in his leg due to something coming from within his body, causing matter to come to the leg, and he had a large abscess that could not be opened.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	 But the madmen overworked [the affected area] so much that the abscesses opened, and they were full of matter, and it became a fistula, and many pustules came out that leaked both pus and moisture from the body.
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	 and many madmen put a cure around it for two years, and there was no wise man in the art of healing as I was called to see him, and I saw his leg and the medicines that were used to treat him, and what ran out through the pustules at great length.
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 And the young man's body became red, and he had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I inserted a tent in one of the wounds, and then I sought all the wounds, and found that some came towards the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	 I quickly went there, and covered one of the pustules until I discovered a part of the bone, and found it rotten and pierced, and the corruption came up to the bone within.
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	 I was appearing to me as the corrupted bone, and I thought that there was no other corruption except that which I left.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	 and began to treat the wound with salty medicines for long times, but could not heal.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	 and then I began again, exposed the bone as before, found continued corruption in the bone, treated it, then left it, and tried to heal the place.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	 but I could not go around the bone with my hand, and took it all out by its socket, then treated it with medicines.
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 and it became healed and solid quickly, and there was no need to start the work again except due to the weakness of the patient who could not endure, and due to my fear of death for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 For the evacuation often bloodied, but it became entirely healthy, and grew in the bone a hard cyst, and was of good condition and had no harm or contrary to anything at all, neither on the outside nor coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	 And if a bone is broken anywhere in the body, it must be set in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	 Take a splint, and hold the end of the broken bone open, and command someone to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	 and place another thicker splint over the muscle that is torn away from the bone, and hold it in place, extending the fracture so that you pull out the damaged muscle beneath, exposing the bone where you wish to be, ensuring it does not pierce the skin.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	 and place iron or a plank under the bone to protect the damaged muscle;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 it must be set as much as one can see and feel the corruption, and be held in place again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	 And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or a part of it, uncover the flesh entirely.
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	 Then place the brand beneath [the affected area], and then sew the one part of the corruption to the other, and let the length of the suture be equal to the length of the corruption as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	 And if the corruption is in the joint, then break the corrupted joint and connect the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	 And if the corruption is between two joints, then there is no remedy but to cover it over.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	 And if the corruption is at the base of the hand or the foot, it is a great difficulty, but nevertheless you must investigate this corruption and find out how it opens.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	 And clean it in all ways that you can, but let neither vein nor nerve hinder you.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	 And know that the incision and the saws for cutting these bones are many, according to the position of the bones and their appearance, and their thickness and thinness, and their greatness and smallness, and their hardness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	 And therefore, it is necessary to prepare the appropriate tool for each type of work.
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	 And know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to knowledge of this art, and the experience of the types of diseases.
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 Choose the tool that you need according to what is required.
dou feu	Hot iron
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	 The shoulder may dislocate either internally or externally.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	 And when you have treated that corruption through the use of medicines, and they are of no benefit, it is necessary to cover that member as far as the place where the corruption occurs, so that the patient may escape death by this or by the greater evil, which is the loss of the member.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	 And the signs are that the member becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption of the limb spreads from limb to limb and attacks the whole body.
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 If you hurry to cover it, and if the corruption is in the head of the hand, as from the sting of certain venomous creatures such as scorpions, sea vipers, or similar, cover it and do not give it any space to reach as far as the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	 And if it reaches as far as the hand, strike at the joint so that the rot does not reach the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	 If it comes to the elbow, strike at the edge.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	 if it passes the edge, that's death, and no treatment outside the quantity of its power is of any help.
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	 And act thus when the rot comes or the wound weeps:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	 If it comes at the first joint, then you strike after the other joint.
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	 If it comes in the foot, then you strike throughout the entire foot.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	 If it rises in the leg, then you strike at the knee joint.
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	 If it comes above the knee, then there is no other remedy for the patient but death.
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	 The method of striking or soothing the limb is to bind it above and below, and stretch one of the ligaments downward, and another ligament upward, and you cut through the tissue between the two ligaments with a spatula wide enough for the bone to be exposed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 Then strike or soothe, and place a piece of linen on both sides, so that the blow does not touch the healthy part, and bring another injury and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	 And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the area immediately, or apply some restraining powders on it.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the limb with a suitable ligature, and heal it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	 And I will tell you what happened to the man in my opinion:
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	 A man suffered a burn that looked like fire scorching, and the scorching began first in his foot, consuming it completely.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	 And when the man saw the scorching, he cut off his foot, and he was healed.
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	 And long after that, the scorching returned to his hand, and he came to me, and I treated him with things that repelled it after the cleansing of his body, but the scorching could not stop.
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	 And he commands me to cut off his hand, and I will not unless I have hope of affecting the matter.
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	 Also, he doubted that if I cut off his hand, he would not die, for the vitality of man is weak.
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	 And he completely gave up hope and returned to his land, and armed himself to cut off his own hand, and he recovered.
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	 And I have never heard of this happening except in the case that it is done differently if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	 An abscess appears in a charred place and remains for such a long time that it causes a large swelling.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	 Then it bursts and breaks open, and the abscess liquid flows out, leaving the wound exposed like a knight.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	 And the skin that is above is as subtle as the fabrics unraveled, and it will not reach the bone nor the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain", and not "fistula".
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	 but if it is so long that it comes to the bone in full depth, it is called "fistula".
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	 and the skin is such that you must cut all around it, and similarly when it is subtle, as a fabric.
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 and it does not burst due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	 And if you suspect that the skin will burst, and the corruption is not in full depth, and the skin is thick with flesh, treat it with clysters as follows:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	 Look to see if the breasts are large, and if they smell bad, then apply Egyptian-made clysterization (enema) in this manner:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	 take asafetida, oil, and litharge equally, cook in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red and as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	 and then take from this according to your need, make it into water and honey, administer the enema to the breast, and restrict the opening.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	 leave the medicine inside for two hours, then draw it out by straining it.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	 do this many times until the breast is purified and the pus is removed.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	 and sometimes an enema of ash should be used when this medicine is not present, and you take vine-wood ashes, pour water on it, let it boil, then strain it, and administer the enema until you know that the breast is purified.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	 And if the patient cannot endure it, nor the Egyptian medicine, nor the water of ashes, then let him be cleansed with water and honey, or he may have a little powdered licorice.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	 let him be cleansed with honey and sweet wine, for the honey has the property of purifying and washing, and the wine makes the wound heal.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	 and when you have done this, and you are confident that the breast is well cleaned, then let him be cleansed with what causes milk to grow in it, and take a medication made from fennel, and make it with rose oil and wine.
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	 let him be cleansed with various medicines and ointments, whose properties or treatment of wounds I have mentioned.
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	 And if the wound of the breast is small and the cannula of the clyster does not enter it, enlarge it with a knife a little, and put on it an Egyptian ointment or Basilicon ointment until it is widened.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	 And if the wound is too wide, allow it to heal naturally so that the cannula or clyster may enter, and if it discharges pus above, lower or press it down.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	 For when the wound is deep, do not let pus collect inside.
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	 And if you cannot cover the wound below as desired, arrange it in such a way that the wound drains downwards, because when the wound is deep, do not let pus collect inside and if you cannot cover the wound below as desired, arrange it in this manner.
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	 The first part of the bow moves gently downward, and do not let anything from the bow go.
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	 Take medicines that strengthen and put them on the wound, and lay a linen cloth over the entire wound.
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	 Then press the wound towards the breast, a little larger than the first one, then apply ointment gently on the other cloth according to the size of the wound, and place it over the wound in the chest to align the bow, do not remove the large cloth for several days after some time.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	 And the one on the wound in the chest often removes it to remove the bow, and knows what moves from the bow, if it is poison or pus or digested or undigested.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	 And take care if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been spread in such a way and you see the nature that rises on the wound of the blood, then know that the breast is pierced already, and approach the healthy.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 Then undo it in the morning or midday, and when you undo the wound, change another cloth and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts sag due to indigestion after many days, know that they will not correct themselves.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poison spreads for a long time, do not despair of health, because health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	 For there are men who delay applying linen in their wounds, and of those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	 And if he bends the breast improperly after many days, know that the breast will not heal.
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	 And if the breast takes a long time to heal and is distant, apply drying medicines in substance and wet in effect, such as ointment drying, for there is a great part of vitriol, and it is the last remedy.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	 Take care of the liniment diligently, and prepare it with rose oil, and mix an equal quantity of old wine in it.
puis le confit et en use;	 then heat it up and apply it.
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	 And the same procedure works better when liniment is not available. You can take myrrh and aloe and incense, grind them into a powder, and sprinkle it on honey when it is over the fire.
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	 Then you wrap the cloth around it and place it on the breast. Sometimes a long-term philosopher or the root of celestial lily is administered, which is like the flour and cinnamon.
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	 and apply simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	 grind them, make powder, and sprinkle on the honey I mentioned earlier, and apply it.
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	 And if the wound is deep and not treated with this cure, then know that corruption has occurred completely, and it presses on the bone, or the tendons;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 If the treatment for fistula, as we have said before, is used.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of an abscess at the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	 Panarice is an abscess that grows beneath the nail of the hand or foot, or by chance arises in other places.
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	 When it withers and no care is taken, the abscess bursts out, and runs and throws pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and possibly all of it.
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 And the corruption reaches the bone until there is a stinking pain, and the toes are swollen, and the color is darkened.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When treating it as we have previously mentioned in the section, and if the treatment does not help, you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	 The cautery is very great help if the bone is healthy, and the nail is whole.
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	 and if the nail penetrates the flesh below it and begins to swell and blister, you must place the iron under the nail so that it does not penetrate the skin, and push it upwards, and strike the swelling gently and lightly, and apply the remaining charred material with burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then cure the wound until it heals.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike and draw out the infected material because as much as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And if you see two bones corrupted, strike them with the same force as before, then cure it until it heals.
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	 And if it is wounded and stabbed, causing great pain, then you must bleed it first.
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	 Then cut the nail with a sharp spatula, slicing across from above, and ensure that the cutting does not reach the skin beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if it happens, put something on it to soothe it.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	The deafening pain of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 One must align the fingers that are born in some men by chance, which are entirely flesh and sometimes contain tendons or bones, and occasionally nails; and none of these grow from the root of a joint, but they grow in some parts of the hand or in the knuckles.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	 A newborn who is born from the uterus does not move, but one born at the joint of the thumb may move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	 The cutting of a fat person is easy in this manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 cut it at its root with a wide spatula.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	 One born at the root of the joint is difficult to treat:
si te tien dou coper.	 Cover yourself.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who grows or should grow in the last finger, it is necessary that you cut the round part up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and cure it until it heals.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	Simultaneously, swelling in the joints comes from birth, or from injury of the wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	 You must cover that sore, causing it to repair according to its natural forms.
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	 Then place between two linens or cloths soaked in rose oil, so they do not stick together.
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 Or you put between two thin boards, until the wound is healed, as it should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of its two (joints) comes with the palm, then strike that weld as necessary.
des vils	 of the simple folk
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	 These are large veins filled with melancholic excess that come in many members of the body.
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 And it happens more often in the legs of those who walk and work or carry things, rather than others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you should sometimes administer purge of bile, and then heal the basilica (abdomen).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	 The iron cure is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	 One is to strike them, and draw out the black blood.
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 And another way is to open the vein, and draw it all out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	 The incision is made in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	 Begin the first incision with deep, hot water, very strongly, until the flesh becomes thin, then hold the patient's leg from above the calf to the part below the kneecap;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	 then cut the vein in one of three places, with a large incision, then separate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the patient's strength can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	 And then tie it and instruct him to bind himself with food containing black pepper.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 And repeat the evacuation and draining when veins are full, and it harms the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	 The application of this is as follows:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	 Wash the patient's leg if it has much hair, then put it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red and swells the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	 And if you don't have any warm water, heat it with fire, and then apply it to the vein near the knee or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	 Then scrape the skin with a knife and strip the vein from both sides until it appears when touched.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	 When it is red and black, you will see that it enters the skin like a white string.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	 Then push the rod in under the skin until it has risen above the skin, and then cut it open lightly at the edge, then strike it in another place 3 inches away.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	 Then scrape the skin over the vein until it appears, then rinse with water as you have done, and puncture it again in another place, as you have done before.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	 Then make another incision, or several if necessary, then rinse it, and puncture the thigh bone, then pull and rinse until the second incision.
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	 Then pull apart joint by joint, until it completely dislocates, then hold it.
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	 and if you cannot pull it apart or lift it, put a very thin sharp needle through its length and tie it, then push it down, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it dislocates.
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	 and be careful that it does not snap back, for if it snaps back, it cannot be pulled apart or lifted, and this causes harm to the patient.
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	 and when you have treated it, place over the wound wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and let it heal until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	 And if the wound is constricted, twisted and rolled together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it forcefully, but do not cover it.
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And pull (it) as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	 The shape of the iron that is used to pierce the bladder is curved and does not cut, but rather it should pierce the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 and is of large curvature, because if it is subtle, it would pierce the vein, but it should be large as we have said, and here is the shape:
de la voinne civile	 Of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	 This vein is in the legs, in warm areas where there are no herbs or trees, and in dry ground.
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 And by chance it may appear elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens due to inflammation that comes from under the skin, as it appears inside the body and spreads like a snake, it pierces between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that there is a very large swelling in the leg, then the flesh changes and the vein begins to protrude, just like the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	 When the shoulder is opened, you must wind around a piece of wood from one and a half feet up to two feet, and tie it, leaving the wood on the leg, and each time it protrudes, you should wrap it around the wood again, and tie it.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	 If it is too long, cut off a part of it, wind up the remainder, and do not cover its root completely until it is all out.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	 for if you cut it off, it will go back into the flesh, cause an abscess and putrefaction or evil disease.
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	 Therefore, it must be treated little by little until the head is reached, and nothing remains in the body.
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	 And sometimes this vein, when treated of five or ten fingers in length, a man came to me once whose it issued from ten fingers in length, and when you open it, the body or the foot bursts out and pierces through to its end.
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 Empty the matter that is inside it, and bring medicine against corruption to its place for any day, then treat it as an abscess does.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	 Sometimes in this vein many waters collect, and especially when it opens at the joint of the foot or arm, there is much leakage, and it jumps out with a gush.
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 Treat it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 The worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	 This disease is called in our country "cattle disease", because it often affects oxen, and it is a small worm that grows between the hide and flesh, and travels all over the body expanding and contracting, and one feels it moving from limb to limb until it breaks the skin or jumps out.
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	 And is infested with putrefaction of certain humors, such as worms, serpents, and roundworms or ascariasis (roundworm infection) in the abdomen.
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	 There is doubt about its malignancy, because when it goes through the body, it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye.
et ceu avient maintes fois.	 And this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	 When you wish to cure it and draw it out, one can force it out only when it goes (through the body):
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	 Therefore, you must lie the body above and below with a strong rope tightly tied, then press on it from above and draw it out forcefully, and if it goes through completely into the flesh, and you cannot pull it out, cauterize it with fire until it dies.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	 And the greatest harm it causes is that it runs oil, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	 and if you see it coming or near the oil, hold the sorcerer's knot under it, then strike above and draw it out.
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 And the patient must use body cleaning with medicinal powders to remove bad humors, and avoid eating spoiled food.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 The pain coming from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	 This disease is called on our land "vakirir," and is a pain that comes in some members, and then moves from member to member.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 And I have seen what I told you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	 I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the armpit of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	 And then, the face turns upward like a worm towards the shoulder, as soon as anything else, just as living silver when it cuts from one place to another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	 The pain separates from that place and penetrates into the shoulder, and then a little afterward runs through the whole body, until it reaches the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 Then he told me that it would return around the body, just as I saw it.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how she moved from limb to limb, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	 Indeed, I wanted many times that pain would move from one place to another, but I did not want it, just as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	 And I thought that was because the woman had a dry body, and her veins exposed, and for this reason appeared such constrained windiness.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 And they do not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and veins returned. (Translation)
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	 When you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it opens as we have said, close it immediately both above and below quickly, and then press down hard so that the windiness is constrained at its place. (Translation)
et cauterize le leu;	 And cauterize the place. (Translation)
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And if you do not see it with your eyes, cure the windiness with those who dissipate them, such as fetid pills and serapin pills, and similar ones. (Translation)
des saiettes	 arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and the places in the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	 The differences among them are that some have large points, small, hollow, and solid. (Translation)
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	 And of those that have two angles, and of those that have tongues, and of those where there are joints.
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	 and the dislocation which occurs in any member falls according to two ways:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 or in a principal member, as the head, heart, liver, spleen, lungs, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	 When it dislocates therefore in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you here after, appears to you:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	 if it is necessary that you beware of the extraction of this arrow, for death comes afterwards in many ways.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 and when this sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not in deep, draw it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	 And the sign of the skull when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a swelling appears on the head that is above the skull, is like scotomia (blindness), sclerosis (hardening of the tissues), edema (swelling), erythema (redness), inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of the mind, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	 and perhaps without swelling of the nostrils or ears.
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	 and perhaps it loses speech and voice.
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	 And from the wound moisture white like pus gushes out, and it also swells as if boiling with fire.
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And if this sign appears to you, refrain from treatment, and withdraw the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	 The sign of the arrow when it pierces or strikes is that it is near the left breast and feels as if it were thrust into a hard object, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	 And sometimes the arrow may move like a hair and produce black blood in the court, and there comes cold sweating and fainting.
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 Then one must realize that death is approaching.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of an arrow that penetrates the flesh deeply is when there is no scum discharge from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, breathes heavily and seeks a warm place.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	 If the arrow pierces the cover of the mattress, it will be deloused from the small ribs;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	 and produces a great wound and great pain and sighing.
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	 And all the limbs of the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls into the stomach, by chance, something of indigestible meat may jump out from the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls into the belly or abdomen, and does not jump out through the intestinal route, there is no hope in the cure nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	 If the arrow pierces the bladder and makes it jump and causes it to flow out, and the patient feels strong pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	 Know that the wound is lethal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the arm and neck and throat and shoulder and loin and hips and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it does not move, as I will tell you what happened to me, for this reason that you do the following:
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	 It happened to someone that an arrow or dart struck him in the root of the nose:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 I pulled it out from the other side under the fat of the ear, and it came out senseless.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	 And pulled out another arrow that struck him in the oil gland beneath the paper beneath, and the arrow was bent, and could not be straightened except the tip towards the fust (shaft), and the arrow was large like a Turkish bow, all light weight for ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 The game was senseless, and no bad accident happened to it.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	 And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic (made of ears).
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 I was a barber, and became skilled enough to treat it, and the Christians were healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	 Draw an arrow from a man's head or abdomen, and I thought he would die;
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	 but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 I made an incision over the arrow, guided it, and drew it out without any harm.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	 If a man has an arrow stuck in his back, and the wound is sutured over.
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And the arrow remained inside him for a long time without changing his natural condition or causing any harm in any of his natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	 And there was another man with an arrow stuck in his face, and the wound was sutured.
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	 And it remains thus without enduring great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	 And many other similar things.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	 And pierce an arrow through the side of a prince's king who was lying in bed and was slightly leaning to one side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	 And the arrow was completely straightened out.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 I was summoned to treat him after he had lain for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	 I took great care not to feel it at all.
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 And he felt a sharp pain and discomfort under his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	 I thought it was from the point of the arrow, so I placed a plaster with soothing and digestive properties on the place where there was no swelling.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 And I appeared the head of the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	 I held the plaster for many days and healed the wound directly, and kept him like that for a long time until he felt the arrow within his groin;
et il le me dist.	 and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	 I put on the wound a healing medicine corrosive for many days until it healed, and then I probed, and felt the head of the arrow that was adhering to the place;
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	 then I probed in the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became visible;
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	 and it exceeded the term of four months, and then the wound that I had treated began to swell, and the meat on both sides could not be drawn out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 Then do not cease to refine and devise methods of instruments, until I take it the following day with well-made tweezers, as its shape will come at the end of this chapter, while drawing it out and returning the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	 And the experts judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 I will then restore it, and the wound will heal, and the patient will be completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	 And I have told you the quality of extracting some arrows, so place your care on what I do not say, for the books cannot grasp everything entirely.
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 But wise masters compare themselves on very little things and on what is present and failing, they find new work, and new instrument, in the understanding of things strange that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	 I say that arrows do not enter the limbs where they are fixed except in two ways:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	 either through the side where they enter, or from another side.
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 and that which jumps out from where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and sometimes jumps out now and then.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	 And if it does not jump out now, leave it until the flesh is swollen around it, and the opening is widened.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	 and similarly if it is fixed in the bone and cannot come out, leave it like that for several days and move it every day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 then it jumps out, and if it does not, pierce around it with the sharp tool everywhere that the flesh is widened, and then pull it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	 And if the arrow is driven into the skull bone and reaches one of the ventricles of the brain, and some of the incidents that I have mentioned occur to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 Do not draw it (the arrow) out immediately, but leave it in until it becomes equal (with the surrounding tissue) after some days, for if the arrow goes to the brain, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not driven deep into the bone only and does not reach to the surface, and the patient remains for some days with bad condition, then try to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	 And if it (the arrow) is deeply embedded and cannot be drawn out by force, administer leeches around it as I have told you;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 then heal the wound until it is healthy.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	 If the arrow is repositioned in the body so that it cannot be seen, seek for it with all your effort;
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	 And if you feel [it], pull it with any suitable instrument.
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	 If the tightness of the wound and the depth of the arrow make it impossible to pull [it], and there is no bone, nerve or vein, open it as wide as possible.
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	 Remove the arrow if possible, and if there are ears in the arrow like handles holding it in place, remove the flesh that is embedded by two parts as far as you can reach, and then break or bend the arrow's ears so that you can pull it.
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 Be careful not to break the arrow while pulling it out.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot dislocate it once, push the leg towards the joint, then draw it, for extraction will be easier in this case.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	 And if the bleeding from the wound opposes your efforts, use the remedy we have mentioned in its chapter for treatment.
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	 And beware of incising the nerve and the vein, and make instrument as you can pull out the arrow safely, quickly or gently; firmly or lightly.
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 Place the patient according to his form when the arrow fell in, for this is the greatest aid that there is, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	 The arrow that comes from another part, or it opens anything of its, or the skin is swollen near where it can be seen or felt.
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	 Cut therefore above, as far as pliers can reach, and then pull out.
si saut fuer maintenant.	 If it was shot from a bow, now jump on it with your foot, and if you do not have the strength to pull it out, then tie a cord around it and pull it out gently.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, widen the bone, then pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still, then continue with the extraction until it comes out.
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	 If it be of the arrow shaft, push it all out.
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	 If it be a broken arrowhead and you wish to administer binding, give the instrument with hair, so that the point of the arrowhead enters the hair of the instrument.
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 Then push further, and if the arrow is covered with hair, push the instrument with point entering it, for easier extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 If the arrow is touched, it is necessary to cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as appropriate.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	 And if the arrow be in the groin or belly or bladder or side, and it is near and you can cover over it, do so.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	 And keep from cutting the vein and the nerve, then make an incision, then cut the wound, if necessary.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And care for it until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the pincers used to remove arrows is similar to an owl's beak, and here is its shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	 There are many ways to do this.
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	 Large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrowhead.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The form of the buttock hair is also like the feather of a bird, to push at the point of the arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of the tweezers for pushing and testing is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of common veins
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	 Of veins that heal are thirty-one, hence there is a head of sixteen, meaning:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	 They are the beating ones that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbechs".
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	 and the two arteries which are in the two temples visible.
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	 and the two veins that are in the two inner corners of the eyes, which are called "aspirers".
et li voine que est emmi le front;	 and the vein that is under the forehead.
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	 and the vein that is at the head of the nose.
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	 and the two tendons which are at the neck.
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	 and the two veins that are in the upper lip above the mouth, and these are called "augeheriches".
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 and the two veins that are under the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	 The veins which are commonly known to be V in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	 The first sentence is: "One is the cephalic, and it is on the left side of the chest, and lay people call it 'the vein of the head'.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	 The middle sentence is: "The middle one is called 'the artery', and it consists of the cephalic and the basilic, and lay people call it 'the vein of the heart'.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The last sentence is: "The basilic is on the right side of the chest, and lay people call it 'the vein of the abdomen', and it is above the liver, and it is that one from which blood is drawn, which opens clearly near the wrist.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	 The sentence is: "The saphenous vein is the vein that is between the little finger and the ring finger, and it has two branches.
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	 And in the leg and foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	 The first one is below the calf of the left leg, and the second saphenous vein which is at the ankle of the right leg;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	 and the vein called "nisse," which is in the ankle of the other side.
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 And there are three veins below those [veins] in the other leg.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	 The sanien vein which is after the ears helps with ancient catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	 and the qualities of the sanien vein, as I tell you, is that you raise the head of the patient, and rub the place where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	 then tighten the neck of the patient to a peg, until the two veins appear behind the ears in the two places dependent on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	 Touch the place where your thumb is located, and where you feel the pulsation beneath your thumb, apply pressure on it.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	 Then take the lance, push it through the vein until you reach the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein and cut both skin and vein twice through its thickness, and make the blood come out as you can see.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	 Then tie and hold it until it is healed;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 And I have already spoken about incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	 The healing of the two arteries that are in the temples is beneficial for migraines, scrofula, and ophthalmia caused by eyes filled with tears.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	 And the qualities of a surgeon are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	 and it stretches the neck of the patient until both veins appear openly;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	 and feels the pulse under your thumb, then applies pressure;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	 then pours blood from the vein on your index finger to the top, and stick the lance below, and pour the vein out, cut it, as you have done in the other two veins, and make the incision according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	 then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put cotton over it.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	 and then tie it securely, and leave it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 and we have spoken of their binding and extraction, or the beginning of the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	 The draining of the vein in the forehead is worth as much as the draining of the head in old facial diseases that have migrated and turned red;
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	 And the quality is that the patient twists their neck to stretch it out, until the vein appears;
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 then take the tool called "fosseur", which has this form (here is its shape):
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	 And place the point on the vein, and press down with your hand (or something else), and let the blood flow according to the quantity that you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 Then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein when it is clean and never use fire for the procedure.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	 Furthermore, the fire should not be too sharp (agus).
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	 And the bone is displaced, because it is close; and by accident the flames break when it is fragile.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	 The sinews of the two veins that are in the eyelids help them, and at the hinge, and at the joint, and at the tendon in the oil, and at diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	 and the qualities of their sinews are such that the patient stretches his neck by twisting some rope, as before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 Then the bone, and the sinew across, a short piece of flame, a bit wide, for there is no fat there.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	 And if the flames are fragile, by accident they break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	 Then make a corroding of blood, as much as you need, and then tie it up with linen, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	 The vein of the neck is useful against ague, and against dropsy, and diseases caused by heat, such as inflammation or redness that comes in the face, and especially when it is old.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	 and the quality of the vein is that the patient squeezes their neck, then presses their neck to your left hand, and takes the subtle flame long, and thrusts it into the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open well elsewhere, and the blood will start to flow now.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	 and do not go too deep, and let the bleeding stop according to your need, then rest it for a night, because it is quickly restored.
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 And this is the shape of fire:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	 The juices of the two guindages aid in the hardening of the alainne and at the beginning of boiling, and much for diseases, putrefaction, ulcers, corrosion, herpes, and stomach ailments.
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	 And the qualities of the juices are such that the patient strains his neck under one and the other, as we have said;
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	 And the master standing above the patient's head and the patient leaning on the seat, then open the vein slightly but widely, then draw out the blood moderately, as much as is necessary.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	 Then repeat on the other vein, then untie the ligature, and gently hold and close both veins so that the patient does not strain.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 Leave it until morning so the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	 From the liver surgery
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The purification of veins in the mouth above helps to cool [the mouth] and promotes decay of the gums, fissures in the lips, toothache, and surrounding areas.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	 And the quality of healing is to have the patient sit in front of you and hold their neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	 Then turn the jaw and look at both of them, the one is to the right jaw and the other to the left, and they are recognized by being black, and by the small black veins around them;
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 Take hold of both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and are in doubt, take the larger one from each side, and also handle the two veins above and below, as they are the same way.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 From below the tongue liver
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	 The healing of the veins below the tongue assists after the healing of the cervical, and it is in the restraint of the throat, and diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth.
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	 And the qualities of the surgeon are that the patient lies between your hands in front of the sun, and he licks the tongue, and gazes beneath into each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 Then one and the other, but do not go too deep, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	 The veins of the cost side which are commonly used are often opened in two ways:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	 or by poking with all the flame of the mirtin large or olive oil subtle as you know cutting tools, and is called "anesil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 and are large and subtle according to the width and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flame mirrhine is very renowned, and it is wide as you can see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	 And it is necessary to open the thick veins that contain large, turbid blood:
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 And this is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and it is pointed more subtle, and it is for treating subtle veins that contain subtle, yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	 The basilica sainie (which is one of the veins), helps with illnesses that are under the throat, neck, breast, and stomach;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 And it requires the lord to bleed profusely, and to empty the artery that is below;
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	 If you puncture the artery, and blood flow occurs, then it requires stopping (clotting), as I have said;
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And the flame should not be pricked but cut like an onion.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	 If the basilica does not open clearly, then you must incise (open) it and change to another one;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	 Or if you want any other route (vein), or bleed in the place of it from the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	 It opens manifestly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And apply the fire cauterizer as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	 And if you wish to find the place of the wound, then it is necessary that you straighten the arm and touch the place where you feel the pulse.
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	 Then mark the location, tie the arm, and burn the vein with fire cauterizer.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	 And beware not to wound an artery when you see it swollen, for that is the artery.
eschui la donques.	 Avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	 And if you see swelling high as the urine of a child, and it is red and thin, know that it is not an artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	 Hurry up then, and place your hand firmly on top, afterwards remove the bone without stopping its flow of blood, for this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	 bind the arm, and let it remain in this position, and do not move it by the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and be afraid, and do not move it until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	 And if the bone does not stop bleeding and it swells, and no medicine is present for you, then cut open the artery if it is open, because the head of the wound will contract.
et estainche li sans.	 Stop the bone from bleeding.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	 Take a slice of the plaster of Paris, and cut it, take one half and bind it firmly until tomorrow.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	 If the bone does not bleed anymore, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	 If not, if [you] cure [it], as we have said, with powders that stop blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 And the stopping of bleeding is not always necessary in multiple positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the ligament of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	 The vein in the middle helps to treat bleeding from the head above and the body below, because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said;
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	 And the lord [should] turn himself towards the nerve that is below, and if it pricks too deep and he finds the nerve, it swells and the wound becomes painful and may not heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	 And this nerve often opens multiple times, and if it does not open in some people due to their subtlety, then you must heal [it] with the instrument anesthetic.
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 And you shall cut the nerve at your will.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	 The bandage of the head if helps, that it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes.
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 And it is necessary to bandage when pricking with olive oil or myrtle fire, because this is the safest of all veins, because there is no nerve or artery below it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	 However, you must seek the lighter joint, and do not harm anything if it is necessary for the first time, and then repeat.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 And sometimes joints swell in some people, when it is necessary for the first time, but do not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the urine is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	 The first thing you must know about bandaging is that bandaging is not brought for any other reason than to keep health and to avoid coming diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	 And make the incision in one of the three veins that are called 'cubitus'.
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	 This means, cephalic, axillary, and basilic; (the three veins)
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	 And the incision should be made in the beginning of spring, or autumn and winter after eating, when the signs of filling appear.
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 And the incision should be made either on the first day or the third day, after two or three hours (of the procedure).
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	 The incision for diseases does not have a fixed hour, but when it is needed day or night, at all hours and at every moment.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 And it should not be incised for children until they are fourteen years old, nor a woman carrying a child until the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not treat the old who have passed sixty years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	 And when anyone wants to heal themselves in any way, it is necessary that their intestines be cleansed with a gentle enema, if they have retained much filth, so that the veins do not release the waste products of the intestines that can harm the principal members.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	 one should not heal who is too salty with meat or drunk, to such an extent that he farts or drools.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	 and one should not want to heal after colic pain, vomiting, stomach distention, multiplying of coitus with a woman, labor, watchfulness and fasting, and those who exhaust their strength, or by something from the weapon or body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	 Then thin the fluids, if it is possible, with food and drinks and medications, if you have the power.
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	 Then bathe [the affected area], if nothing prevents it, to thin the blood and heal the vein in the third place as we have said.
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	 And keep that day from work, pain, lust, and similar things.
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	 And lie down and rest, and let the bandages be higher than those who are being healed, and rub the arm two or three times, then gently pull out the stitch above, for if it is too tight or small, it cannot heal without.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	 And then rub the place with your hands until the veins swell and feel them.
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 Then moisten the punctures with a little old oil, then place your thumb of your left hand on that vein beneath the place where you wish to lance it, so that the vein does not break or split when piercing.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	 For there are veins that flee like cords when pierced, and there are those that are filled with windiness, such that when flame is applied, it recoils and cannot open the vein, and this is one of them.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 And if it opens the vein, the wound will be too narrow, for this reason the lancer must be aware of these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	 And if the vein opens the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	 If not, begin again a little under or above that place where it is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	 And if the area is inflamed and the patient becomes frightened, allow it to rest for a day or two, but do not bind the arm.
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	 If by chance an abscess comes;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	 Do not enter it into water, then treat the wound if it pleases him.
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	 And if the wound is small, or the opening of the abscess is not large enough to expect as much blood as you see, trust in that same wound and apply heat directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	 Open it a little quickly, but only when the area is inflamed;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start the bleeding again, and put some oil of lilies on it, for it calms the body's blood, and in this case, the oil is its remedy.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	 And administer the oil of lilies in each bleeding that you perform, to stop the flow of blood;
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	 and this same thing causes a triacle and boil from them when it is put on the joint.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If the pus and blood are too thick, separate them carefully.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	 If a large abscess comes, which often happens, especially when the vein opening is small and the bleeding is not performed often, hurry, put moist sponge on the joint in hot vinegar and oil, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	 And it is necessary that you do this after the evacuation of blood from the vein, and if it stays in place after several days without any blackness or greenness, it will not harm [him].
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh beneath it, in a powdered form, mixed with oil, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	 Many times an abscess and appearance appear at the incision of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	 Place your hand on it then, if you feel it soft to the pressure of the hand, that is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	 Then do not place anything there as we have said, for it may happen without an artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 But cover the wound with dry bandages to harden it, then treat it with another remedy until it heals.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood according to its quantity based on its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	 If the wound is black, leave it to drain until it turns red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	 and if you see a large lump, let it become refined (or reduced in size).
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	 and if it is hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	 For the person who is wounded and pierced, requiring bloodletting, make the wound larger and let the veins be wide.
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	 And for the weak person, do the opposite, and he must be bled little by little, and it should be bled by cutting across (or transversely), not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And this method of bleeding avoids misdirection of blood and nerve damage, and is more effective than the long bleeding rather than the wide.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	 And to him whose body needs healing, it is necessary to give soft bread beneath green apples.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 If it is scalded, let the blood be bled three or four times; and if of a cold constitution, eat before healing soft bread in syrup sweetened, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and anise, and fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if it [the wound] festers at the wound site, after much bleeding, then it is necessary that he drink a broth of char, and an aromatic subtle syrup, and use other things as we have said in the section or chapter on syncope, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if you want to fracture some bone, and heal it again as needed, when it is weakened by excessive healing, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its power continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And if you want to fracture some bone after the first healing, and it has strong flesh, it heals seven hours after the first healing, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if you want to heal from another part, it should heal on the second or third day.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	 For there is much blood within the body which is already scalded and causes fever.
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	 Then a large amount should be bled, and the peritoneum should be opened as much as it can choke on a cloth.
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	 After you have taken care of all the conditions for healing, place your hand on top of the foot when it is healed, so that death does not come in the place of a cloth, and this happens many times when healers are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	 And it is not appropriate when you dislocate the arm, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wounds are closed, that you press firmly.
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	 And if it is curved, stretch out the arm as much as possible, for that would be bad;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	 but leave it until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 or you pierce with the tip of the flame until the wound that has frozen shuts, and place on it a piece of linen soaked in vinegar and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is burst, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess has been soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the necessity arises to draw blood a second time, do it in the same place or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The veins in the arm are healthier than the vein of the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	 And the method for healing is that the patient plunges their hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red;
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	 then it should be bound moderately, so that the vein is visible, then heal it now across, not wide or long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	 And let the wound be wide, and let it be cleansed closely near the joint of the hand, and if you cannot draw out [something] from there, then put the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water, until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	 but if it is frozen, do not hit the hand with hot water, for one puts more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 and the cleansing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither an artery nor a nerve there.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	 The cleansing of the sheath of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is how it's done:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	 hold the hand, and push into hot water until the vein is empty, if you can see [it];
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	 And if the wound is transverse, and you close it completely, it causes no harm.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 And do not go too deep, because the nerves are entirely exposed bare under the skin, and then put your hand in hot water, if the blood doesn't freeze in the wound, it cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drained the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen over the wound to bind it quickly, and do this with each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The purgative of the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse, and do as I have told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The vein of the spine is effective for all diseases that are under the body, such as ailments of the back, and retention of phlegm, and diseases of the lungs, and knees and old legs, and similar illnesses.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	 And the quality of the wound is that the patient puts his foot in hot water, and rubs it on the wound until it burns, and ties it above the ankle joint.
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	 And the wound is at the ankle, and from above the foot there is much pain.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 Therefore, make the wound wider or larger at the ankle, which is more effective.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	 And if you wound on the foot, watch out for nerves that are underneath, and wound through also as in cutting;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	 and let the flames be quenched.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the bone cannot come out, place the foot in water and let the vein empty well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	 And if bloodletting is necessary for the first time, begin again slightly above because the wound is salty;
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 Do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the soothing of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The wound of the sciatic nerve is at the knee joint, and its cleaning relieves pain in the ankle, when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	 And the quality of his wound is such that the patient immerses himself or herself in water, and pulls above the ankle four fingers twisted, for otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	 and if it opens, you can bleed in all ways that you can, and across;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And it is more useful to break it [the shoulder], for the joint is dislocated, and it responds well to human hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	 And if you do not reset it [the dislocated joint], no healer will open or close the door to it, and turn it towards the little finger and beware of nerves.
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	 Make such correction of the blood as you see fit, then untie the ligament [binding the shoulder], and put cotton on it and hold it in place.
ele est maintenant sanee.	 It is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 open abscesses
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	 Blisters are made of horns, or hare's fat, or glass.
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	 And blistering can be done in two ways:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	 To draw and attract blood, or to avoid wounding.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	 And this ventosation which is meant to avoid wounding has two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	 or it is with all fire, or without fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	 and the ventosation which is made by drawing blood and extraction of blood is performed in 14 inches of the body, from which one is completely in the head.
et li autres est emmi le col;	 and the others are in the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	 and the others in the two sides of the neck;
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	 and the wound under the chin.
et li ventouse des II espaules;	 and the wound in the two shoulders.
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	 and the wound on the shins.
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	 and the wounds in the two arms.
et les ventouses des II jambes;	 and the wounds in the two legs.
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	 and the wounds in the two ankles.
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	 And the ventosation (ventousation) does not deal with blood, except for minor veins that are scattered in the flesh, and therefore one should not avoid it at all, as when performing venesection (bloodletting);
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 and it should not be administered, neither at any fire nor hot iron, in any disease that comes from congestion, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	 If there is a necessity to ventose for diseases, or by custom, then we will administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and in the middle, and every time.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	 because there are some who, when they need to be ventosed, have a swollen head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	 And for those who find swelling and redness in their body, and in their head, and at the neck, and blackening of the eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	 And for those who find a spot of blood in their mouth, and their tongue has swollen, and they bleed;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there are such who have convulsions, and see blood in urine and vomit and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially if it is in the month, we order to ventose after 3 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	 The pain of the head assists in the swelling of the eyes ... that comes to the eyes, and it is not necessary that this be after the evacuation of all the body.
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	 And this ventilation is in the place of the pain of the head, and it is not necessary for those with cold constitution to use it, or who have diarrhea, because it does great harm to them.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 And for this reason, it is not suitable at all that the watchers [or caretakers] should use [this method], nor those who have a cold head disease.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who often heal themselves become negligent, and for this reason, the cupping glass should be placed a little lower due to the fear of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	 The ventosation [therapy] is in the location of the head and the basilica, and for this reason it is effective against the swelling, and for fracturing the channel of the skull, and for all that, and for filling.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 It should be pushed gently, for if it remains too tightly, it may cause obstruction in the intestines or stomach and the heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	 The ventosation at the costel joints of the neck is effective against headaches, otalgia [ear pain], migraine, strangulation, and tooth root pain, and is in the location of the basilica cavity.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 And you must command the lord to press his hand to put it (the dislocation) back into place, not to cut the artery, and no bleeding should occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	 Ventilations beneath the chin are good for mouth disease, corruption of gums, and similar diseases that are in the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	 And it is in the place of the salivary glands of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	Ventilations under the armpits are useful for diseases that originate from heat and fullness.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	 Ventilations along the ribs are as good as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 Command the lord not to press too deeply, for the skin is bare and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	 Ventilations on the buttocks are good for hemorrhoids from the base and diseases beneath, and the ventilation should be large and made of goat's hair, as it needs to draw well.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	 And by chance, if it is delicate, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	 It makes large wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	 The boils on the legs burst open widely because they draw blood from all over the body, and they are old sores of the rain, the marriage, and the bladder, and they reduce the flowers.
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	 They are located in the armpits and elbows, and despite that, they weaken the body after a long time, and bring pus in various forms.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	 The way to put a boil is to first empty it, then touch it gently and quickly, stir it evenly, and not stop doing this until you see the area turn red and swell up, and make the pus appear red from blood.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	 Then heat (or cauterize), and apply cuppings, and take care in the arrangement of the body, for there are some who have cold flesh, and clear pores.
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	 If you should cut only once, and it should be large incisions, and one deep wound.
et suce legierement.	 suck gently (or draw out blood).
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	 And if the swelling is large, then you should cut twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	 The first time for thinning the way for thick blood to flow out.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	 And if the swelling is very thick, then you should cut a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	 And when we want to draw out blood drop by drop, we should only puncture once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	 And if you want a lot of blood, we will do it often.
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	 And if the limbs are thin, they should be strengthened fully, and the joints should be quickly pierced so that the cores are perforated; it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and those with narrow pores, to anoint the joints of the boils with stimulating and dissolving oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	 if it is in this case, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or oil of pumpkin seed.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 and if it is in yew, with the oil of parsley, or of lilies, or of chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the person to be healed has a tight and narrow wound, no oil should be put on it, but it should be washed after being lanced with rose water, cold water, lemon water, curds water, or porcelain water, or any similar thing.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from bed with the aid of aspen wood, or water of myrtle, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	 And those with thick excesses should rise from old wine, or vinegar water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or something similar.
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	 And it is not advisable to apply cupping before bathing or in bathwater, but after the bath for an hour or two.
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 And he should not sleep after cupping, and it is necessary that he warm himself, when he needs to be cupped and when he has been cupped.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	 Watch out for the one who is being bled is choleric, and let him not be too sharp and inflamed;
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	 He must take cold things, such as pomegranates, endive, and lettuce in moderation, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 Eat light foods, such as mutton meat and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	 And the one with a cold constitution, take honey syrup, moderately fragrant old wine, and eat little, and eat light foods such as small birds and young birds and sparrows.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	 And on the day when it will vomit, it should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	 It is necessary to give certain men sometimes treacle or muscatel before or after vomiting, to strengthen the main limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And let the wine be made thin, but it is not good for those who are hot to drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	 The vomitings that are placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, and the spleen, and gout, and on the stomach and the bowels and the loins and the thigh, because these limbs do not tolerate being wounded, and it is done for nothing but to draw blood from member to member, as we do with the breasts when milking;
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	 To remove the viscosity from the limb, as we place cupping glasses on the abdomen and the buttocks to reduce it.
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	 and remove the pain when there is an obstruction or stone, by attracting its nature through chance, or dislodge the stone from its place.
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	 and so it is done when placed on the liver and the bladder when there is retained wind, and these cupping glasses are administered empty to only draw blood.
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 And sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleura, and so the cupping glass is filled with hot water or with water that has cooked herbs convenient for it.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the bladder treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	 And it should be two fingers and a half palm-width long, and have a hole in the middle about a thumb's width wide, like pushing an awl, made of bone, soft beforehand so as not to prick the patient when placing it on the limb;
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	 and make it through the middle a rod of bone or iron for placing a splint inside, and let them be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them;
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 for the swellings of children are different from those of the old, and thin from fat.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	 And this splint should be placed thus on the limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	 grasp the splint with wax or linen and place it in the splint through the hole in the middle of the splint, so that the brightness is at the bottom of the splint so as not to burn the patient.
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	 And then place it on the member, and your fingers should be on the sore as we have said, so that when one looks at it, if steam comes out, then open the blister.
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 Then apply the thread as before, and renew it often, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	 In the blister that is given in case of pleurisy, it should not have a worm nor a sore, and it should not be applied unless when it is full of liquid, and it should only be placed on the member.
et c’est li forme:	 and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	 Suppurating abscesses are not applied unless in members where blisters cannot be placed due to their smallness, such as lips and gums, and similar areas.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	 And in naked flesh, such as thigh or shin, and similar places;
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	 And the quality of the person is that when you find bladders that are in sweet clean water without purge, if you take them;
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	 and put them in fresh sweet water until they are familiar with it and have nothing in their bellies;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	 Then let them be purged of the veins and bowels, then scrub the member until it is red, and place the bladders on it;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 And when they are full and hot, if there is a place to apply a cupping glass, let it be applied, for it works well.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	 If not, raise the limb above water level, and then below water, very good, and then wrap it;
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	 And if the limb remains too long without the body's warmth, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it on, until the pain subsides.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	 And if the limb becomes multiple (or split), place broken glass, or gall, or similar things on it until it subsides.
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	 Place half-peeled beans on the limb and let them remain until they adhere to it, which will cause it to subside now.
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 And if you need more help, take other warm limbs.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	 And if the warm limbs do not want to take hold, scrape the limb with fresh blood or insert a needle until it comes out, then place them on, and as soon as they feel the blood, they adhere.
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And when you see them dripping, sprinkle a little bit of aloe powder and crushed seeds or ashes on them, they will stop now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and it is the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	 Know, dear child, that the foolish man falls into this chapter who has never seen any of the old books, nor read any of their letters.
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	 and for this reason, medicine is unknown in our land, as I have never found anyone good.
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	 I do not know anything else except through the science of the old books, which I have studied so much that I have treated it and by experience, and by the custom of my life.
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 I have described in this chapter what is contained therein and have summarized it at the end and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought forth, just as I did in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us say the summary of this book, the number of words and chapters where the wise put their understanding and dwell on truth, so that those who have been proven knowledgeable will know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	 I say that when breakage or dislocation or twisting or fracture comes to anyone, it is necessary that you straighten the patient from one side and the other, if anything does not stop you, as weakness of the body, or infants, or the elderly.
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	 or if the time is not very hot, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	 and do not eat cold meat, that is to say raw or undercooked meats, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not stuff yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of an abscess heating up, nor expansion of matter in the member.
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 The patient returns with a slight movement to the first management. (Here, "governement" can also be translated as "treatment")
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary that you nourish the patient with foods that make large stools, or they have thick consistency, such as cooked wheat in water, and peas, and heads, and feet, and pork belly, and eggs, and fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this nourishment brings on softened stools and the broken bones heal more quickly.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	 And know that the broken bones of old and decayed people cannot be well recovered nor welded according to their nature due to the weakness of the limbs, neither those who are too tender, as in the case of small children.
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	 but there is no cure, reset above the broken bone and hold together the limb tightly until it heals as it was before.
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 and do not let him at all perform his work, and for this reason, he must be fed with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the breaks are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the break of the neck is different from the break of the foot, or the leg, and I will tell you in this chapter all ways of break.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	There is a break that grows over time, and another that sharpens, like the quill for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is a break with a wound, and a break with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	 And in every way he has his equipment and proper instrument for restoration, according to what the memory comes to mind.
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	 And it is known as bone fracture because the limb is twisted, widely open due to displacement, and feels pressure when touched with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	 And if there is no twisting or touching, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture.
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 But it may have twisting, splitting, or small fractures.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand, but apply medications that follow, and then hold it gently.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	 Know that the fracture that goes in the arm and has two parts separated, you should now set them equally, otherwise abscesses will grow on it.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses grow there, leave it for as many days as the abscesses are calmed;
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	 Then set it equally to the motion that you can easily and wisely move, and know that the restoration of it is easier than the restoration where there are fragments.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 Then hold steady, as required hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	 If the bone is broken into pieces, if it's in the foot or hand, or if it's a small member, or a two-finger break, or a single finger break, using both hands.
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	 And set the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the limb are disjoined, you reset them with all means possible and ensure that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 And align well the two joints of the bones according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	 And feel it with your hand if it seems to you that it is not quite right:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	 If it is straightened well and not stretched too much or pressed as those who force it by their work to bring about an abscess and contraction in the limb, as we have seen many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	 And when the limb is in place, keep the patient still so he does not move, neither while watching nor sleeping or turning or otherwise.
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And be sure that the limbs are so secure that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	 For if it feels no pain, then it is not broken, and it must be put in such a position that it feels no pain.
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	 And ensure that it is placed straight, so that deformity does not come when it is restored.
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are various in smallness and largeness and shape.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	 For there are small members such as fingers, toes, and similar ones:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	 It is necessary to wrap thin and soft linen cloths around them.
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	 And the large ones, such as thighs and legs:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	 It is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard bandage, for the broad bands embrace the whole large limb equally, and hold it tight from all sides without any gap.
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	 Then tie light bandages around it three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and hold less, leaving a slight space from the break.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	 and soften the bandage a little, until you take a large part of the healthy part, then take another bandage, and turn it directly over the broken place.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	 then return to the part below the break, and hold moderately, not too strong nor too loosely, as we have said in the first lesson above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 Then put between the joints of linen or cloth strips that are all even, and then bind them all together above [the affected area], and then place your well-made splints on top, if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	 And if there is an abscess or inflammation, put on top something soothing for the abscess that is hot, and which removes the inflammation, and leave it in place for some days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 Then bind the splints, and they should be half the width of a thick cane, or a staff used for splitting wood, or palm branches, in this manner:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	 but it is necessary that the splint placed on the fracture be slightly larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	 And let it be as long as necessary for the member, whether small or large.
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	 then pull up on the sutures just as you did at the first stitch, then sew it up with thread following this fashion, just like at the first break.
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	 the wound is narrower now, less so later.
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	 and the thread should be of moderate size, not too thick nor too thin, and made of flax yarn.
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 for if the thread is thick, like those I have seen in the works of fools who sew with twisted flax yarn, it is a great error, because the stitch cannot be even if it is too thin, and it should not have less than two fingers' space between each suture.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is gored by the shafts of arrows after being wounded in healthy limbs, you should place linseed oil or linen cloth on them to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is fractured and the ligaments are torn apart, here is the remedy I shall tell you.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not necessary to hold splints on all broken limbs for the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	 For when the limbs are large, no need to insert arrows before five or seven days, or more according to your assurance of the abscess healing.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	 And here is the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 And it is that you take flour that is kept near the mill walls, and mix it with abundant egg, and put this mixture, not too clear nor too thick, on the fracture, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring the fracture in various positions, and likewise for women and small children, for it is neither too hot nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	 Another manner of the plaster restoring the fracture and the dislocation and the twist:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	 Take [a] probe, lancet, and tweezers and dissecting scissors and asbestos and Arabic gum, to X [the patient];
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	 Take myrrh and aloes, to V [the patient];
alechil VIIII З.;	 apply ointment VIII [to the affected area];
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	 and make powder, mix it with egg yolk;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	 if the complexion of the man is hot, use this plaster, because it has good composition and quickly sets broken bones and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	 Another way of making a plaster that is effective for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	 take asbestos and lard, to X [the patient];
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	 myrrh and aloes, to VIII [the patient];
acaice VI З.;	 This sentence appears to contain a Latin abbreviation with numbers, but it is not clear what it means within the context of this Old French text. As such, I cannot provide an accurate English translation for it.
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Boil Armenian bread X З, crush it well, and concoct with vinegar or abundant egg, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	 Another method of emplaster for dislocated joints and displaced bones, and to alleviate the pain occurring, and to treat with a tool, you shall cut the bone and break it.
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Take new linen, dampen it in warm water and cooked oil, and place it on the area.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This splint does not restore [the bone], but it is good for relieving abscess heat and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	 Another method of emplaster to heal broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	 Take dried fig leaves and earthy parsley, crush together, and make an emplaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another way to splint for the healing of the fractured bone and for encouraging the return of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	 Take root of vismalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches, of each one an equal part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 and grind, and make into a paste with wine, and if the limb is scalded, make it with moist coriander water or vinegar, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medical plaster) stronger than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	 Take roots of vismalve, flax seeds, thistle, lentils, and sage, as well as the flowers of violets and chamomile, in equal amounts;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 grind, and make into a paste with salt water, sweet water, or vinegar according to the heat of the limb, and its rest period.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates states in his book that no other substance should be placed on a broken limb for restoration except for a plaster made of beeswax and oil, and nothing else, and he says it should be between soft and firm but not too soft or too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And it seems Galen that dry and slightly warm things should be placed on a broken limb for restoration, such as myrrh, aloe, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	 Another way of plaster that is good for wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	 Grind up moths and human hair, feathers of birds, and mummy, and grind them evenly, then make a paste and apply it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	 Then after that, dissolve a little bit more, and make sure the patient feels no pain, nor has the bones moved from their place.
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	 But do not dissolve it for many days.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	 If pain, itchiness, lack of rest or swelling occurs at the site, hasten and dissolve it immediately, remove the paste now.
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	 Take a thin cloth, sea sponge moistened with seawater, immerse it in water, and apply it to the site until the itchiness stops, and the pain is alleviated.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	 Then let the limb rest for an hour, then put dry linen on it, moistened in vinegar or rose oil, and tie it up until you are sure of the abscess heating.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	 And let the inflammation of the limb rest and the pain disappear, then resume tying it up delicately, a little plaster, and do not tighten it too much as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 and thinly enough that it heals.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	If you see that an abscess has been opened and drained, reddened, painful, and swollen, and you need emplastrum and linen, start it as before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	 And if no improvement comes to the limb in what we have said, do not loosen it until after 3 or 4 or 5 or 7 days.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	 And sometimes leave it for 20 days, as we can see, until the fracture heals and the joint approaches the bone.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	 Then it should be held more firmly than before, and the flesh should be fattened, as I said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	 If you see the place drying out too much, know that nourishment cannot come to it;
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	 Therefore, immerse the place with warm water, every time you dislocate it, and do this for three days and let the ligament loosen a little.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	 By doing this, then you cut off the nourishment to the limb and hasten what the foolish man does, who keeps the limb twisted.
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 This is bad, and it is dangerous work, and I see no other solution but to rest it and treat it correctly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	In various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	 There are many ways of breaks, and various shapes, and the causes are intended for specific purposes.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	 For there are fractures that are made by sword blows, and the collar bone breaks the whole bone up to its shaft which is beneath the bone, as a crack or splinter does.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 And for this reason, such fractures are called "splintering".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	 Or if the sword strikes the bone from above causing it to pierce, such fractures are called "absolute".
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	 And these two types of fractures can be either large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is impacted percussion, cleavage, fractures from falling on stones, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if the fracture penetrates through to the membrane underneath the bone, or it is on top of the bone, and this wound is large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	 And if the wound is healed into the bone as thinly as a hair, and the crack is small, it is called "hairline" fracture.
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	 And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or something similar, and it introduces a bone fragment into the lower part, and the fracture lines are level like a potter when making over the pots.
si entre li piere dedens.	 If the arrow enters within [the body].
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	 And this occurs more often in those who have a moist head of bone, as in a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	 and it happens in all these ways of breakage, as small pieces are disconnected, like bones.
et je em parlerai en son leu.	 I will speak about its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And we shall know all ways of breakage by the dislocation above them, and the inquiry into their cause, and by the corruption of the flesh that is on top.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hairy resemblance is known by those who, when the bone has been uncovered and scraped above it, the breakage appears black.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of breakage, beware of the patient's accidents; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting bile, loss of understanding, extension, paralysis, fever ague, and the eyes to come out and redden, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see a doubtful accident, and you hope for salvation, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	When the navrez comes first to you and it is in winter, then remove the bone before the fourteenth day at the muzzle.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue below the bone is corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	 And if the fracture of the bone comes up to the membrane that covers the brain, then you must cut the split part like this:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	 And it is that you take the patient's head and expose the bone in all ways you can, and over the shape of the wound as much as you can, and if blood discharge comes to reveal the bone or abscesses appear, help him with what is needed, and it is that you fill the cavity with damp cloth soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	 And make the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed and ensure no more bleeding occurs.
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	 Then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done in two ways of workmanship.
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 The first way is that you cut narrowly ahead (in front) and this is the form:
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then insert another cutting tool larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	 And the second method is that you have many diverse sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp-pointed, and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	 And work lightly, lest you wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	 If the bone is hard and projecting, you must bore around it lightly so as to administer sizes with drills, not piercing beyond the bone of the skull, and should have a margin or circle above the point that does not let the point pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	 and you must have more than one, so that each comes into its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all bones.
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	 and this is the shape of three types of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	 The quality to pierce around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and turn it with your fingers until you feel that the bone is pierced;
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	 then replace the needle somewhere else a little afterward, and do this all around, then cut the incision in the bone gap that is between the fractures, and do it as subtly as possible, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand, or any of the tools you have such as pliers, tweezers;
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	 and ensure that you do not touch the brain nor the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	 and when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if it is necessary that you reset the sharpness that has remained in the bone to any other tool resembling a knife, but it must be thinner and more delicate than the other knives.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	 And if something remains of small bones, no scales, lightly extract them with instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 then treat the wound with linen cloths and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	 And another method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is more severe.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	 and he strongly commands, and this is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you expose a part of the bone, where the open break moves, so that when you have exposed that part, you place it under the head of this lever-like instrument, as follows in shape:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	 And do not cut it from one side, and the parts are sharp on two sides, so that you cut towards the bone.
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	 then strike a small hammer on it, so that you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is underneath.
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 if it is pressed against the bone, lightly extract it, for you can break it senselessly and out of fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate through to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it is necessary to smoothen them out afterwards, and remove the scales with a sharp rasp of various sizes, in order to provide the most suitable solution for each case, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	Then pass over with a large rasp, and afterwards with smaller ones, and continue doing so until it is smooth.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	 In each of the other hairy forms or subtle fractures, it is necessary that you apply a remedy according to its nature.
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	 and this is not something that can be replied to by him who has put his study into this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	 And if the wound is exposed, it is necessary that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, moisten it in rose oil, and place it on the wound.
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	 Then take another linen cloth folded double (into two or three), moisten it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth.
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	 and do it more gently than you can, so as not to burden the wound, then administer more (linen) below, but do not strain it any more than necessary to cover the wound.
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	 And let it rest for a day or two, until the abscesses are soothed, then release it, and administer medicines as if with lilies' roots, and barley flour, and incense powder, and Aristolochia, and similar things.
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	 Make powder of these things, and place it on the wound, and immediately administer reliable medicines without biting.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	 And ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave ointment or scabs on it, because when scabs accumulate on the brain's cloth, they will rot and cause great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 For if you place anything biting on it, it will rot from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, if any bad accident happens to the patient as we have said, it is doubtful that he will recover his senses.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	 And if blackness does not come violently except for the medicine that has been placed there, which has this effect, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil, mix them with linen cloth, and apply it to the affected area.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then cure it in the manner of the treatments that are required, until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	 Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, because they are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	 And the one below is cartilage and does not break, unless it swells or twists, then it heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	 If one of the two parts is broken, then you should place your little finger or thumb into the nose and align the fracture within the index finger and at the nostril exit, until the nose returns to its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 And do it gently, ensuring that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part near the neck, and the arm cannot come to its place, then you must align it with the head of a straight stick, about a finger's breadth.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	 If the break is in two parts, then do the same thing, and hurry to restore it as soon as possible if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If it is not in two parts, then after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, bind the wound with strips of linen on top of the head, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	 Or you bind from another side, if there is a break there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	 And the strips should be as thick as they fill the wound on the head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said to some restorer that one should moist the tents with butter, and to stir each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	 It does not seem to be good to me, but they should be moistened in the mixture of egg whites and flour.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 Wait for the swelling to subside, until the bones are hard, and the cartilages have stiffened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	 And sometimes feathers from geese are used in place of swellings, and if soaked in linen cloth and held together, the break is kept, and the patient is made to breathe.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	 or do whatever you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	And if an abscess breaks out while you are working on it, put either beeswax or softened cotton in oil of roses, or a pinch of turmeric.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	 If an abscess does not come out, apply a plaster on the outside, made of flour from figs and incense powder mixed with egg white, then place light poultices on top, but do not bind it too tightly.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	 And if the break in the neck is small and it breaks into small pieces, take appropriate instruments for this, then make an incision, and treat with things that are healing and binding, such as plasters and ointments suitable for this.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if there is no wound within the nails, treat it with tenets, and place plasters of linen until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	Of the fracture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is fractured beneath and there is no wound outside, and the break is only external, but not broken in two, it is curved within, if this can be recognized easily.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	 If the break is in the right part, you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	 And if the break is in the left jaw, insert your right index finger into it gently and adjust it to the other side with the other hand, and hold evenly.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated by 2, then you must administer an extension of 2 parts, until it is even.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	 And if the teeth move or fall out, hold them with a thread of gold, silver, or silk, then put cotton on the broken jaw and place a double cloth over it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	 Place a broad and well-made cushion or an equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it above the muscles that you can reach, and command the patient to rest and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	 And if you see that the shape changes (dislocates), dislocate it again on the third day, and then reset it to its correct position.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	 Apply a poultice on top of it (the dislocated joint), using flour from the mill and egg or meal from a plantain after you have removed the cartilage.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	 and put a light linen poultice on top of it (the reset joint), if the poultice swells, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until it heals.
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	 It often heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if an abscess swells up, bring what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	 And if there is a fracture and wound together, beware that no part of the bone is removed.
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	 Use subtle instruments for the removal of the fractured parts.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, dilate it with fire according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the bone fragments and there is none left over, stitch up the wound if it is wide, and put on one dressing suitable for this purpose to promote healing until it heals completely.
de la forcele	From the armory (or forceps)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	 The broken bone breaks many times toward the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	 it is broken and dislocated in two places, divided into parts, and is the easiest to restore.
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	 or there is a break with an open wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	 And the procedure when the bone break is without an open wound, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder where the bone is broken.
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	 and the other extends the neck toward the affected part;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	 then align the break with your hands so that the shape is as it should be, and there is neither appearance nor deviation.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	 And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as thick as necessary for your needs.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And stretch and lift the limb, and hold the ball (joint) with your hand, so that you align the break as required.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw out the head of the shoulder by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side and place a small pillow under the shoulder, and the attendant should push the shoulder forward, until the bone of the collarbone is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	 Then direct the break to your fingers, and if there is a piece of bone projecting, it is necessary that you cut above it.
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	 and pull the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike it with one of the incisions you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	 but place the limb under this instrument, to prevent the break from splitting apart.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	 and resemble a spoon, not concave, and be as wide as required, according to the size of the bone and the power of the job.
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	 and have two handles, as you see, one wide and the other narrow, as the route of the wound that you made when treating the bone.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 And when you are certain of the abscess heat, if it opens a wound, and if the opening is small, or you doubt about the abscess heat, then use linen cloths and bandages, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscess becomes cold, immerse it in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	 The bone setting, when it has wounds and swellings, is that you put the plaster of flour and egg white on the bone, and place light bandages over it, and put a sphere under the setting if needed.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	 Then take a very wide bandage of one palm width, then place two layers of linen cloth over the bandages, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	 Then take a thin stick of three feet long and wide, and wrap it around that bandage, leaving the ends hanging.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	 And place the iron upon the break, turn the bend upon the neck, and sit the healthy below, and the sick above.
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	 And reset it from each side, and when you see that the ligature holds the break together, and you clearly see that the iron does not move above the broken bone, then watch over it every day, and when the ligature slips, hold it.
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	 And make the patient lie on his back, and place a small pillow under his buttocks, to raise the shoulder up.
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	 Align the break with a sling using the shoulder, or tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident happens, for twenty days.
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	 Then continue with the manipulation (of the dislocation), if it seems necessary, and hold it steady, until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 It is restored within twenty-eight days at most, and in less time for some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	 It hardly ever happens that the shoulder bone breaks or moves far from its place unless it is felt by touch.
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	 If the limb adheres according to the shape of the fracture, and you reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	 Then apply powder from the mill with plenty of egg and soft feathers on top of a folded cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	 Then place a large and thin stick, slightly larger than the shoulder, under which there are no hairs in any part of the shoulder, if there are hairs underneath the stick, use soft feathers of linen to pad it so that the stick is even.
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	 Then hold it all in a great strong bind, so that the bone does not move from its place, and look at the ligament every day.
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	 Whenever it grinds itself, you should straighten and align the bone if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	 And the shoulder will be restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 And when this number is completed, dislocate it and be careful, because it is not the bone that easily goes out of its place again.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front, but not underneath the skin, lift it up and remove the bone, and follow what was said earlier in the setting of a fracture to treat an abscess with hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture (of the) thigh
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	 The thighbone may sometimes be broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 but it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken in the middle, it declines below and causes the patient great pain, and lack of nourishment, and immediately vomits blood, and opens the fractures in the bones that are broken, and he feels it all very acutely.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	 The restoration is that the patient lies supine on his back, and you place the cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and assemble the ribs of both sides to your hands, and be subtle in aligning it in every way possible, until the figure of the bone is as it should be.
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	 Then place plasters and stoppers over the subtle stick of salt or another light rod, and wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move.
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	 and twist the cord round tightly at the back, and hold it in place as needed, and check every hour if the bone has healed, and if it softens, apply pressure again.
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	 and if it is necessary to release the bone due to corrosion or itching in the area, or pain or abscess, then hasten, remove the plaster, and direct those who have come for treatment.
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then reset the bone until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	 Know that the break in the ribs occurs only in large bones near the back and the neck, and they do not bend except because they are slippery.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	 and it feels well at the examination of the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the restoration is that you set the fracture equally as necessary.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put a splint, and tighten it with a stick if needed.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	 And if the rib breakage is tilted downward, then the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, just as with pleurisy, because the bone pierces through the lining.
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	 And it points with tips, and quickly and vomits a large amount of blood, and this is a grave sickness, and the ancients have made great effort to heal it.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say that it is necessary to administer foods that swell the abdomen in order to push out the fracture.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come if they have not arrived.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have arrived, make them healthy.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	 And they said that one puts bladders on the site to suck out pus, and this seems reasonable.
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	 Every time, there is doubt as to whether the bladder will draw out superfluidities to its place due to its weak composition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say to cover the joint with damp linen in hot oil and put tents between the ribs to make it equal on all sides; then it should be cured with pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	 If the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure from the bone that does not pierce the membrane, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to break through the rib and place an instrument under it to press on the bladder.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then it should be cut open, and gently pulled out, and then the two edges of the wound should be sewn together if it is large, and it should be treated with plasters until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	 If an abscess appears, place moistened rose oil-soaked cloths on it and apply it to the affected area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And let it lie still in that place which needs to be incised and abscessed, and let it rest on the side where it should be, until it is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken collarbone
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	 Sometimes a fracture of the neck bones occurs, and pain happens when it bends.
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	 And similarly in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And if this happens and you want to know whether it will be healed or not, take note if his hands become softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick them with a needle, there is no pain felt.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in many ways, and if the hands are silent and feel well when they are pulled or pricked, know that the bone joint is saved, and that the patient should be cured if care is taken.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	 If something similar happens in the spine of the back, and you want to know if it is healed or not, take care if the pain is from soft parts, and if there are accidents that are in hands, and the back gives a jump with involuntary movement;
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And when it has been laid on its stomach, it jumps with involuntary movement.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And if it is prodded on the back and it wants to heal, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	 Know that it is deadly:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Do not labor at all in his treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this accident does not happen to him, it is a lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	 And the treatment is that you reward him if there is an abscess heated, then place on it spine oil or egg yolk oil until it is soothed.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	 Then place one of the comforting and drying ointments on it and tie it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And he must not sleep on that part where he feels pain until it is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	 If any bone is dislocated, it should be covered with vinegar.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 Break the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, then treat it with healing ointment until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	 And if the joint of the bone (shoulder) is broken, which is called the "joint of the cow," push your left hand's thumb against it and align it with the other hand within your power, then place the splint and the steel on top if needed.
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Then bind it (the broken joint), and if there is bone protruding, push it back into place, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the leg bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	 It rarely happens that the bone of the thigh is broken, and if it does happen, there will be only a slight reduction in the size of the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	 Make it long and bend it toward the inside, bringing pain to the patient at the place that is broken and causing it to swell.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	 And the resetting is such that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the break.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	 and know which is the fracture and the shape of it;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	 and if the fracture is only at the neck, then equalize that fracture so that it has its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long or declines within, then make the patient lie on his belly, so that the restoration of the break is presented to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	 And when you have made it equal, place the splint on it, then place a stick or rod on top of the splint and hold the fracture so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	 and apply the lever underneath the ribs, as long as the handles are equal.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	 And if an abscess opens up, do not touch it until the abscess has subsided, and place on it what we have previously said.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	 Then return to restoration, and hold it as needed, if there is no bad accident.
et c’est li maniere.	 And that is the way.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	 The shoulder blade is what is between the ribs and the neck of the shoulder, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways:
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	 The first way is that you take a splint made of coarse material in this shape:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	 And tie the heads together with cords, and lift them up and place the patient on top of it.
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	 Then throw the broken arm over the splint, until it comes to rest, and have a bend in the splint in the middle, then lift it up with some heavy thing or the assistant stretches it downwards.
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	 Then place the mirrors in equal position to each other, at hand level, until the breaker returns as required.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And another method is that one restrains the patient on his bed, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two servants that one holds the one who is above the fracture with his hands, and the other holds below along all the limb, and extends each one to its part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 If you see that the extraction is too strong, hold the ligament under the break, and above the break, and extend each of the attendants to their own part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	 And if the breaker is near the head of the shoulder, then you must place the middle lien under the neck and the other one towards the cost side, beneath the breaker.
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	 And in the same manner if the breaker is towards the cost side, then you must place the lien slightly but without effort, so that the breaker is equal on top of the level and on the cost side.
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 Then you must equalize the breaker as required and hold it in place if no abscesses come up.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	 And if abscesses come up, do not hold it in place for more than 7 days, and put soft linen soaked in rose oil on top of them until the abscesses are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	 Then hold, and the method of holding is that you place the elbow on the dislocation, then bring the arm above the shoulder, and put your hand on the shoulder or the chest;
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	 And cover it, and hold above the shoulder and the arm so that the arm is in its place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	 And if you doubt that the bone is moving, use splints, and place a larger and stronger splint than the others on the dislocation, and have two spaces between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the dislocation three fingers of each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	 Then tighten (or compress) on the studs (possibly referring to a splint), as I said at the beginning of the chapter concerning fractures, more firmly and less when loosening.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	 And if you see the position of the studs (possibly referring to a splint) and the tightening, as we have said, when restoring the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to heal until the seventh day, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 Then observe every three hours the healing (or the suture), that no inflammation arises there or pus comes to the limb because it is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	 And if no such accidents occur, do not loosen (or remove) the sutures before three days or more. Let the patient lie on his back and have his hands on his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	 And place a bandage of evenly-cut linen underneath the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the fractured limb does not move, or the tendons are not softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	 If the direction is by the virtue of medicine, and they are given meat as we have previously mentioned, in such a manner that the meat is first finely minced.
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And when it begins to heal, if it becomes thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	 It is customary that the shoulder and leg should be healed within forty days of all this.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And then it must be dislocated and warm baths and herbal treatments should be administered to direct its position.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the stricture is deformed and blocked, it will take days or two months to dissolve.
de la brisure du bras	In case of a broken arm:
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	 The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "forearm," one of which is small and this is the one that follows the elbow.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	 And the others are large, and he who is beneath, turns towards the small hole.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	 Sometimes only the large bones break, or sometimes both the large and small ones, and sometimes it happens together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	 When the small bones are broken, the repair and healing are easy.
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 And when the large bones are broken, the healing is bad, and they grieve more than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small boil that has been broken, one should extend it slightly and make it level.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	 And if it is a large fracture, then it must be set harder;
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	 and extend it towards the keyhole, and press down on the handle of the hand higher than the others, and the small finger lower than the others, and let the patient cross his arms over himself, and the keyhole in front of him higher, so that the patient does not feel any pain.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 Then extend your arms to the part below yours (the patient's), or one attendant should be on one side and another above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 And then the mirror adjusts it to its equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	If the break is in several places, put each one back in its place, and if there is any displacement that pricks the bone, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	 And if there is an open wound with the fracture, I have discussed it in a specific chapter.
si pren la cure.	 Take care (of the patient).
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	 And if at the beginning of the reset there are abscesses that burst, anoint the linen cloth made of rose oil and white beeswax, neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 Place (the cloth) on top gently until the burst abscess is soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	 Then remove the beeswax, apply the plaster of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then place the sticks (splints), and the splint of the fracture should be further out and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	 And know that it must have six splints or more depending on different positions.
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	 Whether the fracture is in one bone, or two.
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	 And hold it more above the break than elsewhere, and all day less in loosening, as I said at the beginning of the chapter.
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	 The bandages that are above the break should be soft and moist, not hard nor rough;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 And let the thread, with which it is held, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And hold the limb and the joint afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	 If any bad accidents come to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then you must irrigate the limb with hot water until the itching is eased.
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 Let the limb not rest narrowly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 And then begin the binding again, and if the joints are weakened and the bones dislocated, or something similar, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the urine cannot reach the member because it is too narrow, you must soften it with a little medicine, and leave it like that for some days, until the urine flows into it, and then hold it closed.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of the things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo (the binding) until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	 Or, around it then, after that you bind its neck with your hands, and let its neck be even, and guard against movement and turning, and sleep on its back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 And know that this break is restored within 30 or 35 days, and perhaps in 20 days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the break of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that at the back of the hand and in us at the fingers, there are few breaks, but it only occurs multiple times.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	 And when the plant (or joint) of the hand is broken or bent, the patient must lie crosswise, and sit straight before him equally.
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	 Then place his hand on the extended cloth, and the attendant extends the broken bones and makes them equal, placing them correctly until they are well joined.
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	 And apply the plaster and poultice, if an abscess does not come, then place a splint according to the size of the limb.
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	 And it should be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	 And if the fracture is at the front, around the navel of the thigh, make a bandage of cloths and instruct the patient to bind it on their broken thigh.
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	 Then bind a long strip of cloth and make it as wide as the palm of the hand, and bind it, as necessary.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the break is on the outside [of the bone], then you must place a splint above and another below in the sole, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind it completely around the hand, and compress the ligament between the fingers.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	 And if the fracture comes to any of the fingers, whether it is the back or the front, set it straight, as necessary.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	 And bind with the palm and if you see one that is crooked, place a small straight splint to lift the fracture and do not allow it to move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	 And if the fracture is in any other fingers, such as the index or one of the others, set it straight and bind it to the healthy finger that follows.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	 Or tie them all together tightly, as is appropriate, or place a splint upon it, as one would a pouch.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	 and take care in the restoration and arrangement of an abscess, and treat those who come for it, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	 The bone of the thigh is often broken, and it is well seen when it twists forward and backward.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	 And the restoration is that one ties the ligament above the break, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	 The patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his ligament equally on his side.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	 And this is when the break has entered the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the thigh, it is one of the ligaments toward the knee, and the other ligaments below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	 If it is near the knee, then the ligaments should be loosened at the knee, and the extension should be below.
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 Then put the mirrors the bone equal to its two hands, as it should be according to its natural shape, and then place the splint, and the ligature, if an abscess does not come up.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	 And if there is an abscess burning, let it be appeased first, then return to your work and to your care.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	 The ligature is made in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	 It is necessary that you wrap above the break and bind it firmly with one or two layers, and remove the excess, then turn the leg until the heels come to the root of the thigh, and push the long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee, and bring the end of the thread up.
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	 Then turn towards the leg and the calf, then bind with bands, then place on the fracture splints, and place a splint on the bone of the leg.
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	 Use a bandage of soft cloth measuring about 12 fingers between the leg and the calf to equalize the bindings, then start binding in the form of 3 or 4 turns on the splint.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	 and as you go higher up the splint, loosen the bindings.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	 Then insert the threads between the leg and calf that you had placed earlier, bind three splints above them, then go back below the top thread to the foot end until you reach the heel.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 Keep it immobile in its place, then leave it like that, so that no abscess or inflammation or any similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	 And if it happens, dislocate [the bone], and align that which comes out, as we have said many times.
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	 If there are broken bones protruding, it is necessary to set them, if possible.
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	 And if one cannot, then it is necessary to break the bone and draw out marrow.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	 And heal as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	 Sometimes the thighbone is broken in such a way that splints are set on it, as in the shoulder or arm.
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	 However, in this kind of restoration, the patient does not necessarily recover.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	Know that the thigh is restored within one day, or a little more or less, according to the various complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	of the road of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint there occurs little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 If it breaks, it is not so much a fracture as a fissure or a wound that causes pain everywhere and feels painful.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	 The restoration is such that one equalizes what is rounded to its sides until it is assembled and moves as much as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	 Then place the arm-brace, and if needed put a round staff there, and hold it as required, then check all the placements that we have mentioned in other breaks, like an abscess or something similar.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Keep applying to each case whatever is needed, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the leg fracture
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, one is called correctly "badger," and the other is called "fox.
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 And the break occurs in a similar way as it happens in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is the same as that of the arm, and the work is all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the thin bones are broken, they turn forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	 And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen.
et torne desoz.	 and turns under.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	 Then apply extension, make it even, and bind the limbs equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	 However, if the fracture is deformed and there are several parts, the extension should be less and lighter;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 align it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	 And when you have completed your work, take two rods with crossbars that support the leg from one side and the other, and be of the length of the leg from the knee to beneath.
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	 then wrap it in two layers of bandages above and below, and bind it in the middle so that the leg will not decline to the right or left, and thus it is good.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	 And no one administers the iron rod of the leg length, and it is bound, and the leg is held still, and properly done in the break where there is pain.
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	 And move the leg every day to see if there is an abscess or other incident.
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat it until it heals.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no fracture, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a fracture and the toes also, and there is no cure except with many positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	 If there is a fracture of the foot bone and you see the bones pressing against each other, then put the patient's foot on the ground as if he wants to walk, then put your foot on his foot where the bones are raised, then press it until they return to their place.
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	 Then put the splint and padding on it, and under the foot of the patient place a small flat table with two even feet, then hold the foot forward, then, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three or four days have passed, loosen the linen, for you will find the bones even, whether they are broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	 And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the hand's bones.
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	 Then insert a splint along the length of the broken bone and make it slightly wider, then put the foot under a table as I said before, and bind it tightly.
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	 and if there are two or three, or more broken bones, put a splint over each bone according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the table under the foot.
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	 and let it stand above the table's head away from the belly of the foot, so that it covers it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	 And you must not forget the other things I said about broken bones, from what we have said before.
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	 And attend to each accident as needed.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the wrist bone fracture
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	 When the bone of nature (hip) breaks the woman, make her sit upright, then lean her towards the lower back and hold from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	 Then fill the hollow of nature (pelvis) of the patient with cotton and put in as much as will fit.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	 Then turn the woman, lift her lower back little by little, and then pull the cotton out until it comes to the entrance of the pelvis, and the bone returns with the head.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	 And when she wishes to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, reset it, and do this for seven days or more.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	 The break will be restored, and if you see, take a bladder of goat's skin, and attach a tube to the end, and blow all the air out of the bladder into the pelvis.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	 Blow air into the hollow of the thigh, until the bladder is inflated within.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	 The nature will heal the break.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then fill it with cotton and leave it thus for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	 And when the shaft of the arm bone is broken, whether for a man or a woman, restore it as we have said in the thigh bone.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 These breaks shall not be concealed from one who applies his study and experience to them; read my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	 For the break indicates in many positions the right way of restoration.
enten le donques.	 And so on.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	 In a spear when it is broken, take an owl's gourd and insert the spear into it.
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	 Then wrap cloths around [it], and leave it for three days or more; and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	Of breakage with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for one who has a breakage with wound, especially if it is large such as the bones of the leg or shoulder, that it be healed now, so that the wounds that we have mentioned bear witness to it.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound heals, anoint it with vitriol (if you have no other), then immediately begin to heal the breakage in that same hour or day, unless abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for healing to begin, allowing the abscesses to subside; do not touch it on the third or fourth day as it may cause harm.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks out near the opening, it should be gently set back into place with slight extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	 If the extension is not equipped for you to equalize with your hands, then straighten it with this instrument made of iron, which is 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	 and therefore it is necessary for the surgeon to take 3 or 4, according to what is needed in each cure of breaking.
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	 and be round and slightly large, so that it does not bend during the compression on the member at your work, and sharp in front, and thick from the middle to the tip, like this:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	 And it is called "palainche," because the crooked neck should be placed on top of the prominent bone (i.e., the cheekbone).
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 and push it once, until it goes back to its original position, and make sure it is even on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the tool cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut the head of the bone, so that the tool has power over it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	 And if you cannot reset the bone as we have said, then strike it with an appropriate instrument, either a chisel or a hammer, within your power.
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	 Then carve off the protruding part in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterward, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	 Continue until it is in its place, then wet the cloth with black sticky wine, and clean it thoroughly if it is heated.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	 and do not put any oil or other substance on the wound that could cause pus and corruption to form.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	 Then administer ointment when you have reset the bone, and leave the wound open, and cover it all around, according to the size of the wound, and be careful that the wound is not constricted with a fracture.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	 And many times this has been done by foolish people, and they have caused the patient to become sick or die, or corrode at some point.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 And the bindings should be softer and more flexible than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	 And if the wound is bad or large and you doubt that a bad accident may come to it, as we have said, and you feel pain at the place, do not put ointment on it.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 But wrap around it instead of ointment, with hard cloths, and tie them up.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And after a day or two, when the wound has begun to swell, take away what you have put on it and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as healing ointment made from four substances and similar ones.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, as long as it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limbs should be aligned in such a way that the bone moves downward gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it passes for many days and cannot heal but again bows, you know that there are small bone fragments; therefore, you must press the wound with force, and remove all the dislocated bone fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula or other form of corruption comes to the place, you must treat it, according to what is written in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	 And when the bone is broken and exposed through a limb, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder, or similar large members, do not draw it out, for many times death occurs. But let it be until it can be drawn.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	 perhaps after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if possible.
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 and if you cannot, then leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	The burning cautery commands the sick to let their hairs grow long and even; if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	 Often after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, a terrible sight is to be seen on the appearance of the limb.
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	 And perhaps the limbs cannot perform their natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	 Therefore, take care for ourselves.
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	 If you administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, sarcocola, acacia and similar things, take one of these things or all together, crush them with a sharp stone or grind them with pestle and mortar, and then mix them with vinegar, egg white, or honey.
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	 And he places it on a bed of ashes, and holds it tight, and does not loosen it for many days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	 Then he dislocates (it) again and begins another, until the swelling is gone;
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	 or you hold it on a well-made plank.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	 for the properties of the plank are such that they remove all the swelling from the limbs;
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	 and if the swelling has turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed by striking the top of it and making the excess visible.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 or you grate (it) with any scraper until it is removed, and treat it until it heals.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	The limb which is weak after being treated
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	 When the bone fracture has been restored and stays after that, the limbs remain weak and delicate due to many causes.
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	 Because one was tied too tightly and was not tied as it should have been.
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	 because there were too many bindings, and the limbs could not receive the necessary nutrients.
ou por multitude d’arosement;	 due to excessive bleeding.
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	 due to excessively large movements, not at the right time.
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	 because he has little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	 And the cure is to make the patient eat, and make the body strong, until the blood is multiplied in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	 and administer baths, and give joy and pleasure.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	 then put wax on the member, so that the wax attracts great nourishment, and the wound often bleeds cold water, until the nourishment returns to the member.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	 And return to its natural shape.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	twisted limb after health
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	 When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless do not lose its natural function.
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	 do not believe the foolish ones who say one must break the limb entirely anew, and many have done so in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	 and this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and by chance death.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	 Nevertheless, if the nodes and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they be cauterized with hot water, or herbs softening should be cooked, such as mallow leaves, radishes, and medlot roots, and similar things.
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	 And you make the plaster soothing, as one well knows how to do, and you take the musk of vismalve, and mix it with linseed oil or camomile oil, and apply the plaster on top.
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	 And you take figs softened in oil, and grind them with the straw of wheat, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes, the dislocation is opened by rubbing continuously and for a long time with moist hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Movements should be brought to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	 And if the twisting is swollen and hardened like stone, it requires to be cauterized, so it must be covered up to the bone, with a subtle incision made lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	 And put poultice and linen in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in any limb, it must now be reset carefully.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	 For if it is delayed, the wound swells, and perhaps it is reset to its place.
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	 For this reason, one must not move it when swollen.
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	 Often causes spasms and other pains.
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	 However, when this happens, if you can make the patient purge, let him rest until all abscesses are appeased.
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 Then immerse the limb in hot water and oil, gently reset it, and treat each member according to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have arranged the chapters on shoulder dislocations from head to foot.
des mandibules	of the lower jaws (jawbones)
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	 It rarely happens that the jaw is dislocated outwards, and dislocations of both occur in two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	 or they are slightly displaced from their places and softened a little.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	 or they are completely dislocated and hang towards the bottom, with the saliva running from the mouth that he cannot hold, cannot close his mouth, and wraps his tongue around with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When a dislocation is small, it often returns with multiple displacements.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	 And if it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly, without delay.
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	 and in such a manner that the assistant holds the head of the patient, and pushes one of his fingers into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is in two parts.
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	 and the other hand should be open, to hold evenly.
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 instruct the patient to soften, his jaws, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the patient must keep the meat equal, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	 If the resetting is painful, especially if it is both jaws together, apply sharp hot water and oil, until they are reset easily.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	 Do not delay in resetting, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	 And when they (the dislocated limbs) are reset equally, the patient's mouth should close well and soften with a poultice made of rose oil and wax, then gently tie it with a few bandages.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	 The patient should sleep on his back, with his arms between two pillows, so that they do not move to the left or right, nor try to move at all, but take soft food until the pain is gone, and the jaws are sewn.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And then eat whatever he wants lightly, and do not make an effort to open the mouth to eat or drink, until the jaws are well sewn and healed.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jaws cannot be set right within an hour and are not restored to their place, fever and usual symptoms may occur, and possibly a stomach problem or vomiting of clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	 And when you see this, then know that it is destruction.
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	 and many who experience it die within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the noose
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The noose cannot dislocate from the inside along its length and width, but it can be dislocated at times from the outside, and one feels it.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	 And the restoration is that the patient lies face down on his back, and extends his arms.
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	 then press the place firmly with your palm, and it will return.
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	 then put the splint and bandage on it, and hold it.
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	 and the head that is towards the side cannot dislocate.
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	 if it should not do so, and if it does dislocate once, reset it to its place, as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	 then put the splint and bandage on it, hold it, and instruct the patient to rest until he is well.
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 And similarly, the head of the shoulder is repositioned when it is dislocated from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	Of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	 Know that the dislocation of the shoulder occurs in three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	 The first is when it dislocates at the part below the socket.
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	 And the second one is to the part of the thigh;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	 And by chance, it dislocates in the upper part, and this happens little.
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	 and it does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, and it does not dislocate inside due to the nerves.
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	 And it often dislocates downwards towards the buttock, especially in those who have little flesh, for these leap out suddenly.
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 In those with enough flesh, it leaps out very little and returns very little.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes it happens to some men that they receive a blow or break and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated due to this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	 Therefore, you must examine it, as long as you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	 And then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	 Dislocations are known when they move downwards towards the buttock, and you should distinguish between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	 You will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and press down on it with your thumb so that you can put the head of the shoulder back into place, just like setting a bone.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	 The patient cannot return their hand to its original position or make any movement.
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	 If it is dislocated upwards, do not hide it, for you can feel it clearly with your thumb.
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 This type of dislocation is not only able to be reset when it is new, but also if the infant is ill.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	 The manner is that the attendant lifts the hand of the patient up, then places their fists under it, and forces the joint upward to its place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	 And the ministers place the hand, stretch it upwards, then put it underneath;
si venra hastanment.	 It will come immediately.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	 And if it does not come as we have said in hands for several days, then the patient should be bathed in hot water.
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	 and he is given a soothing and calming balm, such as the decoction of elder and fenugreek and melilot in hot water, and it should be administered.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	 Then the patient should be made to lie on his back, and a cloth of equal thickness, not too soft nor too hard, is placed under the affected area. Then the minister holds the heel of the patient while pulling the arm of the patient with care.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	 And another assistant holds the head of the patient still, so it does not move downwards.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	 This shoulder returns immediately, and if you see it dislocate again in this way:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	 and it is that you have someone who is larger than the patient present.
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	 and stand opposite the patient's side, push his shoulder under the patient's armpit, lift the armpit upwards so that the patient hangs on the arm.
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 and another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too weak, they cannot bear any heavy thing, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	 It is also reset in another way:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	 and it is that a long needle is stuck into the ground so that the head of the shoulder is as round as a pea, but not too thick or too thin.
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	 Then lay the patient down, but with soft sheets under him, and the patient should be long on the bed.
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	 Extend the affected hand below towards the other side, and the joint will quickly return to its place.
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	 And if it does not return by all these things we have said, perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 Take a stick of two hands' length (approximately 91 cm) and four fingers' width (about 20 cm), having the head rounded for easy insertion deep into the anus, in this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	 fold the top of the stick with cloth so it does not hurt the patient, then insert it into the anus of the patient.
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	 extend one arm above the stick, place the patient's shoulder on the stick, place the hand at the top of the stick, then place the other arm above an elbow-sized support and extend both hands below, leaving the body hanging from another side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	 the joint is now revealed.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when the joint is reset, whichever way it may be, you must place an equal piece of woolen cloth beneath the joint; then apply an ointment made with flour from the mill, along with incense and egg yolk over the entire shoulder and around it; then hold the limb below the joint, and twist the linen thread around the ointment, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in place.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	 It is necessary that he eats little food, until the limb is comfortable, because it will heal faster.
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	 And then move it more after five or seven days, and let it move.
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	 If it is hardened and not softened, it is healthy.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is out of place due to moisture or for some other reason, then you must administer fire cauterization at three places as stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	 And if you do all this and it dislocates after seven days and the joint does not hold together and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is crushed or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	 And know that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	 A dislocation that is towards the hip or the buttocks, or behind, is caused by violence and stretching of hands, and another treatment is administered.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Treat it until it heals.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes pain in the member, and slow movement, then the patient uses warm baths many times, until the pain subsides and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation cost
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	 Know that the dislocation of the shoulder is dislocated at the point and returns at the point.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	 And it is dislocated from all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not repositioned, because it can be seen clearly and felt.
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	 And it dislocates according to each shape.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 And when you join the bone of the patient with the healthy one, you should see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is thick, and cannot bend the arm nor reach the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	 And you must reset it in the same way as an abscess comes to a head, because if an abscess comes to a head, it would be harmful to reset.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	 And perhaps it cannot be reset completely in every way, especially when it is at the back.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	 If so, it is worth more than other dislocations, and it is of greater pain, and perhaps death may come from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	 And the restoration [of the shoulder] is such that you extend your hand to both hands.
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	 And his arms should be spread out, and the hands to the mirror according to the cut around, outside and inside, and push the joint to its sockets together, or to the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it will return when you fold your hand to the other, and press from the root of the palm on the side that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	 And if it does not want to return to its place, apply strong traction;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	 and two men should stretch the arm, and one should pull it, so that it does not move during traction;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	 Then turn the arm on each side, and when you have wrapped a double long and wide cloth around it;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	 And when the mirror has joined the joint to his hand, apply some oil to soften the joint, then push the joint together, until it returns.
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 And when it is in place, put a dry plaster made with egg on it and hold it in position, and keep the arm around the patient's neck for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	 And if the joint is closed in its place, then leave it alone;
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	 and if you see that the joint does not hold together well, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set.
puis le deslie.	 Then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	 And if it hurts after the reposition of the joint and swells, then wash and rub well, and press until it is soothed.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	 Or place a sheepskin pad over the joint, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and make it enter water.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	 And when it swells, gently rub the joint, then place the arm over it, and then immerse it in water.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	 If you see it, place warm and moist sheep's wool on it and bind it up.
si revenra a sa disposition.	 It will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	 The joint of the hand becomes dislocated, but it returns to its place more easily than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	 Immediately, you must put it back in its place as soon as it is dislocated, unless the joints are swollen or hot with abscesses.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	 And the repositioning is that you place the affected hand on a table, and extend the fingers of your assistants, and align the mirror to it so that the back of your hand rests on the appearance of the joint, and push until it returns.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	 Therefore, you must ensure it is properly set.
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 Place the patient's hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, place the patient's back of their hand on the table, and have them place their other hand on the appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	 If it returns to its place now, that is good.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If not, press the affected area with plasters, and let it rest to start healing.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	 And if the patient cannot bear it, and you cannot set it in place after any days, then the dislocation remains twisted.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	 Furthermore, the patient should not be harmed excessively as long as his hand is injured and cannot exert any force.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	 Therefore, know that nerves or arteries have been cut.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 If there is no other tool available except to straighten it with a fire cautery, it does not have any other value.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is injured, apply the plaster as we have said, then strap and leave for five days, then unbind and let be.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it cannot move well and there is no swelling, moisten with warm water and rub until it is healed.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	 The fingers of the hand are occasionally dislocated on both sides, occasionally at the back of the palm or the belly.
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	 Then push the dislocated finger back into place as it returns, then hold the finger's head and bend it towards the side where it is disjointed.
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	 And let it rest for two days, then equalize it on that day.
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	 Then bind it, as we have said, and dislocate it for a day, and make it move, then tie it back in place.
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And do this often until it is narrow, and do the same thing if it is dislocated at the stomach of the hand, and do what you have done before, until it heals.
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 And do the same thing when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	When the vertebrae of the back are dislocated.
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebrae of the back or neck are dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, for death soon follows the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	 And the signs are that the emissions leap without will, and it cannot be held; and many times, some limb is softened, either both knees or the two arms or one.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	 And many times, the spine becomes mute at four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	 The dislocation that occurs at the back is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	 The treatment is to check if the gilbositez has occurred from birth:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 if it has no cure or healing from the very beginning.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	 And those that come from falling or beatings or similar things, the old ways of cure used to be described with great words, but there is no real benefit in all cases.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 However, I have shortened it according to my intention, and made instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	 I say that in the gilbositez coming at the worst place, there is no remedy or health.
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	 And similarly the one that comes directly between two sides, and cannot be cured except by the one that comes at the back as I said.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	 And it is that the patient should be extended on his face in the same place, and have support beneath him so he does not bruise.
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	 Then insert the iron point into the base of the head and the other at the feet, and tie a rope over the soles of the patient, and another around the ankles, and the knees, and the shins.
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	 and two assistants hold the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, around the two iron points.
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 and they should be tightly closed, the iron points as we have said, and the mirror places his hands on the spine until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	 And if it does not return with this treatment, take a board three feet long and sharpened at one end, place the patient on his side, push the chief of the board under the back, then place the middle of the board on the spine.
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	 And place the mirrors on the opposite head of the table, and press firmly, until it returns to its place.
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 If you see it, do so using the lathe that turns with your hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	 And you insert two pins into the head of the patient's large arm, and between each pin, have about a span of space on either side.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	 And let there be in each pin the lathe turner, and the pins must be firmly set in the ground, so that they do not move.
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	 And between each pin, place the turning pin as in the loom, and have two small pins of a span length to turn the lathe.
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And then tighten the ligament that is between the shoulder blades towards the head, and the other ligament towards the feet at the opposite shoulder blade; each of the ministers turns his shoulder blade to the entire ligament, and the masters align the spine equally as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	 And when it is aligned, place a desiccating plaster with egg white on top, then bandage (it), and then bind with a stick of wood three feet long that reaches the swelling and the healthy part of the spine, then tie with a ligament as we have said, and use warm and subtle poultices until it is healed.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	 And if anything comes at the end of healing, it is necessary to administer softening and calming medicines, along with the stick that we have said before.
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	 And sometimes a piece of wood is administered, and sometimes the appearance appears at the rear spondyle of the back, and it is thought to be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	 This is the bone that opens, which is why one should not have any presumption about it:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 By chance may come death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	 Know that the joints of the neck and the shoulder come out only due to dislocation, they do not come loose like other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	 The joint of the neck is dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	 inside and outside, front and back.
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	 More towards the inside, but less dislocated in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	 And the knowledge of its dislocation within is that when the sick leg is joined with the healthy one, it is longer and the sick person's knee opens wider than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee in fire.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And it is the joint that is dislocated swollen with abscess heat, because the hipbone comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of the one who experiences this happening, is that this event is contrary to those beforehand.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	 And the signs of the one who has it in front, they should be well aligned according to completion.
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	 However, the knee does not bend in pain, and if you want to make it walk, it cannot move forward, and it retains its urine, and when it walks, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of the one whose leg is twisted behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the calf is below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	 The remedies for this kind of dislocation are that you look if the dislocation is old and stays according to its position, without any treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	 And it should not be assumed that there will be recovery in such cases.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	 And in the one whose dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four types of dislocations, hasten that you turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it to the right and left;
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	 In case it returns, it does not need any further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	 And if it does not return in this manner, then you must apply strong pressure to the limb with both hands, or tie it with a rope above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	 and another assistant stretches his hand over it in such a manner that he pushes his hands underneath the buttocks, then tightens a strong rope above the calf.
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	 and others hold the head with the rope.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 They extend upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is raised off the ground all at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common to the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	 If that does not work, it is necessary to treat its appearance.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	 When the dislocation is at the front, it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the root of the thigh, and the limb which is below the joint, then pull the rope up towards the joint, and towards the shoulder.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	 Then take another attendant to hold its arms, and embrace the sick limb's thigh with both hands, and extend it outwards as far as possible.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	 It will return to its place now.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 And this method of dislocation is easier than the others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	 And if you cannot hold it in this manner as we have said, then you must bind the two feet of the patient together tightly with a strong rope above the heels and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two folds more than the others.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	 then hang it from a pole by the head, and suspend it two arms length above the ground.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 then instruct the minister to grasp the thigh, and let another minister be hanging with the patient, who will hold the thigh firmly, as the joint is returning now quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	 And when the dislocation is at an angle, let the patient lie down as we have said in the one with displacement, and tighten the rope around the affected leg properly, and around the body also.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	 Then insert the hot irons, one at the head and another at other places, then push the iron between the thighs towards the patient.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And place damp cloths around it to prevent burning the patient, then extend each assistant away from him, and equalize his hand with the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns (to its place), that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, put it on a table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie down on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	 And when the dislocation is present, you must extend the patient's leg immediately, and as I have said.
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	 And place the hand of the assistant on the upper part of the dislocation, then press with the other hand and push down towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	 And if the dislocation is at the back, you should not extend the patient downwards or lift him up, but rather it should be as when a bed is dislocated at the back, as we have said in the laying on two beds.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	 And place it [the affected limb] on a flat surface, and extend the ligament as we have said before, and press firmly on the joint with the table.
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	 And when the patient extends their legs, they will be even and equal.
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	 Then adjust the thighs, put the splint on, and tie a bandage so that the limb does not move.
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	 And rest for three or four days, then untie it [the bandage], and put the splint on again.
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	 If you see that they [legs] are even, tie it [the bandage], as before, and leave it for three days.
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 Then untie it [the bandage], and make him walk well, until the limb is comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	The dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	 The thighbone (femur) is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	 That is to say, from within and outward, and backward.
et ne desalue point devant.	 And does not dislocate forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	 And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, then he is dislocated.
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	 and the restoration of all is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on his face, and place his foot on your feet.
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	 Then take the thigh with both hands, pull it towards you between your arms, and bend the two sides of the thigh.
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	 And another assistant extends his foot until the thighbone returns to its place, and the signs are that he slightly bends his leg at the knee.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	 And apply the plaster on it, and immobilize the leg at the knee for three or four days, then release it.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And do not make the patient walk at all, until the limb is comfortable.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not broken, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of dislocation, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes bruised, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	 The signs are that the ankle is swollen, and it bends towards the part where it is dislocated:
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 The reductions (dislocation corrections) are easy, and they should be extended lightly to the hands only when relaxed.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	 And when it is dislocated completely, you must make the patient sit upright, and hold the limb (the affected arm) by the ankle above the ankle.
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	 Then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, then to the left hand twice, then lift it up and push the foot up forcefully.
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	 And do it as we have said, by pushing and pulling on the limb;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	 if it goes back into place, that's good;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	 but if not, repeat the procedure as it will return;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	 and if it cannot return in this way, place the patient on his back on the ground, drive the spit firmly into the ground between his knees, and tie cloths around so as not to prick the patient.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	 then mark the minister the thigh, and another minister extends the limb to his hands or elbow, so that he holds it up at the neck of the limb.
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	 then each minister extends himself evenly, and the passerby remains close between the thighs of the patient to hold him down when stretching.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 Then place the patient's hand with the dislocation equal to yours, and another servant hold the healthy leg below it, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	 And when it is positioned, apply the plaster and the cloth, mold it firmly, tie it to the leg, and guard the nerves which are behind the ankle, so that the bindings are not too tight.
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	 Then leave it for two or three days, and if the bindings loosen, tighten them again.
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	 Then untie it on the third day or the fourth, and let the patient walk for four days.
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And if he goes before that time, it is not certain that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess opens, you must calm it, as we have said elsewhere, until it heals.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the arms are dislocated, they must be stretched out gently without effort, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	 And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or neck, you must make the patient sit on a flat surface or table straight, and put your foot on what opens the joints, then press firmly on your foot until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	 And when it is even and there is no opening, place a table under the foot of the shoulder, then hold firmly and leave it for three days, then release.
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 let it rest until it heals.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is to be restored, many times the patient dies.
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	 Do not be hasty in the cure, if you are not wise in the art and have not practiced it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful, do not be bold.
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	 And at the beginning, apply soothing ointment on the abscess and leave the patient in God's hands, if you see no hope of healing.
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	 And when there is hope, reset the limb to its place, so that the abscess heals.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	 And when the limb is in place, apply soothing ointment on the abscess and treat the wound as required, using dry cauterizing ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	 And if there is a dislocation with fracture and broken bones, set them and do as we have said in simple illnesses.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 And beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for it will harm you according to your Creator, and by the wisdom of your weapon and body.
