O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	To you, my very dear son, I have completed this book that is the end of the knowledge of medicine together with its fullness, and I have made an end of it through its explanations and declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it came to me in a vision that I will complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, namely "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And since the work of hands is lost in our region and is alienated from all things in every way, the science and craft are perished, and nothing remains of them but the small descriptions in books by the ancients that the hands have corrupted.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this comes the errors and vanities, and are closed the intentions and is alienated the sciences.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems that I wish to revive it together with the organization of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and I will come together with the forms of cautery instruments, and the other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them, as necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no good masters of hands are found in our time, the art of medicine is lost.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And one who undertakes [this] must be skilled in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, to know the judgment of members, their forms and connections and separations of them, having knowledge of bones, nerves, joints, and the number of bones, and the movement and resting places, and the location of their issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And for this reason, Hippocrates says that names with the noun are much, and with work is little; similarly in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you in the beginning of this book that one who is not knowledgeable about the matters previously mentioned, should be careful not to err and not to operate on humans; thus I have seen many times more of those who engage themselves in this science and abandon their knowledge and sense experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa .i. apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a foolish man who cut open one abscess of scrofula from the neck of a woman, and cut the arteries of her neck; therefore so much blood came out that the woman fell dead in her hands.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens .iij. jors.	And I saw another man who pulled an arrow from an old man, and the arrow was large; it took a piece of the bladder with it, and the man died within four days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to treat him, and I saw the condition of the patient and the size of the arrow, and knew well that if it were cut he would die.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui prist en cure .i. duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi .i. termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And there was another physician who took care of one of our land's dukes, who had his leg broken and with the break had an open wound. And this ignorant physician pulled the fracture above the wound using strong force, and he did not allow any callus to form at the wound, but he let it in such a state; and he commanded that it should not be dislocated; and he waited until the leg became completely swollen and the toes came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to help him, and I hurried to come and dislocate the leg; and when I dislocated it, it was at peace and did not feel any pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways of corruption were already confirmed or the member, and it could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to spread through the member until the member was completely destroyed.
Et vis .i. autre mire qui effondra .i. apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And there is another type of sore that becomes swollen, then inflamed due to the malice of its dominion.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	When a sore that is full of melancholic humor is not in the place where it can all be removed, one should not touch it with iron.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en .ij. divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, dear son, it is necessary that you know that the work of hands is divided into two divisions: one in which there is danger in many situations; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	 Because it is necessary that you protect yourself so that the foolish do not speak ill of you, take your arms in your bosom, and treat your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best means, so that through God's grace you come to salvation and be praised; and leave the diseases that are full of severe pain aside; and remove your weapons from those that make you doubt, and have faith within you so that you can come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	 Galen advises in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of evil diseases lest you be called a foolish person.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	 "I have devised this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and anti-fever medicinal cauteries, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and of the forms of instruments, and of iron cauterizing tools, and of everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and of blistering and wounds, and of the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered and of the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about restoring dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, and of the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Therefore, as we remember the work, it is necessary that I tell you the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of help, and the harm, are the longest and most subtle words and secret responses; and many wise men spoke about this, and agreed with it; and they did not reveal their answers easily, for I shorten it.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que .ij. complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally to all complexions where there is matter, whether it be two complexions: namely, hot complexion with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In hot and dry conditions, some say that cautery is a great help; while others say the opposite: that cautery is of no use for illness that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be used to cure hot diseases with heat or dryness; and it is said by those who say the opposite that cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases in humans.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you understand the body of a man and his moisture with the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree to this statement.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it once by experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And every way, do not interfere except those who have tested it and know by long usage the chapter of cauteries, and the diversity of human complexions, and their dispositions and causes of their diseases, and the occurrences and duration of times; we do not fear other complexions, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the people gathered together and agreed upon the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that cautery with fire is one of the secrets of healing and has greater goodness than cautery with burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For fire is simple, and does not harm any other member unless it touches the one being burned.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	 Burning medicines pass from one member to another by spreading, and bring severe diseases upon the afflicted limbs; and unfortunately, fire may kill the patient due to its high temperature and the goodness of its substance, if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	I have found this by experiment and through the length of service and study that I have put into my art, and it is above the truth of things; therefore I excuse myself for the length of my speech, because I do not wish to reveal the secret concerning fire and its nature, and the quality of work, how it subdues diseases of bodies, as the philosopher says in demonstrating; take this into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, son, when it is appropriate to perform fire cauterization, and they choose friends.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is appropriate in all times, because the harm occurring is due to the help of cauterization; and indeed, if cauterization is for necessary pains except when it cannot wait until a greater evil comes upon the member.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And do not think ever, dear son, as foolish people do; for a disease that is healed by cauterization has no return; and they say it this way, but it is not as they believe, because cauteries are nothing but medicine that changes the complexion, dries the humors that cause pain, and is worth more than other medicines because of its speed in action and the virtue of its work and dominance.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it often happens that the sick person comes according to their complexion and the nature of the disease and its power; and superfluities are gathered within him through the consumption of foods and similar things, unless cauteries are administered where there is little excess and moisture, as in the case of cauterization for pain, and similar things; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And many people do not understand why cauteries are called the rear of medicine, but they do not believe that cauterization is useful after other treatments; however, their beliefs are false, and cauteries are the rear of medicine because when we administer methods of treatment for any illness and they are ineffective, then we administer cauterization, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the rear of medicine, not as the opinion of foolish physicians.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancient ones said that cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, and they did not say this lightly because of the quality of gold and the highness of its substance; and they said that the heads of cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have proven it, and I found that it is true in some men; and cauteries made of gold are more effective than those made of iron, as they say.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And nevertheless, when you heat instruments of gold, you are not sure when it is hot from the color of the gold, and sometimes it cools down; and if heated too much, it causes fire; and thus there is enough hindrance.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And therefore, we use iron cauteries which have been prepared according to our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	I have ordered this chapter concerning the head from neck to feet, so that the path may be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	for the olive oil poultice
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and coldness on the brain, and it is used because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that flow from the head to the eyes and ears, and due to numerous dreams and pain in the teeth and throat, and indeed for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief .iij. nuis ou .iiij., selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is that the patient should be purged by a soluble medicine, cleansing the head four or five times, according to what the virtues and age and the patient's condition can bear; and then make the patient lie down with his head.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses .ij. eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then make him lie crosswise between your hands, place his hands on a soft surface; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your thumbs meet, it will bleed, then heat the cautery called "olivare," which is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os .i. sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren .i. poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse .iij. jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the spot marked with ink, and move your hand up and down while gradually turning it; then lift your hand immediately, if you see a little bone; and if you do not see it, continue to heat the cautery as I have told you until you see the bone; after that, take one pinch of wool and place it in soft cotton within, and put it on the spot, and let it remain for three days; afterwards put a soft cloth soaked in butter on it; and let it remain until the burn is healed; afterwards treat the wound with an ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And as the ancients said, when an overwound wound remains longer, it drains more; and therefore, help it to heal faster.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And some said that one should let the fire cautery burn part of the bone and then heal what is burned from the bone and be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme .i. vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others said that the cautery should be let burn above and push as hard so that a piece of bone is removed as wide as a walnut, which women put in their vaginas because the fluids come out faster; then the wound should be left open for a long time; after that, it should be healed and cured.
Et ces .ij. manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cauteries do not seem good to me altogether, except in some men where there is fear; and it seems to me that I should leave them; for the head is weakened by continuous solutions of nature, as we have witnessed in other members; and even when the head of the patient is weak by nature, the first appearance of cautery seems safer and more beneficial to me, and from this use I work towards salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the ancient pain in the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When the chronic and long-lasting pain comes in the head, the patient should use wormwood and pills called "cochie", and purgatives of the head, oils, and plasters; and if they perform the cautery as we have said before, it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care if the patient's shoulder is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below it with a small amount as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai .i. cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est .i. leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After performing the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as mentioned before, and perform one cauterization known as "vasselz"; it is one place where bellows are put; align your hand so you do not see beyond the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak more about this later; and the cauterizations of the horns should be finer than those used for the midline of the head, and here is the shape:
dou cautere dou chief	head cautery
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc .ij. manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain occurs in a part of the head and the disease spreads to the eye, and the head is purged with various medicines, and other treatments as I have said in the division of diseases are done but it brings no benefit; then cauteries are applied according to two ways, namely medicine heat and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope .i. poc as .ij. chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi .xij. houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi .ij. jors ou .iij.; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cautery of medicine heat is as follows: take a hot iron and remove the bark from it for about two inches, apply one piece to each head, then place the affected area on top of the heated iron in such a way that you can lower the iron onto the skin; when it has been lowered, hold it firmly and leave it for twelve hours; then release it and treat the wound with linen dipped in butter for two or three days.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the treatment with ointments until it heals; and if you see that this does not work, do as I have written for using medicines which burn or for the tenth treatment of burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	 The iron cautery is made in this way.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	 Heat the cautery as follows:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait .i. poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	It is called "clos" because the head of it is shaped like a claw or has about one finger's width of curvature and a small appearance; place it on the painful spot, and hold your hand firmly while you heat the iron slightly, until half of the thickness of the tip is burned; remove your hand to avoid burning the arteries, which are outside, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par .iij. jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	Place cotton in oil and apply it for four days; then put dampened cotton in butter, and then treat the spot with ointment until it is healed; and if you want to cauterize this inflammation with a cautery called "cultellare," at its tip, be careful not to cover the artery in this inflammation that is not old.
de emigraine	of migraines
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When treating migraines as we have previously mentioned in the division of diseases and it does not improve, and you find that cauteries before mentioned in medicine and iron do not help; then it is necessary that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it becomes white; and press gently along the side of the vein for half a finger's length, remove your hand once, hold steady so as not to cover the artery or reach the bone; watch out for the jawbone which mutes when eating, and avoid nerves having sight of the muted part and spasm coming to the patient, also watch out for bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding greatly fears and especially those who do not know and have not been trained and experienced; leave the procedure in progress; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it should be found in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait .ij. coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not help the disease and the patient is enduring, cauterize it on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it heals; and if you see, administer the cautery mentioned earlier or in the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better than that one and more helpful.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain of the ears due to coldness
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold and it has been treated with soluble medicines and other remedies as we have said in the division, and the pain does not subside, then heat this cautery called "poins", here is its form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les .ij. se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait .x. poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After touching all around the sick ear, or around both if the pain is in both, and moving slightly away from the root of the ear since you have marked its position; and place 10 hot cauteries around each ear; after healing the wound until it is healthy.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	The torture that should be cured by fire is not suitable for those that move due to flux, as we have said in the division of diseases; and do not make a fire treatment for things that come from scab or nerve spasm.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de .iij. cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des .ij. levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you treat this type of torture that moves due to flux from the eyes and purges of the head and gargarismes, it is not worth it, therefore you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one in the root of the ear, another slightly further back from the temple, and the third at the corner of the mouth; put the cautery in the part that opens healthy, and make the cautery towards the top of the ear a little below the horn, and another in the temple as long as a thumb; leave the cautery for as long as half of its length is burnt; and this is the shape of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And this is the type of cautery we have mentioned earlier, but it is a little more subtle and requires that the knife be slightly thicker; after curing the place as I have previously said, let it be healed when it is clean.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai .iiij. cauteres: .ij. sus les .ij. cornes dou chief, et .i. emmi le chief, et .i. ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	When paralysis is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then do four cauterizations: two on the two corners of the head, one at the base of the head, one where it is called "vessel" as we have said before, and the last one on the mouth of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	In this illness, give the patient large yews and round pills with crushed cereal; afterwards, shave the head of the patient completely, and put mustard plaster on the occiput which is written or prepared as a plaster; and this is the way of cauterization: if you do it in this manner as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai .iij. cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere .i. doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai .i. cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, .ij. autres sus les .ij. cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healthy in this way, it is good; if not, make four fire cauterizations on the head, descending down to the neck, and leave a space of one finger's width between each cauterization. Treat them as you would others, and if you see any abscess, make one cauterization in the middle; and if necessary, two more on the two horns, and treat until it is healthy. The one that is called "olivare" should be as I said before.
de la froidor dou chief	from the frost of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et .i. derrier et .iij. sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai .iiij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	The head of the patient must be cleaned with years and what has been mentioned before; after that, rub the head of the sick person, then make cauterization on the head and one on each horn, and one at the back and two on the spine of the neck. If you need more, and the body is wet and the patient is suffering, and the disease is spreading, make four cauterizations on the spine of the back; leave it until the most painful part is burned, then withdraw your hand; after that, treat until it is healthy, and let the cautery called "olivare" be as mentioned before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Epileptics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to treat the brain with years (a kind of mineral) and other cures as we have said in the division when the patient is strong and able to bear taking medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai .i. cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et .i. cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot endure it, make them gargle and chew a treatment to dissolve the brain often with good foods; afterwards, place the head in a mill and do one cautery as we have said before, and one cautery on the navel, and one on each horn; and if the patient is outside (meaning dead) and able to endure it, do cauteries as I have said for the person who has paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive oil as I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai .i. cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is suffocated (or drowned), make a fine cautery thus:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the superfluidities or corrupt moisture (phlegm) flow excessively and are thick, then cauterize with such cauteries as we have said for those who suffer from paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if due to melancholy the superfluidities decline towards melancholy and the body of the sick person is moistened, then give him something to drink that purifies the brain, according to what has been said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai .i. torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com .i. cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the king (the patient), make a linen bandage well made, such as a circle, put it on his head; cross the sick person, and hold him tightly from all sides; presently iron the linen, using old cheese rennet; heat the cloth gently so that the sick person can bear it; after emptying the circle inside the head, let it cool; and do this to the patient once a week with good governance, until he is well.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	 If you wish to cauterize [something], make multiple punctures throughout the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	 This method of cauterizing increases the brain greatly; then put on top a moistened cotton in butter and linseed oil.
de l’awe des eulz	of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When the eyes come first with the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something purifying the head, keep it away from all moisture, and make him sweat or bathe more than once while fasting.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as .ij. eulz ensamble, ou en .i. se li dessendemens est en .i.; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After that, instruct the patient to lean back and perform cauterization on his head, and make two cauteries on the temples where the discharge is coming from both eyes or one; and burn all veins and arteries beneath the skull, and let the cautery be long according to the size of the temple. Be careful of bleeding, and if you see too much blood coming out, stop it with your power as you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les .ij. os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and the incision of the cautery how to perform it; and sometimes they make cautery or hot iron beneath the two bones at the back.
dou cors des larmes	The heart of the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: .i. cautere emmi le chief, et .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. temples, et .ij. cauteres ou haiterel desoz les .ij. os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout .i. petit cautere.	When the eyes are old and accustomed and they are above the veins, or in the hollow of the arteries that appear outside the head; and it is clear that it is due to superfluous cold phlegmatic fluids, then do the cautery as I have said at the beginning of this work: one cautery on the forehead, two cauteries on the temples, and two cauteries or hot iron beneath the two bones; and if it is necessary, cauterize skillfully above the brow with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	The heart weeps within the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide .iij. nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai .ij. cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les .ij. sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you treat the patient according to what we have said in the division, and it does not help at all, then give a sick person three hot poultices; after these, roast the head, and make a cautery or olive oil cautery, and make two cauteries called "clavilis" above the shoulders, a little below the hairline; and beware of the artery that you do not cover it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	 When the paper of the oil is softened by disease and moisture, then cauterize this cautery which is called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	 Thus, this is its form:
Et se tu vues si fai .ij. cauteres sus les .ij. sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you wish to perform two cauteries on the two sorcerers as long as they are like sorcerers; and do not leave your hand except when the third part of the paper is burned, according to the way that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which pricks the oil
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc .ij. manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hairs of the oils are converted into a thorn and prick oil; and in such cases cautery is performed according to two methods: namely by fire or by hot medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	The patient should be instructed to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they have grown and are even, then put the patient on a clean surface; after that, draw a figure of the hairs like the leaves of myrtle, with the beginning of the sign cut away from the hairs; then place cotton soaked in egg white and musk oil on top of the oil, then heat the iron cautery in this shape:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi .iij. jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing the figure that you have drawn many times so that the hair is burned in that place; and the signs of health for the work are that you see the paper recede, and the hairs rise to the tip of the oil; then leave your hand, and let it rest for 3 days, then soak the cotton in butter until the burn is removed; afterwards heal with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And after that, hairs may come up, and the paper is softened then begin the cautery on the same place again, as you did before; and if the hairs are curled, cauterize them until the paper is raised to its natural level, and they are straight, and do not prick the hairs with oil.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en .i. oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en .i., et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse .i. poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even, then make parchment in the shape of the myrtle leaf; then take French soap and hot water, each one .З., grind them together well; and do it quickly, so as not to cool, then spread the mixture over the shape you have made like the leaf of myrtle, and put the hairs on top of the parchment; and if the patient can only withstand one drop of oil, you should work with one, and if in both cases; and place cotton dipped in egg white beneath the oil; and the head of the patient should be healthy and your hand mostraring over the medicine, and press one finger and move it all the time when the patient feels a bite from the medicine, for it bites like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a while, remove the medicine from your hand.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	 And when the mordication is passed, lift up the shoulder blade and see if the paper is raised in the same way as it was raised by fire or by incision; and if it is so, then it is good.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is not so, then apply more medicine to the shoulder blade or the medicine has not worked yet, until your efforts are even and your eyes are steady; then put on moistened cotton in butter until the burns are healed, after cure the shoulder with an ointment called "dyafenis" and another one, until it is healthy.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	 And if you need to protect yourself well in your work, keep a great watch so that the medicine does not fall into your eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	 And if the paper becomes damp afterwards and the hairs prick in the oil, start the medicine again on that part which has been moistened properly, as you have done before; afterward cure it until it is healed; and this is the shape of the comb for the vervain herb:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that the hairs of men are different in size and according to this, your treatments should be adapted; and do not deviate from the correct path for those who study this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	On the treatment of fistula by cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When treating a fistula as mentioned in the classification of diseases, and your treatments do not help at all, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to put his head on a clean surface, and have the assistant hold his head between their hands so that it does not move or tilt to one side; then place a moist cotton ball in egg oil or fresh linen on the cautery site; then heat the cautery until it is hot but not red-hot, shaped like the tip of a feather, pointed at the end, and as long as necessary for your work; however, the shape does not matter too much, what matters is that it is pointed. If you wish, it can be straight from one end to the other or in the shape of a tent; but whatever the shape, the tip is most important for your task.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After pressing the fistula if it is open and draining pus, drain it, and dry it; if it is closed, open it, and drain foreign matter; then place the heated cautery on top of it carefully, making sure your hand does not slip; place the cautery in the fat of the oil and let it corrode.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	 If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be good.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	 If that's not the case, start the cautery again once more and if needed, let it rest for three days; then put cotton soaked in butter on top of it, and treat with the drying ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is still not healed, apply corrosive medicine to expose the bone; and the king shall act according to what comes in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	 And there is a kind of fire cautery that none of the ancients spoke of.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	 For the fistula, open it and then put in the substance called camelian in that form:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it in the amount of one cubit; hold your hand or cannula firmly, and do not let the patient move, so that the melted lead does not spill onto his eye; and you must put oil on the patient's cotton soaked in egg white or vinegar: the lead will heal the fistula, and the wound will be cured by marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	 And if the fistula is healed by the fire cautery that we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	 If not, then it is necessary to administer butter to the nose and bring the fistula back towards the nose in accordance with what is appropriate according to its own place.
des crevaices en levres	cavities in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times there appear cavities in lips called "hairs", and the same happens in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe .i. petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When you treat these cavities as we have said in the divisions, and the treatment does not help, then scald a small, sharp-edged cautery according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And put it quickly into those hollows until it reaches the bottom; afterwards, treat the area with turpentine until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	For the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies .i. cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou .ij., aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes at the root of the throat or in the eye, or in the palate, or in the roots of the teeth, after it becomes pustular and grows and turns into a fistula; and you treat it as we have said in divisions, but it does not improve: then you must have .i. cautery according to the size of the fistula; after opening or draining the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron is hot at its base and where it ends; and do this once or twice, after curing as we have said in treatments, until it is healed; and if it is healed, that's good; and if not, you must discover the place and remove the corrupted bone, according to what you will find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	The movement of teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are moistened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat them with medicine but it is of no use, then put the head of the patient in your lap; afterwards, heat up the cautery as will be described below, put a cane on the tooth; and insert the heated cautery deeply into the tooth, hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat approaching the root of the tooth; afterwards, remove your hand and repeat the cautery according to your desire; afterwards, fill the mouth of the patient with salt water and tie it up for an hour and rinse vigorously.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the moving teeth are confirmed, and the gums softened are held back, and the moistures are dried up.
de la dolor des dens	Of the pain in the teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc .ij. manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or wetness, and there is coldness or fever, and medicines do not work, then it will be necessary to use a cautery according to two methods: a cautery of butter and a cautery of fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus .i. fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	A cautery of butter is as follows: you take butter from a cow, and the tip in an iron or horn spoon; then take cotton and wrap it around the point of a tent (a small sheet), and moisten it in boiled butter, and put it quickly on the painful tooth and hold it until it becomes cooled; and do so often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth, and if you see the cotton and wool becoming cold in cold butter, put it back on the tooth and put hot iron near the root of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	 The cautery combined with fire is such that you take a wire of iron or brass, and it should be thick so that the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautioner, let the form come as follows, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be alleviated that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	 And it is necessary that the patient fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of this cautery, and then draw out the hot iron; and this is the shape of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And make a cautery for the head that you want, and according to what you can do; and this is the shape of the cane:
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When scrofulas are of cold and wet pus, and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described below and make it have openings for the smoke to issue from the other side; and place the hot iron on the abscess where needed until it reaches the bottom of the abscess. If the abscess is small, use a correspondingly smaller cautery, and leave it in for three days; apply moistened cotton soaked in butter until the pus is removed. After that, cure the wound with ointments and salves until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	 The shape of the arm:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	 When the frost conquers the channels of the arm, and especially when it comes from cold constitution, then it is necessary for the patient to be bled first with resolving medicines; afterwards, make a cautery at the root of the neck, but do not go near the neck, and be careful not to burn too much.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then make another cautery at the joint of the neck to the head of the spine, and let it be the cautery called "clavicle" from which we have the shape previously mentioned; and cure the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	When the moisture conquers over the channels of the throat, especially when it comes from cold complexion, then the patient should be purged first with soluble medicines. After that, perform cautery at the base of the tongue, but be careful not to go too close to the throat, only a little. Then, perform one other cautery at the jointure of the neck and the head of the spine, using the shape as we have described before. And heal the place as we have said before until it becomes healthy.
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et .i. autre cautere emmi le pis entre .ij. mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When the illness of throat is due to cold moisture, and the patient does not have fever or heat, and the illness is old, then two cauteries should be performed on the forceps in visible places; and one other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries which is called "clavile" have the form as we have said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	 And if you see, make a cautery by pricking all over the cautery called "points" from which the shape is previously mentioned in the ear disease; and let the points be up to 30 or thereabouts.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	 After curing the shoulder according to what was said before, let the cautery be at three intervals according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais .iij. a cop.	And because the cauteries are lighter, since you make four together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a .ij. ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After holding the patient on his back and on his side; after heating the iron that is inside the hollow of your left hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, then apply the heated cautery in the shape described by these two nerves (nerve roots) here:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble .iiij. cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a .iij. ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a .iij. ners:	and cauterize the iron up to the ribs, and bring forth four figures with the cautery made of three nerve roots; because the figure of cauterization consists of several cauteries; and these nerves are according to the subtlety of a tendon, and this is the shape of the cautery that has three nerve roots:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce .i. nerf por coi il i a .viij. cauteres.	And sometimes it is dislocated above this nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the cautery, crush it with oil; afterwards make the patient rest and do not move the limbs for long periods until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	 If it is dislocated above (the shoulder), which happens rarely, then make a cautery on the thick part of the large cautery rod, or many cauterizations at the base with smaller ones.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	 For the joint is put back in place, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	 When there are many coldness and moisture in the stomach that cause it to become cold to its complexion, and many catharrs are multiplied for him, and in common ways of treatment it does not help; then the patient should lie on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	 After that, he makes three fire cauterizations under the hip-bone at the size of a finger, for each cauterization using a pointed tool, and two more cauterizations away from the two sides until the shape of the cauterizations forms three angles, with enough space between them so they do not stick together when pus is released; and the shapes of the cauterizations should be sharp enough to pierce the two parts of the kidney, and the shapes of the cauterizations should be adjusted according to this form:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 And if you wish to cauterize with a large cauterizer in the stomach according to this form, and he who fears that cauterizer, cauterize by pressing and holding on the stomach at the point according to the amount you see; then cauterize it completely, which is called "point".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After the healing of the wound has taken place, when it is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	 When the liver experiences pain from coldness, moisture and large ventosity, when it is forced to move away from its natural complexion due to excesses; and the patient is treated as we have said in divisions, but it does not benefit him, then the patient must be made aware of his illness; and a sign for three cauterizations according to this form, figure, and quantity should be given on the liver, near the hypochondriac region, where the ribs of the body come; and there should be space between each cauterization, the size of a thumb; and the cauterizations should be long, not pressed too hard with your hand; and only the halves of the coal should be burned, and the patient must lie on his back; and if he cannot, then he should be lying down, and stretch out his legs, and lift up his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	 And if your wish is, cauterize these cauteries with the knife, if you are skillful and wise in the art, but do not dare too much because you would burn all over the body; and it should not reach the boil, for the place is very subtle there, and the wise can see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	 When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the liver's flesh or the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient does not feel much pain; but if it is in the membrane, then the pain is madness-like.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	 And when this cure is over, the patient should lie on his head; and then press firmly at the place where the abscess is, and then heat the cautery that is similar to a radish, as shown in the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	 And apply the fire cautery until the flesh is burned, and stop at syphac, so that it can be completely removed; afterwards, cure according to the cure of abscesses until it becomes healthy; and it should not be used for this cautery by anyone except those who have studied medicine for a long time, and many times these diseases have been cured by them.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	 Then it can be boldly operated, and nevertheless I seem to think that more benefit is obtained by letting it rest.
dou cautere de pleuresin	the cautery for pleurisy
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize .i. cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et .ij. petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et .ij. cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et .i. cautere emmi le pis, et .i. autre sus l’estomac, et .i. entre .ij. espaules, et .ij. as .ij. costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre .ij. espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancient ones said one should make incisions with cauterizations of the root of Acorus calamus (Aristologe), and in this manner: take a long root of Aristologe, as large and as long as your thumb; moisten it in oil, immerse it in fire, and cauterize one cautery between the armpit and neck, and two small cauteries a little below where the beard is; two cauteries between the fifth rib and the sixth, leaning back slightly; one cautery on the side of the pain, and one more on the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the sides of the pain away from the cautery which is between the shoulders; and do not press your hand, but rather make an opening as when smelling.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	 And some old people say that anyone uses the fire cautery resembling a razor, and they heat it up and place it between the ribs until it reaches an abscess; and the pain subsides, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	 But in this work, there is fear or the patient dies now, or a fistula comes that cannot be healed.
de la mice	of the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent .iij. manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the sickness of the mice that we have spoken about in the divisions of cures and it does not help, then apply three ways of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	 In the first way, you make three or four cauterizations, aligning them according to the length of the mouse (as we have said before about the liver-shaped cautery); and do not hurry with your hand for the entire cauterization, and let the patient be aware of their back; and another way of cauterizing is that you heat the cauter which has two nerves, as we showed in the dislocation of the shoulder; and cut off the fat that is next to the mouse, or the sides where the sick person's pain comes from, and lift the elevations from the fat according to the fat, according to the length of the body, and the cauter should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	 After, place the two inflamed nerves so that their holes are pierced from the other side, and then draw out the cautery, and thus there will be four. If you see, if you cauterize the entire cautery at three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	 Afterwards, treat it when it has had purulent discharge for a long time, and this is what the other treatments mentioned before do.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	 The cautery is not effective against dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes".
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	 When the cure is performed according to the methods that we have said in divisions, and your treatment does not benefit, then you must perform four cauteries around the abscess, one above the stomach, one above the liver, one above the spleen, two at the bottom of the back near the spine, and one where it hurts; and the cauteries should be close to the thick part of the abscess.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les .ij. ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After leaving the cautery open to expel pus for a long time, do not neglect the care of the patient after the cautery; and healing will be hastened, and the two intentions (healing and relief of pain) will come together with God's help.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly is like the claw that we have shown before; and the one for the back should be olive-shaped, as it was explained earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	 When the feet are swollen in someone who is dropsical and filled with water citrus, it is necessary that you cauterize on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger; and dip your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	 And do not go too deep in, thus would force the water citrus out, and let the cautery be in this shape:
Aprés fai sus .ij. jambes .ij. cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After doing two cauteries on each leg with the tip of the knife; and let the cauteries be long, one below the knee in front and the other outside, in the leg; and leave the cauteries above for a while to heal, until the water heals; then treat the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the swelling
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai .i. grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et .iiij. cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout .i. cautere clavile subtil, et .ij. cauteres sus les hainches.	When the swelling of the belly comes from cold and moisture, and the digestive and retentive qualities that are in the stomach and intestines are hindered, and cannot be cured by means of treatments; and you see the patient suffering greatly and of strong constitution, then make one large cautery on the stomach according to what was spoken before about the stomach cautery, and the circular cautery; and four subtle cauteries around the belly, one subtle cautery clavicle, and two cauteries on the flanks.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et .i. cautere sus chaicun yle, et .ij. petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make a cautery on the elbow, and one on each joint, and two small cauteries on the stomach near the large one, for the treatment is beneficial where there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	of the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	 When the hemorrhoids are founded or several, and are old and filled with large cold and moist corrupted humors, and have been treated as we have said in divisions, and it does not help if you do cauteries: III on the spine of the back, which is completely withdrawn from almecdate pocket and pocket in triangular form, and the cautery under the buttocks II should be; and if you think that the stomach is cooled, and the meat is not cooked, and one sees the face swell up, then the stomach should be given a large cautery, as it has been said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen to the entire length of the cautery; and leave the cautery open for a long time.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	 After curing the shoulder when it is healthy.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carnositis called "thelul"
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble .i. raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou .ij., et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you apply the cautery to althelul (possibly an herb), heat the cautery which seems like a razor, and then place it all around the althelul, covering it; leave your hand there so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein, causing it to close; do this once or twice, and if there is much althelul, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, heal with ointments until they are healthy; and if you cauterize a large cautery on alchatim (possibly a lesion), it will have more aid.
de plaie mal curee	of an improperly healed wound
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	If the patient cannot bear any incision or opening, as we will explain in its place, this disease comes that can only be cured by cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	 If any abscess comes, that is swollen and filled with pus and corrupted moisture, you must probe it entirely using a delicate test, and ensure that you know the extent to which it has spread.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	 After sharpening the cautery that resembles a razor, put it into the abscess according to the size that the pus has entered, and continue burning until the body is burned and corrupted, once, or two or three times, depending on the amount of pain; be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	 If the abscess goes to the body of the bladder or intestines, be careful with these places, and do not perform it elsewhere except in a healthy place, and think that it is not perspicuous; after curing the shoulder when it is healthy, if the shoulders are sewn and the matter has been removed for a long time, then know that the shoulder is healed completely; and if the matter has not been removed, then know that the shoulder is broken, and corrupted bones will form; and thus like one of those whom we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	This text appears to be discussing a medical treatment for a kidney-related issue based on the context of "la vesie" (bladder) mentioned earlier in the text. The translation provided above translates the given sentence as follows:
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra .iij. cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain in the kidneys comes with large swelling and does not improve in women, then you must perform cautery on both sides of the kidneys using the clavicle-shaped cautery as mentioned before; and if we cauterize it in the middle, there will be four cauteries in a line, and it will provide more help.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et .i. a destre et .i. a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais .i. cautere defuers le dos, ou .ij. se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is weak and soft due to coldness or moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you make a fire cautery on the part outside the bladder, where the hair of the penis begins, one on the right side and one on the left side, and each cauterization should be as long as the knuckle; and make one cauterization behind the back, or two if necessary; and the cauterizations should be pointed in shape according to the aforementioned form.
de la marris	of the marriage (or wife)
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice .iij. cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et .ij. cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the matrix (uterus) is cold and moist and does not allow conception, and the flowers (ovum) are corrupted and their term delayed; and when they come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to perform four cauteries around the womb, as described in the cautery of the bladder, and two cauteries behind the back; and let the cauterization be with a needle, as described.
de la hainche	When the loins (lower back) are swollen and painful: then it is necessary to make four incisions, one above the other, on both sides of the lower back, from the waist to the buttocks; and the wound must be washed with warm water and vinegar.
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a .i. cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the swollen loins (lower back) descend to the abdomen and move out of their place due to this, and the signs are that one thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and it is found in the region of the hernia, then you must cauterize the patient on the lower back at one cautery, similar to a circle, and mark the location around the hernia so that the hernia is within the circle; and let the cauterization be like the one used for the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai .iij. cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if this fire cautery is not present for you, make four large olive oil cauterizations instead, and let them be as deep as all the others; heal it until it heals.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain in the hernia
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes in the hernia of the groin, and it is due to coldness and moisture; the patient is cured by what we have said in the division, but the cure is not effective, and the disease is old: therefore, you must purge the patient with pills made from foul herbs or other good-seeming pills.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	 After that, make cautery; and the manner of cautery is according to two ways: namely, with burning medicines, and cautery by fire.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	 Cautery by fire is according to many ways, one of which is such that you cauterize three triangular cauteries on the boil of the haunch in this manner, and make deep and large incisions between each cauterization, leaving enough space for a thumb, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped; sometimes cautery is made in the middle on the head of the haunch, so there are four as follows:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circular cautery that we have mentioned before in the dislocation of the thigh; but make it so that the circles enclose the entire thigh, and all the fat surrounding it is burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	 And this is the way it is done in sciatica, when the pain remains in the loin, and does not reach the thigh nor the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	 If it reaches the thigh and the leg, have II cauteries there where the pain is, and let the patient say that the pain remains; and the cautery should be a lancet, and the thickness of the coal burned should be thin; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two feet or near the ankle, cauterize it where they feel the pain 3 inches or 4 inches away from the place called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if necessary, do more; and if the pain is below the knee towards the thigh, make a fire cautery with a cutlery or circular cautery, but take good care in all your cauteries that you do not let the cautery burn the nerves and large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	 And I myself have seen more who have performed cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they let it stay so that the leg became swollen and the toes as well, and they were pierced and corrupted all the toes.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	 After a stomach solution where he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	 And if the pain is in two places at once, make a cautery in one and the other, as follows.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	 And the wise will say regarding the cautery of the groin, as follows: make this iron and its tip be as thick as a thumbnail or slightly less, and between these points should be the width of a nut (poce); and these points should be above each other, like nuts, and have the handle well-made; and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois .i. cautere reont et lou laisse .iij. jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be scalded until it is all red and blisters, and then place it on top of the sick person's haunch bone, turning it towards the healthy side; and cauterize once with one hot iron, leave it for three days; then make a plaster of butter, keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we should use this cautery sparingly due to the fear of its gaze, and few do so; yet it is a good cautery, which can withstand it, and in places where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	 The cautery of burning medicine is to make the instrument between the points where it descends from the edge of the opening, and it should be made of iron or copper for a long length; at the top, there should be two nuts; and there should be space between each one equal to the thickness of a dove's egg; they should be turned over and above, and join together in this way:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	 After placing the boil on the patient lying on one side, hold your hand above the boil; then pour between the two circles of hot water that has been heated in a pot, and leave it for an hour, and let the patient endure the heat and burn from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 For it heals as if by fire; and when the inflammation has passed, lift your hand with the instrument and gently lift the boil from the heat, and leave for three days; then apply butter so that the black scab is removed; and leave for three more days until the pus drains out; and this would be the final aid after the cure of ointments until it is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	 And if the pain has spread to the thigh or the leg, perform the instrument that binds according to what you have done in the haunch strongly; and this is the method of the hot plaster, and I have written it or treated it regarding the correction of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	 Take quicklime and hot coals, an equal amount of each, grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	 or it has a small hole covered so that the tip of a needle can enter; and place one pot on top of another well weighed pot, and put soft plaster on top of the lime and coals as much as you have previously kneaded with your hand; and leave it like that until the powder settles down and becomes wet or the upper pot is weighed, then take all that plaster, and pour it over the coals and over the lime as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	 And then if it (the dislocation) is much agitated and treated with various medical procedures and fire cauteries of other members, because it does the same work as fire, and also with other medicines that one cauterizes well the inflammation in such a way as tesisie, honey and aniseed, and chalk with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	 And Galen tells us of a cure in which a nobleman was cured of the pain of the inflammation and sciatica, and he highly praises it, and says that no other treatment was done, and that he became well at one time when this treatment was made, and he bathed as he instructs below.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	 And he says in this manner that you take the powdered green veratrum (litargirioide) and mix it with a little fat, and apply it to the inflammation and to the thigh and to the leg where the pain is, and hold it; leave it for three hours until the patient no longer feels the burning sensation.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	 And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed up, and let him lie down, and the pain will go away completely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	 Know that no one should use such fire cautery medicine unless it is after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	 And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with goat's fat, it helps very much; and the cautery should be done in this manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	 Take linen and anoint it with old oil, and place it over the furrow that is between the toe of the foot and the one called foscile.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	 After taking dry goat's fat, heat it on fire until it becomes charcoal, and place it on the linen, and let it stay; repeat this process again, and do not stop until you think by your senses that it reaches the hainche, and that the pain is ceased; and this method of cautery is called "cautere de chievre".
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain in the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back, either from falling or striking or excessive bleeding, or from similar causes of cold matter spreading, none of these similar symptoms are worth cauterization, except for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne .v. cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai .iij. cauteres ou .iiij. au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	Then, after the patient has been bled of foul pills or similar substances, three lines should be signed on the back where the pain is located, and in each line 5 or more cauterizations according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauterization should be made according to the cauterization known as "poins"; and if you see, make 4 cauterizations or 3 according to the medium-sized cauterization in this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to young children, and the signs of its onset are that they have a narrow anus when they defecate, and fear; you will find it in the last spine of the back and in the appearance that comes above the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and wish to heal it, cauterize it with the fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	 The cautery makes every part of the spine swell up.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	 And if you see, cauterize around the spine with a cautery puncturing it two or three lines apart, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	 After curing the place until it is healed as we have said, beware of applying a cautery in the area where there is nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When the pain in the joints is due to moisture that affects every member of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which are called "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and medicines cannot cure it, it is cured by cautery as follows: make the patient sit down near the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	 If it is necessary to prick the belly of the thigh, make the cauterization all over the cautery that they call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	 And if the pain comes up to the genitals and other joints, which happens often, cauterize over each thigh with three or four cauteries on each part, using an olive-shaped cautery; and if you need more, do more, but don't hold your hand too far that the coal of the fire is not burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	 And if the pains descend to the thighs and back, administer the fire cautery as described in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	 And if the pains are at the hands, make small incisions two finger-widths apart; and if there is no more pain in the fingers, make incisions above each joint and above the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or up to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good care to the patient and think about medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	 For if you give good care and you cleanse with purging, it will heal with God's help.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sinus (or sinew)
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When the rupture happens in the bladder, and the bowels descend into the cavity and this is new, if you wish to treat it, then it must not eat that day; and let him use things which relax the stomach, so that the feces descend from his stomach; afterwards make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold his anus as long as the bowels are repaired, and reinsert them with your fingers, and sign over the rupture on the bone of the thumb, and at all a sign that is similar to half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery in the form given here:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	 until it becomes white and flows out pusules.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	 Then straighten the bones to their place; and the minister holds his hand above that they do not return backwards; and work well the thighs on the patient, and put the cushion and the sergeant under him on the thighs, and the other one on the foot which holds the hands; then place the cautery on the sign throughout your whole hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach it the first time, try again until you come to the bone; be careful that the bones do not crack when you perform the cauterization; and beware that you do not burn him; and so that the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	 And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	 And the cauteries for children should be fine-tuned according to their size, and for adults also large according to their measure; after three days, cure the leaching of the cautery with butter until the burn is removed; after that, cure it with other salves until it heals, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days so that the wound heals well; and it is necessary that his dressings be left long, so that the boils do not protrude when he gets up to go to rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	 And after forty days, when he wants to get up, bring him a well-made cloth and keep it for another forty days; let him have good rest, so that he does not work too much and be careful of excessive drinking and eating, and of too high fever; and if he follows this instruction, he will heal completely.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	 And I shall tell you after the cure of tailor in its chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of abdominal rupture
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	 When roundworms come in other bellies and are known, and you see that they no longer grow, then perform the cautery of the cautery according to its quantity, and let it be burned one third degree; afterwards cure according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized at three angles according to this shape:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	 but first mark the beginning and make a line above the roundworm, and another below, and then hold your hand all over the entire cautery iron.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	 But the first cauteries are lighter and easier to move.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of ancient pain in any member
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	 When pain comes in any limb, either from falling or being struck, and the pain lasts a long time, and the cures of medicine are of no avail, then it should be cauterized with the cautery called "poins", and the cauteries should be according to the length of the limb, its smallness and fragility, and its virtue and location for twisting and pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	 If the first incision heals well, that's good; but if the same incision needs another treatment over it, you should do so because it is customary for the affected member to heal in time, which is why you must perform the cauteries as long as the patient is healing.
de meselerie	In mixing
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	 The illnesses are sometimes relieved by cautery with great help, and especially those that originate from the corruption of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	 Can you see the patient being cauterized? Take care if the illness is at the beginning, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and it neither festers nor remains, and you doubt that the corruption will spread throughout the patient, then perform V cauteries on the head: First lift the head to your lap, and the other toward the forehead at the end of the hair; and II on the II horns, and I behind the neck; and leave your hand so that the cautery reaches the bone, and so that the scabs come out from within so that the vapors of the gross humors can escape; and cauterize on the mouse according to what is before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et .i. cautere en som lou neis, et .ij. cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et .vj. cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et .i. grant sus la crupie et .i. autre delez, et .ij. sus les .ij. espaules; et .ij. sus les coutes, et .ij. sus les tendrons dou pis, et .i. sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et .i. autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et .i. autre sus lou foie.	And if the mixture is scattered everywhere; it clearly perishes, you should cauterize with the cauteries that we have mentioned earlier, namely one cautery on the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the neck, six cauteries on the spine of the back, one large one on the hip and one smaller one, two on the shoulders, two on the hips, two on the shins, one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the hollows of the hands; beware of the nerves that are above the last rib, do not burn them; sometimes a person cauterizes a bone in the fist, and one in the stomach bone, and another in the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	 And know that the more you do of cautery, the more help it provides, and it benefits them; and know that the sick do not feel pain from cautery as the healthy do, because their bodies are already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	 And it is necessary that the cautery be large and small according to the members and joints, as you will find in ways of iron-working.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	 After curing the wound with wheat flour with honey and other treatments until it is drained.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When inflammation appears in any member and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it is not drained, then you do cauterization on the member according to its size and the smallness or largeness of the member; and let the cauterization be slightly deep into the flesh. Then cure it with oil until it is drained.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	 And sometimes one makes a fire cautery at the hand, foot, and back, at the nerve's opening that renders the limb immobile, and thus the skin is cut open; and no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	When a tumor appears on any member and it is treated with medicine, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then the cautery is made on the limb according to its size; and the cautery may be superficial or deep into the flesh; then cure it with poultices until it heals. And sometimes a cautery is performed in the hand, foot, back, at the nerve's exit that makes the limb immobile, thus removing the tumor; however, no one should interfere unless they are knowledgeable about members and the nerves moving the body.
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease known as "albaras" grows, and the medicine does not work on it, then cauterize with a deep cautery until the blister disappears and its color changes; then treat with flour and lentils mixed with rose oil and banana leaves, along with cow blood and almond blood, each in equal parts; mix everything together and bind with cloth, and apply to the affected area until it heals.
li cure de chancre par cautere	The cure of scrofula by cautery
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	 When a boil begins and you want to stop it, if you cauterize, do so with the cautery that resembles a circle, all around the boil's circumference.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	 And yet the wise say that one should cauterize in the middle of the boil; and yet I do not find it good because I fear that it will become ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; a more direct thing is that it should be cauterized around, with the cautery called "circle", as we said earlier about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	the swelling that cannot grow or spread
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	 When someone has a disease called "adubelati," which is slow to heal or because of the superfluity it causes, or because of the age of the patient when they are decrepit (meaning very old) and have little blood, or because of the time; and you see it hastening to heal: then cauterize around it with many small cauteries by pricking; afterwards, leave it.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	 Then let it heal.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierced completely by the cautery, then heat the cautery according to this form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	 Keep your hand in the middle of this disease called "adubelati" as long as the cauteries have pierced through, and let these cauteries be such that the patient feels them only in such a way that the course of the pus is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 After the cure when he is perfectly healthy.
li cure dou feu par fer	The cure for fire with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	 Another form of disease is called "corrosion", and it is nothing but an erosion of a limb, for it consumes the limbs as fire dries up dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	 If you see this disease in a place that can be treated with cautery along with fire, then heat the cauteries little and big, according to what is necessary at the location where the disease is; after cauterizing all parts until you reach all the corruption and nothing remains of it, so that everything corrupted is removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	 And then leave it for three days, and put soft powdered cauterized leaves on the affected areas, crushed with oil until the burns from the fire are removed and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	 After the treatment of worms producing char (sores or ulcers).
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	 And if after three days you see that healthy sores do not appear, it is good; and if not, start the cautery on the lesion that remains in the corrupt flesh.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	 This method has sometimes been cured with hot medicines instead of fire cautery; but nevertheless, fire cautery is more helpful, and I have already said the cure for hot medicines in the section on the plague: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	the worms that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	 Often times, through the feet, a disease arises which is called "closed," according to our understanding, and it is a large thing filled with pus that swells the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	 And the cauteries for this disease are of two kinds.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	 That is to say, cautery with fire and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	 Cautery with fire consists of heating the cauterization iron to the same temperature as a ploughshare, made of good iron that can pierce through all sides and has fine edges; after it is heated, place it on top of the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the point of the nail; leave it in this position for three days until it begins to purge pus; then make a plaster of wild herbs boiled with oil, and leave the plaster on it all night, and the nails will shrink and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal the shoulder with an ointment soothing warm salve until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	 And if it has been turned outward by the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you must bring hot cautery; it is done like this: take a cane of tar or iron, or a pen from a candle, and place it on the nail and althea, that is to say against warts; and place the cane so that it surrounds completely, then put a little hot coal there, and hold your hand well, and press your hand while turning so that the edge of the cane comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot coal deep penetration to the root; and let the patient endure a little bite of hot coal for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will rot out completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	 Follow another method while you are heating all those [affected] within the body, then treat them with ointments that soothe pain.
li cure dou trembler	the one who cures trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices .iiij. cauteres ou .iv. sus l’espinee dou dos, .i. cautere entre chescune espinee; et .i. cautere ou pez, et .i. sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When someone trembles due to cold or fever of quartain, or from another [cause], it is necessary that you apply 4 or 5 cauteries along the spine of the back, 1 between each spine; and 1 cautery on the shank, and 1 on the stomach with an olive-leaf cautery; this will make him stop trembling, and hasten his recovery from the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of rotten boils
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	 Occasionally, on the outside of the body appear baths, or pustules that come from large corrupt matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	 First, when they appear, it is necessary to make a cautery on each head of the pustule: a subtle cautery made from mirtle wood, so that its point is immersed in fire, or from long aristolochia root, or with lenticulaire cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	 And sometimes they cauterize at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and they cannot grow further, but the superfluous matter from which they come is broken up, and they become healthy; however, it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Often there are great outflows of blood from the cut artery at the wound that comes to the outside, or in the incision of an abscess, or in the cautery of a limb, and similar things; and it is a very bad thing to let it flow.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren .i., ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And even if it happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein and hold it very tight so that the blood is stopped under your finger, and no more juice flows out; then take olive oil cauteries, both small and large ones until they are all red; then take .i., either large or small depending on the size of the wound and where the artery is running, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and hold the cautery in place until the blood is stopped.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement .i. autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if a leap happens when you place your thumb over the vein, and the cautery is extinguished, take immediately one other cautery that are by fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des .iiij. manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not stop doing one after the other until the vein is completely drained; and watch that you do not burn the nerve that is exposed, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when the vein dries up from the artery, it cannot be well stopped if the artery is large, except by one of the four ways that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strongly tied string, or by medicines placed on it that have the power to stop blood; and let it be tied and constricted accordingly.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Whoever brings a tightening of the ligature with cloth or puts something hot on it, or similar things, will not benefit if there is no profit.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to anyone who has no mirror or medicine present, you should place your finger on the wound of the vein as we have said and stretch it out until it is tightened over the wound and the vein; and do not move it, but the cold moist should often be applied to make it very cold so that the blood congeals and thickens and remains; and make inquiries ahead about the person who needs cauteries and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	Here begins the second book of surgical treatments
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	In the first chapter we have told you about all diseases in which fire cautery or burning medicine is needed, and we have explained their uses, causes, instruments, forms of cauteries; and I have put that chapter up to the thighs and will proceed in this chapter by the same path for those things that are easier to understand.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And thus as I begin this, it is necessary, dear child, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first of the cauterizations, and for this reason greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	 And I warn you not to take foolishness upon yourself.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	 For many ways of people come in treatments.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	 There come those who are so sick with their disease that they die quickly due to the frenzy they find in their illness, and from the greatness of its malignancy; and these should be feared.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	 And among these there are those who give you their advice and say, "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is deceitful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	 You should not easily consent to those who come to you with this manner, but put more trust in your honor than in your desire, and do not act recklessly but wisely with those from whom you are certain, and with whom you can learn; and use prognostication and indication in the treatment of your patients to convert salvation; and this will help you acquire good reputation, glory, and memory of praise.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear child, Our Lords grant you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire with the holy inspiration of his hand, come.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Furthermore, I have divided this chapter into sections by chapters, according to what is before or in the chapter of cauteries, which I have described for you from head to feet, because you will find it easier to understand those matters which you will need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	The head full of water
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	This disease often comes to children during childbirth and when the head of the child is forced too hard; sometimes it happens because of reasons we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease in anyone other than children, and all those I have seen hurried towards death; therefore, it seems to me that I should waste less effort on such treatments.
Et je vis .i. enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com .ij. nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I saw a child whose head was full of water, and it grew larger every day until it could no longer support itself; and the moisture collected under the skull between the skin and the bone; and the treatments are such that if the moisture is between the skin and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision in the head; and it should be as long as two fingers, so that the moisture runs out; and here is the shape of the spatula:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai .ij. fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is more swollen, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief .iij. fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is under the bone, and you observe the edges where the abscess is located at each part, and when you press it with your hand inside, and it does not respond: then you must make four incisions in the middle of the abscess, according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	 And after the incision, remove all the moisture thoroughly.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	 After the incision, draw out the pus with linen and powders, put vinegar and oil on it, and let it stay like this until the fifth day; then open it up, cure the wound with poultices and ointments, let the swelling decrease, and give the patient dry meat without moisture for as long as the member is comfortable and healthy.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look where the abscess is largest, and gather the pus; for sometimes it is in front, sometimes behind, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Therefore, incise where the abscess is open, and drain the pus, and do as you can; but avoid covering the artery; and let blood flow, so that the patient dies a natural death from loss of blood and evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of scrofula
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les .ij. arteres.	When a certain disease called "cataract" affects the eyes or becomes worse, and medicine treatment is of no help, then the last resort is the cautery by cutting into the 2 arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	 Therefore, when you wish to cover it, the patient should bend down over his head; then rub the area with a rough linen cloth until the arteries appear, then tightly bind the patient's neck with the cloth; look where the veins bulge, and check that the veins on both sides are behind the ears, and the pulses are located there; then mark the places of the pulse, then prick one and the other with a sharp spatula of two fingers deep, until the incision reaches the bone, and this should be done at the base of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com .ij. dois au traver.	And if you see it (the artery), push the spatula underneath the artery and cut through it (the artery).
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when a vein is cut, it jumps out continuously towards the top.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And if the artery does not open up by itself, you must measure the space of three fingers, then press and proceed to the bone; and what amount of blood needs to be let out is 6 cubic centimeters, and occasionally a little more or less, depending on what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then examine the wound: if it remains above the bone without swelling, if the pus that comes out of an abscess does not come, then hold the wound closed and bound, and apply ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When an old migraine comes with a sharp catarrh, due to moisture from tears and heat in the temples and a feeble and aged headache, and it is treated by means of medicine cures but does not improve; then we should open the arteries of the temples and cauterize them as we have said.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extraction is that the patient leans backwards over his temples, and listens to the artery that opens in the temple, because it opens well by beating, and is not easily retracted except in some cold-natured people; and if it has been retracted, the patient should tighten his neck with some cloths, then rub the area with a rough cloth, and moisten the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spatula of the following shape:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	 Then lightly scrape the skin to reach the artery, then pull it upward with pliers, and remove carefully the cloths that are under each part; and if the artery is delicate, turn it to the point of the scissors, then apply the cut from that part according to the amount of two fingers.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	 If it is not cut, it cannot heal entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des .vj. c/, jusc’a .iij.; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en .ij. leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les .ij. liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out the blood from the 5th finger joint, up to the 3rd joint; and if the arteries are large, you must tie it with a thick double silk thread so that pus does not come before the wound is closed, and there is bleeding; then cut off the excess between the 2 tendons at that hour itself, and if you see, cauterize the cauterizer scalpel up to the bone as much as the joints are cut; and this is the mutilation work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot constitution.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries is aid for finishing the sores: because it is of greater help to sores.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de .ij. pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, one must fill the place with old cotton and put on tight bandages; and when you loosen them, cure it with dry medicines that make pus, and bandages, until it is healed; and if there is no incision of the artery as much as you work, hurry to cover it with cauterization, or use vitriol and strain it with your hand so that the wound does not become infected; and if you do not have this present, put your finger on the place until it freezes, and scrape the place with cold water until it stops, and strained as necessary; and the mutilated and easier in the extraction of the artery is that you cauterize the vein of this sharp cautery with two parts, but they should be well thickened to keep longer its heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	When the instrument (strumens) is too thin, it retains less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les .ij. coutelz .i. doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les .ij. leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en .ij. leus; et soient esloigniet entre les .ij. chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And should have between the two blades, one thick of space, and when you have marked with incision on both sides, and you place the heated iron for as long as it comes to the bone, and cut the vein in two leagues; and they should be kept apart because they are not welded from this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes flow out of the veins that are on top of the face near the head, and no medicine helps in treating it, you see the patient's face turning pale with shivering, as if with fever; and when they are tender and moist so that the eyelashes fall off, the eyelids are scalded by the tears, then this kind of treatment is needed.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	 And they called it the "cured crushed", and you shall do to the patient who has this disease shave the hairs on his forehead, then make three equal incisions in the forehead according to the length of the forehead; one of the incisions should be as deep as necessary, along the middle line from the top to the nose, and the other two should be along the eyebrows parallel to the eyebrows, but avoid cutting the arteries that are near the brows; and keep your hand away from the lower jaws, and each wound should be the size of three fingers joined together; and prepare a piece of sponge and a lot of linen to soak up the blood, then insert the pointed spatula through two parts as shown here:
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les .ij. fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is across the temple up to the second incision; and scrape all the fat that is between the two cuts right to the bone, then do another thing from the mid-incision up to the other second one, and then pull out this spathule.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	Insert the instrument called "cultellaire" into the first incision. It is very sharp on one side and soft but not sharp on the other, and it has this shape:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	 And strike the rib cutting towards the chest cavity, and the rib becomes soft towards the bone, and push it until it comes to the middle opening.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And sew all the vessels that descend from the head to the base of the incision until it is complete to where the opening of the chest cavity is, and then continue in the middle opening to the other side; and then extract blood evenly, and press the location for the blood taken; then put a tent of old cotton in each opening, and put damp linen soaked in vinegar, oil, and asafoetida on top, and ensure that no pus comes in; and on the third day remove the sutures, and apply large amounts of cold tamarind juice, then ointment with basilicon and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	The root of the hairs
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	Whenever a sharp catarrh commonly comes, you see the thin and small hairs, dimming the vision, and burned paper; and the hair follicles itch, and where the head is painful with severe pain, and the patient coughs; then know from these symptoms that those substances and the catarrh do not come from anywhere other than many veins, and the cure for this is to open them.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	 And you are to instruct the patient to bend their head backward, then make a wide cut across the forehead and another deep one in the back of the neck.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	 From the temple on the left side to the temple on the right, make an incision as deep as the bone; move your hand away from the nerves that move when chewing; once the bone is exposed, drain all the blood onto a sponge; then insert between the two lips of the cut and put old cotton, and thread; then cover with damp cloths soaked in vinegar and oil, and avoid getting hot; once it has been removed, you must rub the bone until char begins to grow, then treat it with things that promote the growth of char.
En teil maniere: pren .ij. parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine .iiij. parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In this manner: take 2 parts of wheat flour and 4 parts of colophony, and make a poultice with it; administer it in these wounds to alleviate pain everywhere.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des .iiij. choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things: grains, animals, stones or similar such as iron; seeds like peas, beans, lentils; liquid substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	 When it falls into the ear, stone or any other thing that does not fit in the ear, does not grow within the ear, place the affected ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	 If you see a stone, apply some drops of violet oil or camphor oil, then induce extraction; have the patient cough and close the nostrils when coughing occurs, wrap the affected ear with pieces of cloth or wool around it, and hold it above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	 Often, farting occurs with this treatment; if it does not, use fine forceps for extraction as follows:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it jumps out at the hinges, that's good; if not, introduce extraction with a thin wire of small twisting; and if it doesn't jump out by that means, make a thread of wax and push the head of the thread or ear canal firmly, and stop up what is around the thread with soft wax so that the vein cannot enter with the thread; then pull forcefully, for many times it comes out as we have said; and if it doesn't come out in this manner, take glue from where you can get it, put any tool suitable for this purpose on it, and put a piece of cotton around it; then press the glue onto the stone or something similar and pull forcefully.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it doesn't jump out by any of the things we have said, hurry to incise the ear before an abscess forms and spasms; and the manner of incision is that you first cleanse the patient's head, then draw blood according to the strength of its virtue, then seat the patient between your hands and turn the ear upward, and make a small incision in the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and let the incision be like a moon, until you reach the bone, then break it as far as your power allows, and suck the pus quickly into your mouth; and treat it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre .i. spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that swells and it cannot be extracted, introduce one thin and subtle spatula in this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	 make an incision in that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	 Do not make incisions if you believe the grain is moist due to ear moisture, until you have made several sections; then extract it with fine forceps and suction as we have said, so that the extraction is aligned.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	 In water then that falls into the ear, the patient should use warm cleansing with early condiments, and fill the ear with soft cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	 And let him lie on that same ear itself where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	 If it jumps out because of this, that's good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	 If it does not jump out because of this, take many small and light stones according to the length of your finger, heat them slightly in the fire; and have the patient put one or two fingers into his ear, and press from another side with a stone on the stone that is in the ear; and do not stop pressing the stones against each other until the water comes out completely, and then it jumps out entirely; and if you see, take string, and push one of the ears into the ear, and the other end takes fire as much as the string burns; then tie another string as long as the water comes out completely, as we have said in the previous section.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of an animal, if it has a small body like fleas and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it has a large body that can be felt, use the extraction method with tweezers; it is easier to remove lighter objects from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms from the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in treating distillations, and the treatment does not help, then you should look at the ear in the sun: if any worms appear, take them with fine tweezers, and if none appear, take a reed of this shape.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	 And it should be narrow below and wide above.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	 And push the smaller head into the ear according to the severity of the patient's pain, then suck strongly on the whole cane; do this repeatedly until all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	 And if they do not come out, stop up around the cane with cotton as I have said earlier; and if they do not protrude as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in expelling worms, and you will find or treat the distillations of such substances; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this apparatus, here is the method as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a .i. petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a .i. estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren .i. raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations .i. poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And make it of silver or tin narrow within and wide above to distill; and for pressing inside the distillation, one instrument made of tin is required; and if you see, take a grater and wrap it around the tip with cotton; then pour your oil or juice, and whatever medicines you have in the reed, and the reed should be in the ear; then push the grater with all the cotton inside, and press your hand evenly until the oil is distilled or boils out of the ear; and let the patient smell it within, and the distillation should be one pot heated by fire in this way that it is distilled in the ear; and ensure that it is not too cold, for the medicines will not be as effective.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppage of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient .i. poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born without some imperfection in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by stoppage of a wound or pus coming from within the ear, and this stoppage comes completely into the ear at times when it cannot be seen; and sometimes there is a drop or two of pus protruding, and it can be clearly seen.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	Therefore, if it comes completely into the ear and cannot be seen, it is difficult to cure in various conditions, and in such cases, you must place the sick person's ear in the sun; look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, open the affected area with this spatula-like tool that is shaped as shown below:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be cauterized and incised all around, both in front and behind, so that it does not touch the ear; if the swelling is of new flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with subtle forceps and strike gently until the flesh is completely burned out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	 And if the tumor is fully within the ear, take a subtle razor lightly and heat it slightly with fire, then place it in the ear of the patient.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	 If you feel the tumor that causes the patient discomfort in the ear, make a small incision carefully, ensuring not to injure the nerves of the ear; then insert a bandage according to the width of the wound and moisten it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this every day until the wound heals; take a linen patch and moisten it with rosewater, and sprinkle powder of vitriol over it; if you see the ear swelling, it is necessary to remove the linen patch and apply another moistened linen patch made of rose oil and beeswax until the swelling subsides; then heal it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that stop the bleeding, which are either to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the paper charcoal
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from the hairs when they are moist and dry, it is necessary to stretch them with tongs and tweezers, and then crush them with a spatula of their roots; then put vitriol powder on the place.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And without removing [the affected part], if you cauterize with the subtle cautery of lenticles, and after incision is necessary to be cauterized; and many times they heal, since nothing remains from their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the hailstone
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	 Often these things come in paper that resemble hail in shape and hardness, and because of this the disease is called "hailstone"; it is a mass of moisture in the upper and lower paper; the treatment is as follows: observe carefully if the hailstone moves from one side to another, and this can be easily determined; then make an incision from one side, peel off each part gently, grasp with tweezers, and crush.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	 If you cannot cover it with something to pierce a little of the paper, cause no pain to the patient; and if the wound is large, gather it together in stitches, and cure it until it heals; and if it is small, do not apply force, as the humors restore it soon and cause harm.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the stone is descending inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper and place the stone in tweezers, press it from both sides; and if the paper is pushed back by the incision, it does not matter; and when the stone is pressed, apply oil of brine to the affected area, and treat the wound of those who are injured until the patient recovers.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	 Exinach is greased onto papers made of parchment above it, and this happens more often in children than adults, causing much pain to them, and they get catarrhs at dawn, and cannot bear the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; therefore, they lie on their faces immediately, sleep on top, and keep their papers under their eyelashes moistened so that the exinach oozes onto the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	 And when you push the joint with your fingers and feel it pop between them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren .i. drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of work is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then take one linen cloth and prepare a tent in the shape of a circle according to the size required for each part, then place it over [them]; and press with your hands from both sides so that the parts are assembled within the circle; then make an incision in the middle of the moist area with a sharp spatula, and it should not be larger than the wound made during vein opening; and cut through the skin completely to expose the incised area; and in various positions the incised area comes from the incision, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Then take a piece of coarse cloth between your hands and spread it apart until it is scattered; and ensure that you do not widen the incision or bring the spatula to the oil, do not pierce it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	If the incised area does not open at the beginning of the incision, raise it slightly; then spread it as we have said, then wet cloths with oil and water, and place them on the wound, and hold bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	 And if such people who grind mustard and place it over to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then heal him until he is sound.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess comes to the joint that is hot, then heal it with plasters softening until it is sound.
des poilz des papieres	of the papers' hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc .iiij. manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper grows hairs other than its nature, and is nurtured, it harms the eyes, and brings about manners of diseases such as the accustomed tears and swelling of papers and albugine, to the destruction of the eyes; and the cure is according to four methods: either by cautery with fire, or by medicine for ague according to that which is before in the chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by canes, according to what I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout .i. fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai .i. fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai .i. fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the patient's head on your sound side, then turn the paper with the oil on your left hand; if it is converted (turned), that's good; if not, push an awl through one filament (hair strand) of it; and cut the hair adjacent to the hair strands, and draw one filament above the entire paper, then scrape it flat; then make a hole in the part underneath the paper, beneath the hair, all the way from the large fold to the small; then extract one filament, and place a small tent of cotton and linen beneath the paper, then mark on the paper a figure like the thorn of blackberry, and note that the figure should be according to the quantity that you see will raise the paper which has been designated for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	 If there is much paper needed according to the softness of the paper; then spread it all over the space you have marked, starting from the large blister up to the small one; and let one of the cuts be near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then insert the onion into one of the two angles of the incision, then peel it all; then bring the two edges together with a stitch using an awl with fine linen thread, squeeze out the blood, and remove the excess threads on the two corners with something sticky, if you want to do this; otherwise, leave the suture and the threads for three or four days; then heal the wound without sutures with dry and binding substances, because the paper dissolves at the edge of the wound and merges with it, but the suture is rotten (as the ancients say), and this is a dangerous procedure; there is another way: and it is that you sign the paper with a shape like the leaves of myrtle, as we have described, with three onions cut off according to the form shown here:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	Then bind (or tie) equally the parts which are above the small ones, according to the form shown here.
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	 And if you cannot hold the pliers, and the parts are not even, take a needle with thread, and insert it through the figure; and place one end of the thread into the large wound, and the other end into the small, and arrange the threads equally between your fingers; then move your hand equally, and lift all the skin as you have described, then close the two lips of the wound by suturing, and let it heal until it is healthy; and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with ointment and similar calming substances; and sometimes the hair of the papyrus becomes inverted: then use what we have said about the incision; but the suturing in one and the other is more complex.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai .ij. caines par art, et .ij. liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as .ij. chiés de .ij. pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les .ij. cainnes des .ij. parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure for canines is as follows: You should fold the paper and place it inside as I have said, then make two canines by art, and two subtle threads of the same length as the paper and the width of a needle hole; take the two heads from two parts where you hold the threads; then put one on top of the other subtly over what is above the paper of oil, and bind the two canines from the two parts; leave it in this state for some days, and the skin that is bound will die and rot away, until it falls off.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	 If it is delayed, if it is struck with force, then cure it until it heals; and when the wound is sutured, and the paper raised, and the hairs cannot be felt; and this is the shape of the two canines you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute .i. fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse .i. autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a .i. ou .ij. ou .iij. ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The workings are as follows: You take a fine needle and insert one thin thread of silk; then assemble the heads and place them together subtly, and make sure that the length of the threads is about one palm (5 inches); then tie another fine silk thread briefly to the end of the canine; then place the patient's head in your hand and ensure that the work is done in the sun, as this is a subtle and delicate procedure; then insert the needle into the entire sheath next to the natural hair root and pierce the paper immediately so that it pulls up the natural hair; then pull out the hair until it reaches the end of the canine, and put that hair in the canine, if there is one or more; then pull your hand until the hairs come out completely with the natural hair in the paper.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne .i. poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the shot (arrow or other projectile) is expelled but the hairs do not come out with it, you shall draw the shot beneath to its full length that you have ordered, until the shot comes forth through the wound and you see it by the sight of the eye; then, you shall draw out the shot and the string, close the eye and leave it closed for 2 or 3 days, until the hair regrows in its place and flesh grows over it; and if the hairs are small, accompany one long hair from a goat's beard with it, and let it be grown along with that which you leave, until it is distanced and then cut it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the purulence of the eye
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	 When this disease which is called "alecratius" or the purulence comes in the eye, it occurs in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	 It happens from a sudden blow to the wound, or cut, or burn, or similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	 The method of the work in it is that you cut open the suture, disconnect the edges of it, put inside linen tents and tie it until it heals; and it should not be used in the treatment of it with things that dry and restrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	 If you do that, the disease will be worse than before; but with things softening, such as fenugreek; and the roast of water or barley and flax seeds cooked, and then castor oil melted in any of the oils, and wrap it in a cloth, and apply it to that.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the key to your treatment is to ensure that the joint does not heal in its former shape; and this work that we have mentioned has no effect on this illness unless it corrects its shape so that it does not return to its former state.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the fat from the oil
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	 This disease which truly is called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	 The accident arises from wounds and cuts and cauteries and things similar; and the method of work in it is that you take a needle with double thread, and poke it into the flesh, and make it pierce from the left eye socket to the right one so that the threads come out through the two cheeks; then place the flesh over the whole needle, and apply a spatula wide.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the shape of the paper returns as it should be, that's good; if not, take the razor and place it in the crack, and turn the paper, and make two cracks where the bone is within the paper; and let the edges of the two cracks be at the angles of the incision you made, and make an angle so that when they are assembled, the shape will be as the shape of a letter with the name "Greek"; then remove that cartilage, according to its thickness where it is close to the paper, then join the two separated parts with a linen thread; then apply the medicine for softening and binding, as we have said before, until it heals.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les .ij. leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a wound or stitching or cauterization, it is necessary that you make a deep incision under the hair of the paper, as mentioned before; then separate between the two layers of linen, as I have said; and the work should be done according to the shape of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and the wise masters prepare any tool with all possible means to return the figure to its natural shape; and the patients themselves, according to what is necessary for the work and tools in various positions.
dou soudement de la papiere	Sudden blow of paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suture happens in the hands of men in such a manner that the paper above is glued with white oil and it cannot move or perform its natural functions, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper, lift it up; and hold it with pincers, until you reach that which is at the root of the splinter, which should not be too sharp nor too jagged, so that the patient does not suffer from too sharp a splinter piercing the oil; and your incision, from which you scrape away the assembled mass, should be gentle, so that the paper returns to its natural form; and this entire assembly is healed, and at times it becomes infected with foul oil and produces pus and colic; then put between the paper and the oil a tent of linen, and place on the oil damp wool in abundance of egg; and after the third day use warm colic and healing ointments until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the oil
Saiches que li ungle est selonc .ij. manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a .i. dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	Know that the nail is of two types: one is nervous and resembles a hard horn, and another which is not nervous but resembles white frozen moisture; when it is touched by iron and cooked with tweezers, it cannot move; and both types begin towards the large root and grow little by little until they cover the entire nail bed and light and the movement of oil.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met .i. poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et .i. fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of incision is that the patient places his head in your hand, then you open the eyes; take paper with your hand, then grasp the nail with tweezers of small double curvature and hold it above; then take a needle, put a horse hair or cow or bull hair and a strong thread on it; double the tip of the needle a little and pierce it into the nail, and poke it all through, tie the nail with the thread and hold it above, and shave off all the hair from the side of the nail that was under the cuticle and the silk to the hair up to the root, then crush the rest in the root of the big toe to a very subtle paste with small forceps, and leave the natural flesh or root, so that the corpuscles do not flow out as is customary; and sometimes the nail grows only at the onychium (the upper part of the nail) and along the sides, as we have said; then shave off all the substance of it in this way:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And be careful that the spatumile does not touch the flesh and tear it apart, and that the pulp is not pierced; and after the incision, pour a little oil of sebum (oily matter secreted by skin glands) and collyrium (medicine used for eye problems), and leave it until the next day; then cure it as needed until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot insert the needle, and the unguent can't enter, this resemblance of a nail is often cured with medicines; and they grow as I have told in the division, and if you see it covered, it works the oil of the patient, and take the spatulum lightly and sharp according to this shape:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	Gently press the nail above, and if you see that it does not soften and reason does not apply to it, distill from your mouth into the colyrium oil made of litargirio and red collyrium powder and sulfur, and let the oil rest until the next day; then repeat the work according to this same process until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing opposes in the oil, as with an abscess, then let it drain, and cure the abscess hot until it is healed, then repeat the work as before, until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the armpit harms in oil greatly, suspend it at the onion, and cut a part of it but not all, so that no tears come from it; then distill in the oil colyrium red which is made with litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises above the eyelid
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	 The first hairs of certain men sometimes grow red and cover the anus and adhere to paper and turn inwards, resembling a stone rose; and the operations are such that the patient places his head in the bowl, then you open the anus, and all that charred material suitable for this purpose should be removed and held firm with force; then cut the first layer of char, and go on cutting to the bottom using a razor until the end, ensuring not to wound the oil during the operation; and it should be the incision with the spatula as described in the incision of the nail and small forces used for removing flesh, as the form after this chapter demonstrates; and when the incision is complete and all the char is removed, use oil of linseed or you distill red collyrium and similar corrosive medicines, and put cotton with egg white on top to ensure that the wound is hot; and if something remains, and the flesh swells and you doubt that the wound is hot, leave the oil and treat the wound with calming agents for a hot wound; then return to your operation when it is healed, and do so whenever charred material adheres in the oil by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	However, it is necessary that you alleviate the cure of each oil with a natural remedy; and for an accidental treatment, in work with iron; do not put your hand in any of these treatments until you see that this member is strong enough for that work.
des voines des eulz	veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	 Should the veins be red that are covered by oil, they will make their work visible and weaken the oil for all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	 Then, it is necessary for the first to inspect if the oil, in which the scab is present, has any other disease apart from the scab; then treat the oil as follows: Instruct the patient to place their head in your hand, then press those veins all along the length according to your discretion, and let the incisions be subtle and twice the size of the scab according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en .i. cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two incisions by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then carefully apply force to those veins subtly, and squeeze the blood out hour after hour, until you see the veins move away from the oil; also ensure that the oil is not pricked by the tips of the lancets, and perform this task at noon in front of the sun, and be very diligent in your work so as to not spoil the veins; and when you have completed this, if it distills green and red collyrium for correcting those that remain affected by the sebel.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you cannot catch [or bind] all of it in that hour, make a plaster on the oil of soothing things for the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pain is soothed and assured of healing, then resume according to this manner which is beforehand until it is healed; and this is the form of forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula (small tube) of the oil
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	The mire (a cyst or abscess) is called "arissati" fistula: when you treat it with cautery and burning medicine as I said before, and it is not healed, there is a device within it that you should cut open on the abscess where it must break, and drain all the moisture that is there, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a .i. chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and blackness, if [the area] is ready with all the instruments as mentioned here; it is called "sharp head", and make a hollow [cavity] of about 1 inch deep, pointed like a chisel as shown in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	Then turn the bone corruption between your hands and press with your hand slightly to ensure that the corruption is removed; do this once, then restore the joint with medicinal poultice.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	 If the lesion is sutured and pus does not appear, and the body of the bowel remains thus for 40 days without returning or becoming abscessed, and no bad accident occurs, as it is healthy; if this is not the case, there is no other remedy except to return the fistula to the neck as follows: Expose the bone again with a knife, and with hot medicines, and when it is exposed, take the iron fork according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and let the shaft be attenuated up to the head as you see here.
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	 Then place it on the bone of the dislocation, and move your hand away from the oil hole, then turn the lever completely until it pierces the bone and the patient feels it if you keep your hand on his neck; and then restore the joint with dry medicines as I have shown you, and when the flesh hardens and the joints soften, the matter goes to the neck; it is easier for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	The translation of this line is: "of the oil's discharge" or "from the discharge of the oil".
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil .i. liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en .iiij., et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eye is completely open and there is no need to disturb the nose or reduce it, you must hold the patient; then clean the eye, then apply poultices or hot oil to help heal, then place the oil (a mixture of aconite, aloe, incense, and sarcolocca) on a linen thread and tie the eye, then apply ointment on bands and cloths; and the manner of the cloths is that you take soft cloths, fold each one in four, and then place one on top of another according to the amount needed by the eye; then tighten with a strong bandage and repeat the poultices to help heal without hurting; then remove the poultices and leave the tied eye for a day and night, and if the thread wears out, you must tie it tightly again; then remove the thread after the day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good; if not; repeat the ointment, cloths, thread, and poultices until the eye is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	The dislocation of a torn membrane
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com .i. grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait .i. fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions occur in a torn membrane, they open up and fart like paper, similar to grains of resin and are visible; then you must cover it. The procedure is such that you insert an awl into the root of the affected area until it reaches above, then insert another awl where there is a double thread from the edge of the tear; pierce it, leaving the first awl in place according to its position; then tie the end of the double thread and wrap a part of the membrane around it, tightening it, then remove the awl and apply oiled linen cloth moistened with egg; leave it until the threads grow with the membrane, then cure the area with comforting substances until the wound is healed; and sometimes the wound is held closed by the membrane on both sides in a circular bandage of fabric until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear large, pierce it with a fine spatula coming from oil and remove the moisture and pus, then enter immediately; then pull out until it is healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	From the bone of the oil (can mean "from a bone soaked in oil")
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	 This disease called "alcunnati" is not foreign but rather a tumor assembled in the oil, appearing like an abscess, but it is not an abscess; and the appearance of the work is that you make the patient sit on a prepared chair and straight, then take his head between your hands from both sides, and move it until you see the tumor come up to your eyes; then let it be stuck, and do not drain and let the light enter, and let the patient see things as he is accustomed; and if it does not drain below, know that it is an abscess, and if the draining of the tumor is not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 Make the patient sit between your hands, then take the thin spatula and press it against the corneal membrane on the affected spot, as long as the bubble persists; and when it bursts, distill into it hot sharp oil mixed with honey, or hot water boiled with fenugreek and honey, then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	diseases of the oil (can mean "diseases that occur from bones soaked in oil")
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	 We have the resemblance of pimples in the separation, and that which is required to pierce; if you do so according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	 It is necessary that you make the patient sit cross-legged, away from light because of the sun, and hold the oil in one hand very tightly; then place the paper with the oil on your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or on your right hand if the eyes are on the right; then take the instrument called "almagda" in your right hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your left hand if the eyes are on the right; then place the tip of the instrument under the cornea by a distance of about one fingerbreadth at the smaller tear duct, then push the almagda instrument firmly, and keep your hand steady until it pierces the cornea, and you will feel that almagda comes to an empty place; and it is necessary that the length of the path of almagda should be at the full length of the space between the pupil to the end of the black part; and this is the cornea of the oil; then you will see the bone in the paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument up to the bone or to the wound, then press it gently.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	 If it is to cut now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in its oil.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	 After resting for a moment, and if it is to cut again along the second vein, place the force with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and does not rise, press it gently by turning your hand little by little; then insert a small amount of gem-oil within it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	 Then pour oil made from hemp or dampened linen in rose oil and abundant egg, and bind with the oil of vinegar.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	 We and those of our time place on it a mixture of crushed egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if almagda cannot enter the oil due to its hardness, because there are some men who have too hard eyes, then you must take the instrument called "alberit", which is shaped as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	 So, pierce the conjunctiva only and do not go too deep, but make it thin, then put in a moderate amount, as we have said; and upon completion of the work prepare the patient who will sleep on his back in a dark room; be attentive to all movements, give light foods, and do not move his head to either side, and bind him according to his position for three days; then unbind him in the same dark room and examine his sight, show him some things, and then re-bind him for seven days; and it is not advisable that you perform this in the hour of the cure or after the incision, but rather relax it, because the vein rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	 When an abscess comes, you should lance the oil before the seventh day, and direct it to the one who soothes the abscess; and when it is soothed, you should then lance the eye and put gold or silver on its surface to cover for any duration of time, and stay always in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	 And then leave the house little by little and convert to your condition; and know that no disciples should interfere in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And one came to us who was from Iram, who told us that in his land they pierce almond ointment, so that the pain subsides, but I never saw anyone do it in our land, nor have I ever read it in books of ancient times; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the resemblances of the forms of almagda, because those who do not know them see them; and they are from a rain properly speaking:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en .iij. angles ague.	And be the heads of these from the same subtlety, and the rear parts in four angles pointed.
de la char sor le neis	of the chest on the neck
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	 Sometimes born or are born various tumors, from which there are some that seem like scorpions with many legs; and if there is such a one or it has a tumor swollen in a dark color, and if the tumor is soft of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	 In that case, of those soft charms (or concoctions), and not too harsh, it is necessary that you make the patient sit between your hands towards the sun; open his nostrils, and pour the unguent into those charms, and force them out; then take what you can hold with a sharp, slender spatula on one side, until you know that the charm is completely stopped.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout .i. des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains anything that cannot be caught, open it with all sorts of subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if the abscess is swollen, or an arrow, seek aid as necessary; and if these are malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the wound is sealed and all charities are removed, then spit bile or hot vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	 If it doesn't open (the nostrils), moisture approaches up to the palace (brain), knowing that he is healthy; and if moisture does not pierce as necessary, know that there is pus growing in the bone above, to which the cautery does not come for cutting: then you should put a thick thread of linen, about two fingers apart, into his nostrils, and pull it through smelling until it comes out from the nose down his mouth; and many times do this to children at school, and it is an easy thing for him who wants to do it; then hold the head that comes from the nose in one hand, and the other head that comes from the mouth in another hand, and know each other while they are with us who are at the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	 Do as you know that the nose has been corrupted by corruption of flesh, then pull out the pus, drain the blood, and moisten the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back into the nostril as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrodes all that remains of the flesh; then put a plank splint on it for some days until it is healed, and if there is need for drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, as one distills oils and medicines at the nose.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait .i. mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And it shall be of silver or bronze, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it thus; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the tool be plain for purging the head; and have one handle on the head for holding when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	of the chest on the neck
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	Often a disease named "telul" arises on the neck of the head and grows large over time until it is visible; therefore, it is necessary to treat it from the beginning, remove all pus, and then apply fire cautery or burning medicine to it; if it is not treated promptly when it first appears, and it becomes hard, dark, with poor sensation: do not touch it with iron because it is an aggravated abscess, for when it is touched even once, the patient experiences great harm; and if the abscess is soft in texture but does not have a foul color, you can cover it entirely, let the patient relax without fear, and treat the surrounding area with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	When the nails are cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	 Know that when solution comes in one of these jointed cartilages, it is of little use, unless in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, when such a thing happens to anyone, one should look if the wound is fresh with all its blood; and then align the two lips to a stitch, heal it until it is healthy; and if the lips have already separated on both sides, you must cut all the parts of their flesh until they bleed, then align the two lips to a stitch, tighten it, and sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and finely crushed incense on top; and place a piece of strong or other plaster holding it in place until it hardens, then heal it with ointment until it is healthy.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The method of sewing is such that you assemble the solution: either with needles, as I have told you in abdominal stitching; or with thread, as I have mentioned before.
des apostemes des levres	for abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	When abscesses occur within the lips that are hard and grain-like, either small or large, then you must turn the lips and cut through each side with scissors and take it out with tweezers in each part; afterwards apply vitriol powder to the incision until the wound is cauterized; and then apply alum to heal the wound of dry things until it becomes healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the jaws
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Often flesh grows adjacent to the jaws that the ancients call "albulus"; it must be held with tongs and cut at its root, leaving the vein or blood to flow; then apply vitriol powder or other drying and constricting powders on the place; and if the flesh returns after incision, which often happens, cut it a second time and cauterize it: it does not return again after cauterization; and these are the forms of the instruments for covering.
des sordens	boils
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes, teeth or gums assemble together at the jaw, inside the mouth between the gums; these are ugly and rough; and sometimes the tooth is black and citron colored and sharp, until corruption comes to the gum, and the tooth is foul-smelling; then you must make the patient sit between your hands, and his head should be in your lap, and peel back the teeth or the roughness that appears, as long as nothing remains; and in this way do with the blackness and the greenness, and the yellow and other stains, until they are removed; and if one removes what is at the root first, it is good; if not, then begin again the second day and the third, as long as you have everything removed; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to the work that shows, because the cleaner who cleans the teeth has other forms than the one who cleans between the teeth; and these forms and others should be prepared with you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you are treating the tooth from its pain, it is necessary that you pull slowly as much as you can, for this should not be done hastily; for this is a very high substance until there is no excuse to scrape.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	 Therefore, when the patient is compelled to draw teeth, one must be certain about the tooth to be pulled.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	 Many times the patient feels pain and thinks it is a toothache, and makes the good tooth come out; yet the pain does not go away until the bad one has been removed, for we have often seen this with holy men; and when you are certain that it is the dying tooth, then you must cauterize around the tooth at every interval. Use strong forceps to keep the gums from all sides; then rotate it with your fingers or subtle pliers at the first sign of movement, until it has been well dislodged, and firmly grasp the pliers; and hold the patient's head between your knees so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	 After the tooth has been correctly removed, if it does not fly out, take any of these instruments and gently push it in from all sides, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	 And if the tooth is pierced and eaten through, you must fill it with gauze where the hole is; and if you hold it gently with tweezers, so as not to break while squeezing; and you must work very carefully around the gumline to dislodge the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	 Be careful not to break it and leave a part behind, because returning it again due to the root's mischief will cause greater pain to the patient than the first time.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	 And beware that you do not act like ignorant people who, in their haste and audacity, break the cart sometimes, and do not bring the things we have mentioned; but they sometimes cause this great illness by the roots that remain or by the cart they break, as we have often seen; and when the tooth is pulled out, wash the area with wine or vinegar and oil; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill it with pulverized vitriol; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which initially silence the teeth, should be long points and thick handles, so that they do not twist when you pull the tooth; and these are their forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them be large members which do not yield when drawn, and let them be made of hard iron and sharp-edged to hold fast.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	 When the root remains at its pulling, you must put on it soft cotton wool in butter for a day or two.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	 as long as the joints are softened, then insert the tongs called "algefri," with which the head resembles a beak of a vise; and within them, make it shaped like a limpet shell.
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not want to come out with all these tongs, you must cut open the skin all around the root, and put the instrument called "althali," which is known as a pincers, there; this is its shape:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	It should be large and thick so that it does not break, and if the root jumps out through these tongs, that is good; if not, help with all the instruments, and here are the shapes that follow:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait .ij. rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you use this instrument with two prongs, here is its shape:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	And other instruments which are in front of the teeth, and of this tool that seems like large pincers, whose shape is:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And this tool should not break, and know that many instruments of teeth are; and likewise other instruments which are not counted; and the wise masters skillfully find their own tool according to what their work and the sickness show, for there are such diseases where the ancient ones did not teach any instrument due to diversity among them; and if it breaks a chariot or another bone that it could have healed, then search for the instruments that are needed, which I told you, and help with gestures, of which this is the shape:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And be large and well-holding to hold the bone, so that it does not slip, but can hold and remove; and then restore the place with medicines suitable for this, and if there is pus in the bone, which is small, grind all this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a .i. petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not as natural according to the body, and the shape is ugly, even in virgin women, then you must know that if the tooth has not erupted after the tooth, and it is not in the correct place, and it cannot be straightened or filed: then file it; and if it is near the tooth, take this instrument with the following form, and resembling a small beak, made of sharp metal at the end:
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the coping file should be used with much care for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it appears that one can file it, then file it with a small file like this shape:
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	and is also like the file used to make needles; and with a light touch file the tooth little by little, so that it does not move too much when it emerges; then smooth the end in any way with any smoother, and if the tooth is excessively sharp and it bites the tongue, then you must file the sharpness until it is even, so that it does not bite the tongue or corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	When the teeth fall out
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	 When the teeth fall out in front or by falling or crushing, and the patient cannot chew food without them spilling out, and you have cured them with constricting medicines, and it is of no use; then they must be held together with a golden thread, because silver threads become green and decay, but gold never changes; and the thread should be neither too thick nor too thin nor too small, according to the space between the teeth; and if you see that the teeth are separated, take the thread and place it double between the two healthy teeth, then put the head between the separated teeth as many as there are, one or more, until you see clearly up to the healthy tooth on the other side; then continue the covering until the part where you began, and hold your hand skillfully and carefully, so that they do not move at all; and tie the knot at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	 Then take the shoulder bones with wire using pliers, and assemble them, and place them back between the healthy joint; make sure it does not pierce the tongue, then leave it as tight as it can stay in place, if it dislocates or the wires break, secure it with another wire; if it remains and serves for its entire time, it is the shape of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy joints, and the two muscles, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the teeth fall out and are put back in their place, freshly, as we have said; and do not let anyone interfere who is not wise and patient, and sometimes a tooth of bone from a cow or other animal is made and placed where the missing tooth was, and it is tied in as described above, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	To cover the ligament of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	 Occasionally there is a ligament that comes from under the tongue, which occurs naturally; or by accident due to a healed wound; and the work is such that you open the mouth of the patient, hold their head still, and lift the tongue; then take hold of the nervous ligament with a large grip, until the tongue dislocates from its place, if there is resistance or not, it is the result of a severe wound, in this case press the knife and take hold of that ligament; but make sure the cut is not too deep, because the artery is below; and when done, lift the jaw upwards with cold rosewater or cold water, then place a linen tent under the tongue; and let the patient bite on it every night so the jaws cannot heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	 And if bleeding from a wound occurs, apply vitriol powder; and if the wound does not heal itself, use a slow-burning cautery (lentiginout), which is good for this purpose; then heal it with another remedy until it is healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if you see it of a thin color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is cancer; and if it is spreading towards blanchor, and there is moisture, apply the incisors, and free it with a slender spatula from both sides. And if bleeding continues at your work, apply vitriol powder until it stops. Then return to your work until you remove all pus. Then lift up the swelling with warm rose water or cold water and treat it with other medicines until it is cured.
des apostemes de la gorge	From the abscess of the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	 Sometimes boils (godath) come inside the throat which are called 'the two almonds', and they are properly called 'the two almonds'; when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are not healed, take care: if it is a hard abscess of small size and pale color, do not touch it with iron.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	 And if it is red and the root is large, do not touch it with iron, also because of the bleeding; but leave it until it becomes ripe, and then you will cut or break it open, or it would burst by itself; and if it is white in color again, and the root is fine, prepare the instrument for covering, but first check that the abscess's heat has subsided and been calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	 Then make the patient sit in front of the sun, and his shoulders be in alignment, and open his mouth wide, and the servant takes hold of it between his hands, and presses the tongue beneath the instrument, thus is its shape; and may it be of silver or fine iron as thin as a knife:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	Press the tongue to all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take the hook and poke it into the almond, and pull it up more than you can; and pull anything from the cloth with it, then strike it on the instrument, as follows, which resembles a forceps; and even though the head is curved, one side to the other, and they are very sharp, and made of iron or brass:
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les .ij. amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les .ij. amandres igament.	And if you do not have this instrument present, hold the iron with pliers, of which form follows:
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	 Then treat a woman with an abscess that is inside the throat, specifically an abscess of small size; and I had pressed her throat closed so tightly that the woman could not exhale through the blocked passage, nor eat or drink, and would have died within a day or two.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	 And the abscess was so swollen that it had to be cut open through two of its passages (nostrils).
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	 Therefore, I promptly, thrust into one eye-socket, then pulled it outwards, and also pulled a large piece of bone with it; afterwards, I reset the other socket that was pierced by the nose, opened its mouth and pressed its tongue; next, I thrust the bone back into these abscesses, took a portion of it, and no more blood flowed out except for a little; and thus, the woman's throat was closed off; and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease cutting away from that abscess for a long time; and the abscess grew again and filled up the place I had emptied, until it became very large; then I tricked it and cauterized it inside the throat: thus, it stopped growing; and I left those parts, and only God did something with them afterwards.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	 When the arm is drawn back towards the eye and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and if it is thick and rounded, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	 When it is healed as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not improve, and you see that the abscesses are alleviated, and it is thin, you must cut it; and if it is rounded and not long, it should be collected (or removed); and if it is red, bloody, or black, you must make an incision for it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	 For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	 Therefore, when you see it (the abscess), according to the manner that I have said, of its bladder and its length, you must make the patient sit facing the sun, and press the tongue against the instrument which we have mentioned above; then stick the onion in the eye, pull it out, and cut it at the places where I have mentioned in the incision of the two apples.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And you must not cover any superfluity that is beyond the natural term; for if you cover more of it, it causes harm to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use what we have said in the incision of the two anatomies, and cure it until it heals.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	 And if the patient fears to cover [it], then you must use an instrument for the cauterization to remove the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	 The manner of the cautery is sharp and hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	 And the patient places his head in your lap, and then you press his tongue to the instrument that we have said or in the chapter of cautery, and hold it with a sharp hot iron, so that it is not too thick nor too clear; and use the handle of this instrument, which has the following shape:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés .iiij. jors ou .v. Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And have a hair or oil pot where one puts the medicine, like the scoop of a spoon, and place the instrument on top of all the medicine over the eye; and let the patient lie on their side, so that saliva and mucus flow from their mouth into the medicine without it descending to the throat or the nose; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it on the eye for the amount of half an hour, until you see the pus and the inflammation of the medicine are soothed; and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the sheath over the wound, until the cotton adheres to the eye; and do this repeatedly, until the cauterization is complete, then let it dry for 4 or 5 days. And if you need to restart the cauterization with the medicine, restart it, and after the cauterization drain the pus around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine; and wash it with cold water and heal it with gargarisms until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en .i. pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait .i. estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is more effective by fumigation than by cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take camomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, and wormwood, and assemble them all or some of them in one pot, and place it on a fire to boil; the pot should be well sealed with strong clay, and in the pot have one opening covered with fine cloth in this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	 And let it be silver or lead, and let one of the heads be pushed into the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the canal, until the eye is mortified; afterwards, the process often repeats, until the eye dries up, and make sure you do not perform this at the beginning of the abscess's eruption, for many things may occur; and do not do this unless at the decline of an abscess's eruption.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	 If this instrument is not present, take a cane and insert an eggshell into the head so that the patient's mouth is not too hot; for the eggshell does not let the vapor harm the mouth, and it is a good remedy together with safety.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou .i. morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge .i. fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren .i. estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times an arrow or bone lodges in the throat or somewhere else; therefore, you must draw out what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with the whole instrument, so that you see the thing move; and if it does not open and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is cooked in the stomach; perhaps this will loosen the thing through vomiting. Or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of cotton, or a radish root, or one morsel of dry bread; tie a thread to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will stick, and then you will draw it out; and if it does not come out from what we have said, take one instrument made of wood in this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the instruments be curved at the head so that it can enter more easily into the throat, and lift the head high; watch that you do not touch the epiglottis, that nothing harms it or push the bone inside; it is better if the patient pushes the instrument, because he can move it or the thing is air; if he pushes down, or pulls it all the way out, the instrument should be pulled out equally until it is out.
de la sansue de la gorge	the saliva from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	 At no time is the saliva medicine, as I said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when it does not help, then look at the throat of the patient towards the sun, after you press his tongue with the instrument that I told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	 And if you see the saliva, draw it out with a very small spoon or subtle tweezers that are suitable for this purpose.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	 And if that does not work, take a hollow cane, and put it in the patient's throat, then push or heat up the end of the cane and do this frequently.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	 And let the patient be anointed with water all day long.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	 Then take a full glass of cold water and open the mouth, pour it in without swallowing, move it around with your hand frequently; and as soon as the saliva feels the water, it will be expelled.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	 And if it does not fall as we have said, you should fumigate the patient with asafetida, using the instrument that I mentioned in the fumigation of the eye; do this many times, for it will yield results.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	 The manner of fumigation is that you take the pot or one with charcoal inside, and cover it with a cloth pierced in the middle, and put the head of the instrument in it; then pour your fumigation, and the patient puts the head of the cane in his mouth, and closes his mouth so that the smoke does not escape, but comes directly to the nose; and now it will flow, and if it does not fall, then repeat the fumigation many times; let the patient endure thirst, eat salted and alkaline food, and drink no water; and afterwards it will be necessary for it to come out through this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	The form of the instrument for treating the nostrils is like curved tweezers to enter the throat; and resemble the beak of a syringe, and it should have abrasive limestone so that what it takes, it cannot release; here is its shape:
li chapistres des apostemes	The chapter on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	 Many things that appear to be abscesses are, according to what is recalled later in this book from one and another, and they are different in perforation and incision; and it is in two ways that the one resembles itself, and of these that it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	 And the second way is for the sores that are on the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	 For abscesses of the head are other than those from the foundation, and abscesses in the cartilage are other than those that come at joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	 And if it is an abscess, it should not be pierced until the swelling is measured according to its completion; and if it is of such kind that it needs to be pierced when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	 For when an abscess approaches joints and is left surrounded by it, there is a chance that the ligament and nerve of the joint become corrupt, which causes contraction in that member.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	 For if an abscess is near the main member and you delay perforation until it is ripe, this will harm the main member; or if it is located at the base, piercing it in such a way that it is not yet ripe will result in no benefit, and there should be no perforation of an abscess without completion of digestion, except for one that is located at the base, which cannot penetrate and should be incised and drained to become a fistula and not heal within a long term.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time of perforation of the abscess that is ripe according to its completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the subsiding of the fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and the loosening and shrinking of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you must make the perforation sit on a lower place nearer to the abscess, and where it has opened; and the perforation should be along the body length, and if the abscess is on the hands or feet, in joints, nerves, arteries, and in all equal places where there is no hair growth.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	 In those that break, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	 When an abscess is in a charnel (an open grave or pit), it is good to leave the perforation until it has been confirmed through complete digestion, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	 For if you pierce it beforehand, the body will flow out with its pus, and it will be filled with much filth; and there is the danger of hardening the lips and suffocating from it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	 And if any abscess that has been pierced according to the width of the body, as required by the limbs.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	 You must also prepare small abscesses, small wounds; and large abscesses, large wounds, and many cuts according to the similarity of the size of the abscess; and if there are such abscesses that require the key, they should be sealed; when it has become as the napkins, and is dried up, you must do as with babies: and if there are those that have been cut into three angles, and those that are covered like the myrtle leaf, like arm abscesses; and if there are those that make a round incision, and other similar cuts and similar sealing.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	 One who has no head, in the manner of an abscess superficially, you must pierce it completely; and when the abscess is large and it encloses a big cavity, and you pierce it, do not draw out all the cavity in that hour, but draw out only a part; then stop up the abscess until the next day, then draw nothing wrong; do this repeatedly with great care, many times, until the cavity is completely drawn out; likewise for those who are of weak constitution, or women, or small children, or old and frail men.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	 The sphincter occasionally spasms with the discharge of bile, which may accidentally kill the patient, and you should not worry about it.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced the abscess, drain the wound, and check if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is large, bring strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess and there is much damage, it is necessary that you insert a strip in each one so that they come against each other; and if you have cut into the abscess part of the skin and shaved around it, fill it with old cotton or linen gauze without moisture, tie it until the third day; then open it, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	 And if bleeding occurs during your work, apply cold water and a linen cloth, wet it, and place on the site repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If bleeding continues during your work, administer treatment and care, and the powders I have mentioned in this book for the muscles or abscesses, and if it is winter, or the muscles or abscesses are very nervous, then place hot tents and damp cloths on them; and if it is summer, and the muscles are fatty, then place damp cloths on them in cold water and oil, or cold water and oil, for up to three days as we have said, and then lance the abscess and drain it, treating it until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	This must be known universally in wound treatments: now I have told you how to proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	boils
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	 For small abscesses on the head, our methods are as follows, similar to those in bags, like the knot of a grape, and there are many similarities.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	 There are some that have fat and pus, similar to boils; and those that are hard and stony at the base, without any doubt if the arteries do not go against it.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	 And the work of the cut [incision] is that you probe with any instrument that is called "entomissoire", from which the form comes afterwards, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	 For if it contains moisture, they drain it by making a long incision.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	 And when the moisture is drained, they scrape the skin that contains it without leaving any hair, because it returns again if you leave some; then immerse cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, in vinegar and linen, and use it on the wound and leave it until the next day; and those who are delayed will recover.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And then continue with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you are sure that it does not heal over; then treat the wound with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	 If the abscess remains hard with pus, squeeze it according to this shape, longly; and pour out your onions and the scorch from all sides, and put all your care to draw out the puss where it is located; and if the arteries oppose you, do as I told you after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	 And do the same with the abscess if it is pus-filled, and in cutting and treating as I told you.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	 And the opening on the abscess pierces and moistens it, it becomes lighter as there is little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	 And in some of these abscesses or sores, there is no moisture, and from those I have cut open or opened a sore of an old woman; and I found the abscess as hard as a quartz stone, rough and discolored, and could not be broken; and if one were to cut it with anything, it would make the same wound as with a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	 In other abscesses coming or head, whether those that come at the heads of children and at the roots of ears, they should be opened all the time depending on the case, to make the pus issue; and they are treated as appropriate.
des scrophules	of scrofulas
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	 Often this abscess comes at the neck, under the armpits, and in glands, and sometimes they come elsewhere on the body, and are hard, and are connected to each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	 And each scrophula is properly inside its own side, like the tumor and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the resemblances of these scrophulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	 There are some that contain moisture, and there are some that are malicious and do not want to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	 In the case that you see it well-positioned in the body, and it resembles the color of the body, and is silent on both sides and is not hard to the touch neither at the neck nor at the artery or duct, and is not swollen; then you must cut through it, and peel off each part, and spread the two lips of the incision, if necessary, as we have said in head abscesses; and pull slowly and carefully to make sure you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not use the spatula or lancet too deeply, let the hands not slip, and look not too far ahead, so that you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	 If you puncture the vein or artery and it does not let you continue, put vitriol powder into the wound, or some powders that stop blood, and hold the wound closed; leave it until the abscess is calmed down, and the wound becomes soft and starts to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	 When the wound is stopped bleeding, return to your work until you finish it; then check if there remain small scrofulas, if so, cut and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	 If there is a large vein at the root of the scrofula, you should not cut the scrofula at its root, but tie it with a strong double thread and let it hang out without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton dipped in Egyptian ointment, and heal it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	 If you cut the entire scrofula (the swelling), it is necessary that you close the two lips of the wound and sew them now, as there will be no excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	 It is necessary that you understand to cover the root and draw out pus, and sew it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Those scrofulas that have excess, pierce there where the growth is more open; and pierce as was said before, in a dependent manner, then bring in tents with ointment and similar things so that it corrupts what remains of corruption; and when the wound is well cleaned, apply the ointment of healing charcoal until it heals.
de squinance	The patient should lie on his back, with the affected leg raised and supported by a cushion or similar object. Then, using a sharp instrument, make an incision from the groin to the knee, following the natural creases of the thigh. This incision should be wide enough to expose the underlying tissues but not so deep as to injure the femoral artery or veins. After making the incision, carefully remove any necrotic tissue, pus, and other debris from the wound. Once the wound is clean, apply ointment-enriched charcoal to promote healing.
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke of the shape of the throat; but I never saw anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en .ij. amandres.	For those who have squinting (squinance), the incision of the throat called "epiglote" should be opened; and it should not be helped by these [people], because all the veins and the passageway for the sickness are at those who have an abscess hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in two mandibles.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the sickness is in the passageway of the throat, it should be covered to avoid the danger of strangulation.   (When the sickness is located in the passageway of the throat, it is necessary to cover the epiglote to prevent strangulation.)
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	 Therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, it should be cut beneath three circles or four small incisions across, between the two circles or by the size of the incision according to the thickness of the cartilage; and such a place is suitable for the section of the epiglottis that there is no cartilage, and the vessels are long in that area.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	 If the master is fearful, it must be that he stretches the skin of the throat entirely, then cuts the windpipe until it reaches the trachea; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cut the thyroid cartilage as we have said; and this is demonstrated by the section of the laryngeal gland that swells when it protrudes through the broken trachea, and by the lack of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed in which there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound with care and sew up the entire area against the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce healing, until it heals.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Al-Zahrawi says not to do this until the throat is completely stopped up and the patient has been judged dead, and then let the bird fly away.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	 Then squeeze the epiglottis because the patient cannot clear his throat; and he breathes through the wound, and thus is guarded from death; and for this the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease has passed, which has passed in three or four days. And then they commanded to sew up the wound and heal it, until it is healed; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	 A maiden took the knife and thrust it into her throat, piercing part of the windpipe; and I was called to heal her, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I found the wound and saw the blood coming out of it, and knew that she did not have any vein or conduit except for her throat, and the wind was going through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	 I hurried, and sewed up the wound, and healed it until it was healed; but the maiden had no fever except for her voice being hoarse, and she recovered afterwards; therefore I say that in such a situation of the epiglottis one should not be afraid.
de la grosse gorge	from the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	 This abscess is called "hernia of the throat", and it is a large one with a bluish color, and it occurs mainly in women; and it is according to two ways: natural and accidental; where the natural one has no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 And the accidental one is according to two ways, of which one resembles fatty tissue, and the other way resembles an abscess that comes from us due to arteries; there should be fear, and it should not be operated on except in the case of a small one, and it must be proved and sought through all the opening: if you find it as hard as fat, and does not open in any way, strike it like one strikes fat, and draw it out completely, if there is anything; and closely surround it, and cure it as needed until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	We have found that... (Incomplete sentence due to missing text)
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	 Many ways of ours are, which I will tell all similarities; and now it is necessary that I say all the differences between notch and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting, until the boils have passed and the porridge is complete; then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	 The notch has no heat, fever, or pain, and contains the pus, which is its own sac and is like the color of the body, and starts similarly to an abscess, and becomes large; and they are similar in two ways, either fatty or moist, and they have much color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It is necessary when you come to the cure of the newt, that you examine and test first all the instrument which is called "entromissoire", according to its form or chapter that follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	 The method of the incision of abscesses for us is that you take a more moist place than you find in the abscess and turn your fingers little by little until you feel that the knife has pierced the core, then it should be according to the size of the abscess; then separate the edge, and pay attention so as not to let it burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	 If moisture runs out from the abscess and colors it, treat it as I have said for other abscesses; and if afterwards no more moisture comes out, know that it is filled with pus, then make a cross-shaped incision, grasp it with forceps, gently scrape it lightly from both sides and pull the cotte where it lies that you draw it cleanly with the thread; and if you cannot draw it cleanly, then pull it apart piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	 If nothing remains, the pus will return many times; and if a small amount remains and does not bother you, treat the wound with certain corrosive powders, hold the wound closed, put warm soothing things on the abscess, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the pus is large, cut two lips of the wound, and cure it with whatever helps to heal flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet .ij. jors ou .iij., tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beats against you or otherwise is opposed to you, or if you hasten and employ the leech of vitriol crushed, let it lie for 2 or 3 days until the wound heals, and let the boil of blood rest; then return to cover what has remained unhealed.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	 Behold the shapes of surgical instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small; and there are three cross-shaped ones called 'albaret', and one called 'breb', and they also come in three forms: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses with fistulae; and they are similar to needles used for sewing sacks, and they are of citron reed, iron, or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more valuable, and are more experienced in dealing with black plugs for encircling fistula sores; and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the width of the wounds.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	 The shapes of the tumors are much alike, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and some tumors have two bumps of three types; and some tumors have three bumps, and are also of three types; and some tumors have two bumps, and tumors with only one bump, and they are also of three types; and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	 The heads of these things that are cut are sharp, and those who do not cut it only from one side, from which the vein or nerve is not struck; and these intrusive things are replied in manacles so that the patient does not feel it at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three types: large, small, and medium, as you see; and they are not used anywhere except in charnut places, such as legs, arms, breasts, and bellies, and in similar places; and sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling fistula scissors, according to this form, for letting blood:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	And it is placed at times on the place where wounds heal quickly from veins and arteries, and sometimes round in this large shape.
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	 At times the breasts of some men swell when they begin to corrupt, until they seem like female breasts; and they remain ugly and swollen, and whoever wishes to cure them, should do so according to this form of this line b to g:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	 Then cut the fat, apply medicine to the wound made of charred linen, then bring together the two lips of the wound in stitches, and cure it until it is healed; and if the breast sinks downward due to its size, as happens with women, fold it into two folds, above each other, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form, from line b to line g; then cut the skin between the two lips, remove the fat, and introduce what we have said about stitching and powders, and whatever is necessary for the cure, until it is healed; and if it is not healed, or the incision is not complete because the patient does not want to rest, or due to bleeding, then fill the wound with cotton wetted in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it digests the remaining fat, then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	From abscesses of the buttocks
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come under the buttocks are handled as hard scrofulas where there are coats and if it contains moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	 Therefore, those who contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b up to the line g:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the boil that is in the abscess is emptied, use old cotton on the wound and leave it until another day, then remove all the cotton, and apply ointment afterwards until it heals.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said in the incisions of scrofula, and if the wound boils again, apply a cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of an artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	 If the artery is wide and the skin above it thickens repeatedly, abscesses occur, and this happens with a swollen vein and abscess; and if one knows it by the artery, the abscess is long and deep; and when you feel it with your fingers, it feels tight; and when it is due to the vein, it appears round and protruding; and it is foolish to cut this abscess, especially when it is under the shoulders and angles, near the neck, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Therefore, it is necessary to remove the iron cure, and he who has a head injury should also be treated likewise, and in the case of an inflammation of the artery, make an incision through the skin along its length; then open the abdomen carefully, and separate the artery from the lining, exposing it completely; then insert a needle beneath it, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and bind the artery with a double thread as I have shown you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples; then press down on the gap between the two bands until the injury disappears, and remove the pus; then apply the cure of bow saw, until the ligament breaks; then treat the area with liniment until it is healed; and if the injury is due to a vein wound, dye your hand with what you can from the pus, then insert a needle beneath the area you hold, pierce it, and have thread there so you can pull it out from the other side; then tie the pus, as I said, or a ligament of one of the two bands with the thread; and if you doubt that the threads do not protrude, insert another needle all along the thread beneath the wound of the first needle, and bind the threads in four parts; then cut the pus so it disappears, then cut the excess fat and leave what is tied; then apply a damp cloth in wine and oil, then apply treatments of tenting and liniment until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses from nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As in the artery and vein come abscesses, so do abscesses of nerves when they are wounded or by excessive labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	 And this happens more often in the shoulders and elbows, and in all joints where there are joints, and it is the large abscesses, and its color resembles the body's color, and it is found in many conditions causing pain; and when it is stretched outward, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely within the body, but under the skin; and it spreads well in all directions, and does not go forward or backward, neither down nor up, and one who is in joints should not be covered by iron: perhaps contraction will occur; and one who is in the head or forehead, make the skin thin.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and strike its root; if it is large, squeeze it at the edge and peel off the skin, then break the bone and stitch up the wound until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	hanging large growths
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	 At times, there occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and it is a disease called "funge," resembling mushrooms, and the roots are subtle, and the heads are large; and among them there are small ones and very large ones; and I have seen men who had two or more bellies that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had a thin root, and were cut open, and ran moisture constantly.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	 I weighed it and found one weighing eighteen ounces, the other six, and the wound in the incision is such that you look at it if the patient is moist, and the color of the arrowhead is white and moist with a thin root; then grip the spatula large, and the fire cautery be present.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	 For in the thigh, there often comes too great displacement of blood, if it escapes, then hurry to cauterize; and if you see the patient anxious and afraid of the iron incision, take a well-made thread, tie it around the artery as we have said, and leave it for two days; then tighten it, and do not stop tightening the thread until it stops the flow of blood, and causes pain; and if the roots are large, be careful to cauterize in the same way due to the belly, but you can easily cauterize half of it, then cauterize where it has not returned; then cure the wound, and be sure to not cauterize the flesh that is of a dark color, poor sensation, and milky appearance.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an enlarged abscess, and I will come to the treatment of scrofula afterwards.
quant li boude ist fuer	When the buttock (or anus) is open/exposed
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	 If the appearance of the boil comes through a cautery of a wound or a split in the sifac (a surgical instrument), and it is on the belly and among some of the buboes (swellings), as happens in other routes, or from blood that pours out of veins or arteries according to what is before, or from windiness; and if it comes through the sifac route and the exit of the stool, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body and is a light thing without pain, and open with multiple exits.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more diverse, and when it is pressed with the fingers if it shrinks back, and then returns, and possibly if it is hardened, and greatly enlarges at the entrance of the bath and by great effort.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	 And if it is due to moisture, it is a light thing and open wide when you press it with your hand, do not constrict it; and if it is due to blood, then the abscesses are large and hard, and filled according to a quantity; and if it is due to windiness, it is soft to the touch, and the work is such that you look to see whether the appearance is due to the blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	 You must leave the treatment.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	 For it causes fear and doubt, as I told you in the chapter on abscesses, because of the artery and the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	 And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bowel, you must command the patient to empty his anus, extend himself straight, then bend all around the feces; then command him to bear down between your hands, then go around the area that you have signaled with the spatula, then stretch half of the abscess above with a large spoon; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a strong cord and let the nose be pulled away from the thread; then open the stretched abscess over the thread and insert your finger, looking for the intestine; if you find it caught in the thread, release it, push the intestine to the outside of the abdomen; and if you find the bowel, grab it with the spoon and cut off the excess; and if the artery or vein oppose you, go gently, then return to your work and take two needles and insert two fine threads, and place them around what you have made in a cross shape that you pierce; then press the abscess in four parts above the needles, and if you see it, remove the needles, and leave the area alone until it dries up, and separate the dead flesh by itself; or cut it when it is subtle and can be pushed through, then cure what is necessary, and close the abscess as we have said; and drain the pus or moisture that you find, then cure the area.
dou chancre	two boils
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We said in the previous division the resemblances of boils and how one should treat them with medicine, and how to avoid the iron cure; and we say that a boil starts in the groin, and great caution is required in its treatment, and the ancients said that when boils are in a place where it can be shaved as in boils that are on the breasts or in the thighs, and in similar places, one should remove them entirely at their beginning; and when they are large and old, it should not be approached because I never knew anyone to heal it; nor has anyone healed it before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide .i. boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when in a place where it can be removed as we have said, is that you purge the patient once with black bile; then make him urinate if he has manifest fullness, then cut the patient one boin (a small knife) to perform the operation; then throw down your oncines (bandages or poultices) or boil, and shave off all the hair from all parts, and remove all the flesh without leaving anything; and let the blood flow freely, and be careful to anoint the place with your hand or something, and if the discharge of blood opposes the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the blood is coagulated; then cure it with another treatment until it is healed.
de ydropisie	Of hydropisy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	 We have said in the division that the resemblances of edema are similar to idropisie; and how the assembly of water is made, and the signs of each resemblance, and the cure made by medicine, and that which is cured by iron: only this is exuded; no iron should be used in these two resemblances: namely tympanites and yposarche, for it is a fatal thing; therefore, when you treat this edema-like condition called "eclites" with medicine, if the cure does not work, observe whether the patient is weak or has other diseases besides edema, such as dropsy of the belly and similar things; no iron should be used because there is doubt; however, if you see the patient to have strong constitution and having only edema alone, who is neither too thin nor too old, then you must work in this way: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press the belly towards the lowest part of the back, then take the pointed spatula according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	 And let it be cut through the second part.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	 And let it be incised through the second part. It should not be so deep as to reach the intestine when punctured, and it must not be pierced; then examine if the hernia is directed towards the intestines: if so, you must make an incision below the third rib on the left side of the waist; and if it is due to liver disease, the incision should be to the left of the third rib; and if it is due to swelling, it should be to the right. The patient should not lie down on the incision so that excessive fluid does not flow to that weak place; then puncture the skin with an instrument, push it, and move your hand along the entire spatula between the skin and the hernia sac as when peeling an apple of about the size of a nail or inwards around it; then pierce the hernia sac until the spatula reaches the watery area (the fluid), which is the location of the hernia, then pull it out, and insert the instrument in its form:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	 And it resembles a silver-thin chain, and is of silver or light gold, and at its bottom part, there are three holes; and on one side, two holes; and one on the other; and the head of the shoulder is cut like a feather, and this is the shape of the incision that scribes carve into a feather:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	 Above the arm is the elbow, so that when the instrument comes to the point, now push it on the instrument; empty then either half or one third, for if you empty too much at that time, perhaps the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he will faint, or approach death; but empty according to its strength and according to what the conditions of its virtue indicate in the patient and his pulse; then draw the instrument and hold the point, and it is held now by the caution that stops the wound that I have spoken about, which you pierce in this way; then return the instrument the next day if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small amount of fluid; do this every day, and be careful not to let him keep too much fluid but just a little.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	 And if you doubt the patient's condition and leave him with moisture, cure him by burial or hot sand, by much sweat or bath and in the sun, anoint him with wine; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healthy, cauterize the stomach, liver, and spleen after the removal of the moisture, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	Of stopping the penis
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	 Sometimes children are born without testicles or their testicles are small or not in the correct place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	 When it is necessary to pierce through an abscess with a very thin needle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	 Then put the testicle of thin lead into the abscess, tie it and hold it for three or four days until he wishes to urinate, then remove the lead, let him urinate, and then replace it; and in case there is no need to do so, as the urine that comes out does not close the opening.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	 The patient with a small putrid sore should be treated with a cloth of plaster, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	 Those who do not have the sore in their place are bleeding, for no one is born with a sore on the head of the penis, therefore they cannot urinate before lifting their penis; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the marris, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the method of work is that the patient lies supine on their back, their head should be slightly elevated and the neck similarly to the thickness of a feather, so that the patient's chin touches their chest, as required; and guard against bleeding which occurs frequently, and if it happens, stop it by pressing the area that is bleeding, and treat the wound until it heals.
des pustules de la verge	of boils on the penis
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a .i. oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Often this albathion appears in the penis, and it is an appearance of ugly genital warts; and there are both malignant and non-malignant ones; you should take them one by one with a subtle instrument, cut and clean all of them, then put cotton moistened in Egyptian ointment on top; then treat it with the ointment diafinicon until it heals.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	 And if the anus is infected with pus-like color and discharge, then you must apply fire cautery.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	 When you have cauterized it, and the anus is on the side of the penis, with parts inside the skin and parts outside, you must first remove the infected anus that is inside. And when it has been removed, heal the part that remains outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you are treating it together, the genitals of the penis are not always certain that they will not be perforated; and blackness and corruption come into the penis and around it; if it is necessary to remove all that is black and corrupted, then lay it on a plaster of honey and flour made from pumpkin shells and sometimes, then treat it with other cures until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	 And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	 The cautery and its aid are assembled together: that is to say, for the removal of blood and corruption; and if the genitals of the penis are corrupted and retracted, it is necessary that you pass or lead a pipe from the penis, and make the patient urinate; and when the hairs reach the tip of the penis, which occurs in those who have not been circumcised, or it occurs due to injury or abscess, then it is necessary to shave it with an instrument having fine hairs, until the ligaments are loosened, and the genitals of the penis are delivered from all sides; and if this is difficult to speak about, it is necessary to shave it at the spatula a little distance from the tip of the penis and the skin; then separate them carefully, and put a thin linen cloth dampened with cold water between them, which should not come apart immediately.
de la circoncision	Of circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not just a cutting like other wounds; however, when we perform this work of our own will and specifically on infants, it is necessary to make the best and easiest work for salvation.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not circumcise their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have only what we have acquired by experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor .i. dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a .ij. toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have wanted the greater part of masters and saints who perform circumcision around day one, and for forces, and in all cases with a novacule; however, it is feared because there are two layers, and by chance if one above is cut, the one below may remain.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Now it should be covered, and the pain is doubled; and at the amputation which is deep in the limb, there is no assurance of the point of the member; and during the amputation of the nail, by chance the iron may slip, and spoil the work, and many times it is not necessary for amputation, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	In amputation which is done with the forceps, I have found the advantage of the experiment, because the forceps cut evenly both above and below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When you press your hand, you should cut it evenly all around; but the thread should be well tied around the skin; and the method of the first work is such that you make the child understand if he can, that you tie the thread only around the rod, and then let him rest in every way that you can; afterwards, let him stand upright between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them or any tools; then press your hand onto the rod and blow or pull, and draw it up until the head of the rod is in; then clean it well of the accumulated filth, then tie a suture made of double thread, then tie it underneath the skin to the other suture; and hold it with the second suture at the pouch and the index finger, and strike between the two sutures, then remove the thread as quickly as possible and pull the head of the rod; then let the blood come out freely as it wishes, because this is the discharge; and put powder on top and more powder stick with a soft egg yolk mixed with rosewater, boiled and finely ground oil of roses, and leave it on until the next day, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forces for cleansing is as follows: the two heads should be tender and sharp, and their heads should be as large as a hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in the incision of the womb is when the bowels inside are cut; therefore it is necessary that you stretch it with your nail so that the opening resembles an abscess, and then press it equally, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, grasp it with forceps, and then press.
Et s’il trespassent .iij. jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they exceed three days, and what is beneath the scrotum swells, leave it until the abscesses are appeased and gently incise the skin; then press as you can move it, and be careful of the part of the scrotum, which will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, treat the limb with things buried in a wound with the powder we have mentioned or how to treat wounds with powders, and if you press too hard, it will go upwards, but it will not harm; therefore, treat it as we have said until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	Retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	 The retention of urine is due to a stone, or congealed blood, or pus, or frozen semen, or similar things, as we have said in the division; and if the urine is not dislodged, and you see that it is retained because of the stone which is in the bladder or urethra, then you must make the patient bend over their knees; put their feet on the back, extend their abdomen from the part above the lower back, and restrain the patient as much as they can; and then the lower part of the bladder to the expression of the stone above is compressed, so that the urine is dislodged; and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, you must administer extraction with all the instruments called "syringe", of which this is the form: and it should be made of thin silver and lightweight feather-shaped head, like a bird's pen; and the tube should be one and a half palms long and subtle at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	 And the method of discharge of urine is that you take a doubled thread, tie it to the tip of a cotton or wool swab, and push the swab's tip through the syringe; then pull off the excess thread and push it up to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on a chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with oil moistened with oil from olives and warm water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then double the penis over towards the belly; then push the syringe forward up to the bladder, and make the patient feel as if he is about to void into an empty container, and this is not done according to this order unless because the conduit through which it goes is twisted; then tie the thread to the entire swab, and the urine will follow the swab, then remove it forcefully, and straighten the urine; then repeat the syringe until the bladder is empty, and the patient is relieved.
des maladies de la vessie	of diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When scorching or blood comes into the bladder, or pus is collected there, and you see it distill liquids and medications, do with all the equipment that is called "clepsydra", and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	 It is closed and has three openings: two of them, and one from the other side, as you see; and the medicines are placed in such a way that they stop the worm without addition, if it can draw out moisture, and push when needed; and when you want to expel your medicines into the bladder, put the head of the catheter into the moisture, and pull on the string attached to it; if you pull out the moisture with the catheter, then forcefully push the string back in; the moisture will enter, and come to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it; and this is the form of the subtle clister for filling the bladder: thus it is.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	 And it is made of silver or copper, and the head [of the shoulder] is higher; underneath at the chest or ligaments falls; then take a sheep's bladder and put moisture in it which you have prepared to moisten the bladder, then tie it between the two breasts using a good thread double, heat the moistened wool over fire; then push the head of the clistere into the rod [arrow], then hold your hand above the bladder with all the moisture facing towards it until the patient feels that the moistened wool has reached the bladder; if you do not have a bladder, take a piece of parchment and make a circle, puncture it roundly; then push a strong thread into these holes, assemble the circle like a drum, put inside it what you wish of oil and moisture and water, seal it in an instrument; and perform as you did with the bladder, pressing your hand firmly until the moistened wool reaches the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already said in the division about the ways of stone, and extraction combined with medicines; and I have said the difference between the stone embedded in the flesh, and all the signs, and when to operate on it by cutting; and in the bladder, and in the member; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont .iiij. ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	The stone embedded in the bladder often happens to children, and this is a sign that the urine jumps from the bladder like urine in its subtlety; it opens a hole, and makes the patient's member swell, and he pees many times, then strangles himself; and many foundations occur due to these jumps; and it is easy for children to heal until they are 4 years old, but it is severe in adults, and it is in the middle range for those who are between youth and old age; and it is easier to cure those who have large stones than those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	 And when we come to the treatment, it is first necessary to cleanse the patient with an enema, in order to draw out all the filth that is in the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	 For it sometimes blocks inquiries into the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	 Then take the patient by the feet, and turn them over and move them downward, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and moves upward occasionally; then have him sit with his hands between your hands, and his hands should be below his hips, so that the bladder is completely declining downwards; then press and touch inside; if you feel the stone in the space, then hasten now to cut into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	 And if it does not fall upon touching all around, then anoint your right hand with oil, if the patient is a child, or use soap, if the patient is an adult male; and push in its foundation, touch the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, press it towards the neck of the bladder; then press in your finger, and push it out at the place where you intend to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the assistant to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and with his left hand remove the skin that is below the scrotum in the part where the cutting is done; then insert the spatula covering it, which is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	 And it should be made between the one who is between the eyelids and the socket base, not at the medial canthus but along the outer side of the left eye; and it should be straight across the bridge, and your fingers should be close to or against the socket, and the incision should be wide enough to allow easy removal, but narrow within, according to the size of the stone, not too large; in case the finger that is against the socket presses on the stone, causing it to jump out without effort; and know that there is a stone where there are angles or margins, and it should be carefully removed; and if it is soft like a bean and round, whose issue is easy.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	 If it has angles or margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not come out, you must pull it up with forceps that are like a lime with a narrow handle, to press the stone so that it does not escape; or push something sharp and curved under it from above; and if you cannot extract it in this way, you can drill a small hole using a burr, and draw out the stone with tweezers; and if there is more than one stone, pull out the largest first, then cut along its side, then remove it, and the smaller ones after.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	 And if it is very large, you must make a larger incision.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	 The following happen to the patient: either he dies or urine comes forth where the joints cannot be sutured; but nevertheless try to drain it, or break with pliers, as long as you draw it in pieces; and when you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloe and dragon's blood, bind it, and put on it a damp cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and cold rose water and cold water to cool the abscess; then resolve the patient on his neck, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you loosen the bandage, clean the wound very well with oil and water, then treat it with ointment of defyacinicon and basilicon until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	 If abscesses and corrosions come into the wound and congealment of blood in the bladder occurs, causing urine to be retained, which is known to cause a dangerous situation without passing urine; then you must squeeze your hand into the wound, draw out that blood, because if it remains, it will cause the bladder to burst and leak; lift up the wound from pus, pus and moisture, and help in every way that you know, until it heals; and it is necessary that all the wounds that you treat, you tie the two legs together, and mix the medicines on the wound.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	 If the wound is small and is from the penis and pierced with a probe, and urine cannot be released; then treat it as I say below: cut it several times, and make an incision in order to excuse the urinary passage due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	 I have already experienced this.
Pren .i. foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a .iij. angles fichiees en .i. tison:	Take one iron rod of this form and sharpened at four angles on one point:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	 Then take the thread and tie it around the shaft of the arrow beneath the stone, so that it cannot return into the bladder; then gently push the awl into the shaft of the arrow; then turn the awl towards your hand in the shaft little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side; soon the urine will come, then press your hand on what remains of the stone that is within the shaft.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If it is broken and jumps with the urine, the patient is cured; but if you cannot do this for some reason that prevents it, tie the thread beneath the stone and another above, then push the shaft towards the stone between the two threads, then pull it out, and untie the thread, and clean the congealed blood in the wound; and treat it until it heals.
de la piere des femmes	Of the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por .iij. choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	It rarely happens that a stone appears in women, and if it ever occurs, it is a great grief for the woman, and it is forbidden for four reasons: one is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a woman who knows herself well enough to be examined by mirrors, especially when she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	 And the third manner is that sometimes it cannot be found a woman well skilled in this art of hands; and the fourth manner is that the stone of the woman is deeper than that of the man, which requires a more profound incision and great fear it brings about. If you find yourself in need of such, it is necessary to take a midwife who knows, and if one cannot be found, then cast a subtle doubt; and present a wise woman in the matters of women's life, or a woman who knows a part of the art, and command her to perform the incision of the stone; and observe very well that the woman is a virgin: thereupon, she must push with her hand or foundation and seek the stone; and if she finds it, she must restrain it beneath her hand, and you command her to push with her hand or with the patient, and press her left hand upon the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	 If it is found, you should move it gently from the entrance of the bladder all the way down to the root of the thigh, until it reaches the root of the hip; then strike above the hip on the bone at the root of the thigh against the point where it is moved, so that you feel the bone in that area; and do not move your finger above or below the bone, and make a small incision; then push the flesh into the incision, if you feel the bone closely seal the wound so that the bone can protrude, and know that there are many kinds of bones: namely, small and large, sharp and smooth, long and round, and those with ridges.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	 Know the appearances to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	 And if the wound opens without treatment, place pulverized vitriol on it and hold for an hour until it stops bleeding; then return to your work when the stone is loose, and have instruments as I told you for removing the stone from men to assist in your work; and if the wound opens again and it is an artery that has been cut, put powder on the place and bind with tent-cloths and bandages, do not touch it again, and leave the stone and do not draw it out, because the patient may die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	When the heat of the blood has subsided and the swelling has decreased, return to your work while the stone remains hard.
de hernie carnouse	Of a carnous hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit .i. autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous is not otherwise called an accumulation of moisture or white chyle, which is beneath the bladder, containing the egg; and it is called "chyle," and sometimes it is properly in the egg's membrane, if one thinks that it is another egg; and it is the skin of the bladder between the white chyle we have mentioned; and this does not happen except when there is an empty space.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the growth of this aqueous is due to weakness that comes from the bladder, and that matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	 And sometimes percussion comes on the cheeks, and this moisture appears in many colors: it can be declining to yellow, or without redness, black, white, or watery whitish; and this happens more often; these are signs for recognizing this assembly because if it is as white as we said, it is a sign of an abscess, the pouch is long like an egg, and do not open the cheeks because there is moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	 And if there is moisture in the very cloth (bandage), it is thought that the abscess has been reborn with part of the egg; and if the moisture is between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue, one can feel it clearly; therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, probe thoroughly, so that you may discern its form, as described earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	Accordingly, judge what is inside through the intruder.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when we treat it with iron (cautery), the patient should be anesthetized to the best of our power and as much as his body allows; then lie on his back, on a small raised object, and place many cloths beneath him; then lie on his left side, and command the assistant to stand on the right side, and extend the arm from which the skin of the shoulder is affected; then take the spatula (tweezers), and cut the skin between them along its length, down to the subcutaneous tissue, and cut it delicately as far as the white fat, and peel it carefully according to our ability; then pierce the subcutaneous tissue with a needle full of water and drain all the water, and place a dressing on it; and touch only the subcutaneous tissue but not the skin; chop the entire affected area delicately into pieces, so that if you do not do this carefully, the water will return; and if the egg bursts during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the subcutaneous tissue treatment; then bring together the two folds of skin at the shoulder joint into a suture, and treat the wound as one would other wounds until it heals.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	If the egg (fetus) is corrupted by another disease, then it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspended, fearing the release of blood; next, cut the cord entirely and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	 And if an ulcer is assembled in two parts together, know that these are the branches; if you cut off the other part as you did the first equally, then draw out the blood, and put moistened linen in oil of roses into the wound; and put another moistened linen in wine and oil, and put two sacks over it, and bind it all with a cord according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	 Then take the two sacks and use them with dampened linen according to this appearance and sew them together into a collar for the arm, one of the heads taking up the base until the back, and the other at the handle part; and the other two heads above the two angles, and hold all together in the buckle of the bandage; and sometimes is the branch of cautery used instead of iron cutting, and it is that you take the pointed cautery, cut the skin of the hairs, and heat it as we have said, so that the white pus containing the ulcer is exposed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce the white pus with holes, and scrape off the cautery hot.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	 And the cup in all ways that you can, as long as you are heating it; and ensure that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more salve (or save); and carefully guard against the leakage of blood, and be aware that the surgeries of incision; and if anything prevents you, or abscesses or the leakage of blood or something else, cure what prevents you, according to what has been said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	 If the patient is afraid and does not want to endure this work due to its horrifying nature, you should perform perforation, as I have told you; and it is that when you are certain by the signs we have said that ramice aquouse is present, you should make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the part below with a spatula-like tool, long along the body; and let the perforation be wide so that all the pus can flow out; then put cotton over the area, hold it in place, and allow the remaining pus to drain, then heal until the wound is healed; if the white cloth does not stop the pus from coming out through the opening of the wound, you should insert a reed or instrument used to treat dropsy, as the shape is described earlier; enlarge the opening of the wound, and know that the pus will return, and it will be collected after 6 months or more, and when it is collected as mentioned before, the patient will pass his days.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the tonsils
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	 Know that in the treatment of this condition, there is fear in many positions, so it seems to me that one should not move [the patient]; and I will tell you the work and similarities of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	Then, many abscesses come from bodies or heads; this happens often.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	 It is by excessive sour and hot air that is spread through the kidneys or from impact; and the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body; there is no pain found, and it is a painful abscess; and sometimes an abscess becomes swollen due to fear or stones, and of this color, and occasionally it comes from the artery or the inflammation of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	 When it is from the artery, it can be known by the hot position of the abscess when pressed with hands; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	 One who is inflamed by the swelling of a vein is known by his disposition at the expression of the touch on the fingers; and he can well make an incision on this likeness, and on other things; it is that you cut the bone's core, then the yolk is above, and the white part is split, and release the suspensioner from all parts of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	 If the yolk is already solid with these things born, then you must draw the yolk and cut it; if it is hard at the white part or in that which is inside the vessels, you must release all of the tender part and cut it sharply.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birth of the bladder is at the back, you should strike it all, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, you should apply the wound with damp wool in oil of roses and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the tonsils
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	 This is an abscess enveloped by an envelopment resembling a boil, with the softening of the bones, and the patient moves hardly when he goes; and the cure for this disease is very dangerous as described above, and nevertheless we will tell you its work according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	 You must make the patient sit on the elevated seat, then push the suspension device for the eyes downward towards your hands, to all the instruments near the penis, and touch them with the master's hands and stretch them out properly; then you should cut a wide slit in the sphincter muscle in front of the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from both sides, as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a double-threaded needle and sew it to the first place where the vein appears, and tie it straight to the other end; then you should pierce everything straightly according to the length of the body, and draw out corrupt matter; then heal the wound as with other bowels, so that no vessel leaks the fluid from one eye; for this there is no harm. If all vessels appear, you must drain both eyes; so that the eyes do not lose their fluids due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be healed.
de la routure dou syfac	Of the rupture of the sinus (or sinew)
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	 The occurrence of this ailment is due to a section that opens suddenly or an extension on the abdomen in the area of the intestines; because the intestines descend from that rupture towards one of the kidneys. This rupture can be either sudden or due to extension, and these two types come about by various causes: either through impact, jump, fall, lifting heavy objects, or similar things. The signs that it is an extension of the rupture are that it occurs gradually over a long time and does not happen suddenly; and the abscesses remain equal up to the full extent, because the rupture follows the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs when it is of the section of the fracture, that it brings sudden pain at the beginning, and the abscesses appear variously under the skin near, and this is because of the issue of the intestines and the body turning away from the fracture.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the intestines protrude through the circle, and it is retained, causing great pain to suffer by the patient, especially when pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these iron treatments, there is fear, so it is fitting to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	 The method of treatment is that you instruct the patient to manipulate the intestine back into its place within the wound if it can be returned; then press on the neck between your hands, and lift the legs; then hold the kidney above, and chop all the skin of the kidneys with long strokes; then push in the fingers of the groin, as many as needed to open the wound, and ensure they are large enough for the intestine to pass through; then scrape the rupture that is under the kidney skin until the white rupture becomes completely exposed on all sides; then insert your index finger into the area between the white rupture beneath the kidney skin, between the second and third ruptures, and detach what is behind the kidney, and between the second ruptures; and then move your hand to the right of the kidney within the rupture, and lift the white rupture towards your left hand, and remove the kidney away from the entire rupture towards the groin; and instruct the assistant to stretch the kidney upwards, and detach what is in front behind the attachment; and check with your fingers if there is any of the intestine entwined or white rupture hardened, and if you find anything, push it to the abdomen beneath; then take a needle with a thick thread made from ten threads, and insert it into the rear part of the rupture, which is behind the kidney skin, followed by the tail, then sew the threads that appear, as many as needed until there are four threads; then arrange them in the form of a cross, and tie the rupture, as we have previously mentioned beneath the kidney skin, with a strong ligature of two fingers wide; then wind the threads around the rupture, ensuring no vassals who feed it can enter it, unless pus comes out from the wound; and place the ligature in its original position along the length of the first ligature, and after these two ligatures leave a large gap beneath the kidney, equal to one finger; and after this, leave the rest according to the round shape that the kidney bears; then chop in the area that is behind the kidney skin, until it softens, and bores, as we have previously mentioned above; then bring moistened linen in oil to the wounds, and place it there, and bring the ligature we have mentioned.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes white boils are cauterized as we have said, after incision, out of fear of the discharge of blood.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	 For this often occurs and let the ligament be loose until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, warm it with hot water, and apply what has been said to it, until it falls; then treat the wound with another cure until it heals completely.
de hernie carnouse	Of a carnous hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this remedy, I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And the ancients said that it is made like a graft which is attached to the bone, in this manner you bind the vessels, above the wound lightly beneath; then cut through the middle, and treat the abscess of those who work on it, until the vessels fall; and heal it as we have said, until it heals.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	 Sometimes it comes to rupture in the anus, as we have said, and open the area; and do not remove any of the intestines from the anus, and if some are removed, it is a mistake, and repair it every hour; and even if it remains too long in this place, the wound or syphilis grows, until the intestines are being removed; and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which is in the anus, as we have said, because it is extended, then it becomes softened and inflamed the area and opens; and the healing is by cautery as we have said before; and sometimes it is healed by iron in this manner: and the patient lies prone on his back between your hands, then cut the swollen anus with a large knife according to the size of three fingers; and then draw out the syphilis which is underneath the skin that sticks, then take the rail and place it on the visible syphilis area; and press the full belly, then sew the two visible parts of the syphilis to the head of the rail, and sew one and the other; then draw out the head of the rail, and do not cover or extend the syphilis or any other thing, as I have told you in the cure of intestinal graft; then heal by the wound treatment.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And when you cut the threads, if they bleed and heal the wound, let it be until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The ointment is confined and has no appearance in the wound, and cauteries are made here and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	Of the softening of the skin around the eyes
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les .ij. levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a .iij. costures ou .iiij. fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around the eyes becomes soft in some men, because the glands within are softened and there is pus to see; and when it is observed that it needs to be cured, it is necessary to make the patient lie on his back, and to strike the softened skin with the natural skin; then bring together the two lips at a stitch, and if you see, sew the excess of the softened skin at three or four stitches firmly; then strike between the stitches, and let the cure be as for other wounds, until it is healed, and stitch the threads.
dou chastrement	When struck with a blow
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	 Know that castrations are considered sinful in our law, and for that reason I will not speak of it in this book; however, it is necessary to know about it in two ways: the first is that the mirrors in castration respond when asked, and it is cured in castration; and the second, because we often need castration of certain animals to help us, such as bulls, sheep, goats, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	 Therefore, castrations are performed in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	 In the one we do by attraction, let us sit the beast in hot water until its joints are softened and relaxed; then hold it firmly with your hand, until it is set and you no longer feel any movement.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 For the branding of size: it is necessary that you dye the beast, and press the skin of the joints with your left hand, then tie the harness, and strike on each one as it calls for it, when you have thoroughly scorched them; leave a small amount of fat and delicate fat which is on the vessels; and this kind of branding is more reliable than the one made by attraction, because at the attraction sometimes there remains something of the joints, so that the beast desires lewdness; then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	The translation for "des hermofrodites" in this context would be "hermaphrodites". This term refers to individuals with both male and female sexual characteristics or reproductive organs. In medieval times, such individuals were often considered abnormal or even monstrous by some societies due to their ambiguous gender identity.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	 Hermaphroditism is according to two ways in men: one is when there is an opening between the two coccyxes as in the figure of a woman's nature, where it has hair, and sometimes it flows urine inside the court.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	 And the other way is in women, who have growth on top like a penis and two coccyxes.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	 The cure for a man and a woman is that you cover the adjacent wounds all over, and treat them like other wounds; in the second way, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the coccyx, there is no treatment.
de la tentigene	Of the torture
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	 Tumor is an adjacent wound on the natural part, as long as it is too ugly to see; and some women have it as big as a hand, and that is the treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	 It is necessary that you dip the excess of the tentigen at your hand or with an oncyon, and strike it lightly; and do not go too deep, so as to avoid bleeding; then treat it with another remedy until it heals; and at another place where a boil arises at the mouth of the marsh, and the bump, and possibly a hole forms, and resembles a cow's teat, and for this reason they call it the old disease "kowe.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 If it is necessary that you strike (the abscess), as we have said, and treat it until it heals.
de erratique	Of the eructation
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	 An abscess is erratic when the nature of a woman is not perceived, or the opening is small; it can be natural by birth or accidental due to disease; or it can be due to a swelling caused by hot or thick pus, and is formed in the marsh or the costez (sides) or below, and cannot be conceived, or the child born, and possibly flowers (pus) are produced; and recognition of these things is by observing the state of the belly.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	 If the stoppage is close to appearing, it may be with your hand or eye.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	 If the swelling is subtle and near the liver, hasten to do this: place your index fingers together, let the woman lie on her back with her legs spread; then form the two livers, while the subtle swelling is round and over the liver; then take wool and moisten it in oil, and place it on the area, and let the woman rest for each day so she cannot congeal.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	 And if the swelling is hard and large, it is necessary that you cut into it with a knife resembling a mirror leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the swelling is of pus, suspend it in onion juice and cut it off; have medicines that stop blood, such as acacia, dragon's blood, incense, mixed with a lot of egg; then bring a wide-mouthed straw, so the wound cannot congeal; and thus be long, and bring a tent of dry linen; then cure it with other cures until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	 And when during childbirth snow comes, it should be covered in this way, unless the abscess becomes aggravated.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	 For an aggravated abscess that occurs during childbirth, no action should be taken.
des emorroides	Emorroidal lesions
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	 Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that usually require cautery, and when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into piles; and we have said in the division their similarities, their signs, and I will say here those that receive treatment.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	 I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they appear in the fullness of birth and cannot be felt, are not cured by iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	 Those at the mouth of the birth canal, which can be felt, are those that can be cured.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	 Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold house, then attach the iron to the roots, and apply powdered medicines that restrict blood, such as acacia and dragon's blood and incense, and similar things; then keep her feet exposed for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding occurs, have her sit in a decoction of sumac, apple bark, holly, and similar things, and then take barley flour, mix it with honey and egg white, and apply it as a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	 And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	 If it does not, make bladders full of air on the back and at the breasts without piercing them; then take linen, wet it in juice of plantain or elder with old wine, and apply it at the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when the abscess rests, if you heal the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and is similar to a rough crust, if it must be covered as I have said, then heal it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	abscesses in the anus
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	 Many kinds of abscess come in marriage (i.e., the female genital area), such as scrofula and pus-filled abscesses, herpes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, hot abscesses, and other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	 Therefore I must tell about the hot abscess that comes in the marriage area (i.e., genitalia) in this treatise; it is not one of those that adhere to the bowel (perianal abscesses); and if you wish to know the work with iron, observe whether the abscess is acute at the beginning of its coming, full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	 Therefore, do not hasten to pierce, but let it heal as the pain subsides; and then make the patient sit on a chair, and provide him with two small chairs or a stool where he can lean, and support his back and place his feet at the sides of each footrest; his knees should be spread apart, and put his arms beneath his thighs and tie them firmly with a good rope; then approach the patient from his right side, and bring the instrument used to open the mouth of the anus, so that the shape follows; and it is necessary that when you see the instrument brought forward, you pierce the rectum first to know the depth of the anus, so that what enters the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not hurt the patient; if the instrument is large, it is necessary to cover the depth of the anus with cloths so that the instrument does not harm; and it is necessary that you put the nozzle of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	 And when the abscess opens, and one touches it with soft hand, it must be covered with lard, using a spatula; and when the boil is emptied, you should put woven cloths moistened in oil rose or green dry oil into the wound; place the cloth further into the wound to the full depth of the flesh, then over the flesh and the clean linen cloth moisten with vinegar or malmsey wine soaked; then cure for two days with ointment following this procedure until it is healed; and sometimes lift the flesh and the wound by clysters of vinegar and honey, and then vinegar or long-cooked roots of lilies and Aristolochia are used; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	 And if the wound is healed over with a scar, you must be careful not to burn it with iron, but treat it as we have said in the section.
de l’enfantement	Of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	 Firstly, the maid must recognize the figure of natural childbirth, and signs to watch out for when you see a woman in labor, and desiring to bear a child: then hasten the birth of the child; then know that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and the afterbirth comes out with the head, and the second one follows it; and when you see these signs, you must gently press on her belly so that the child comes quickly; for when it descends toward its head, it is accompanied by the afterbirth, and the afterbirth is discarded from its superfluidities through good cleansing; and this which comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	 It sometimes happens that something falls upon the feet, and the body or the shoulders, or the hands, or it falls upon the abdomen, or the head, and turns by chance around the neck, and in other evil ways; therefore it is necessary for the physician that she be wise and skilled in such matters, and warn of errors and deceptions, and I will show you all the figures as to how one should assist.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the infant comes out over its head naturally and the woman gives birth painfully, and her strength is weak, make her sit on a saddle or have other women hold her; anoint her nature with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then the midwife should insert a small spatula of this shape:
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	 And split the afterbirth, and strike at its edge with a fingernail until the moist thing that is within comes forth; and take hold of the woman's abdomen as the child descends, and if it does not descend, you must cleanse the woman with muscillaige of fenugreek with oil of cumin; then make her take and vomit from chamomile, and keep her mouth and nose closed for an hour: now the child will come forth.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	 And if the two hands come out [of their place], you must gently pull them back bit by bit; and if they cannot be pushed in again, lay the woman on the seat, and lift her feet upwards; then turn the seat on the ground, and bind the woman so that she does not shake during the turning [maneuver]; and if the hands cannot be pushed in and the child dies, you should cut the hands with the knife that is placed here before, extract the child, and pull them back equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	 of the birth of the child over its feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	 When the child comes over its feet, you must push it upwards; and then turn it bit by bit, until it is even; then take one of its feet and stretch it bit by bit.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	 The patient cannot jump up to such heights if commanded to do so, and causes himself to vomit in distress; if he jumps anyway, may God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not as we have said, turn it bit by bit, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	Then it will be easily.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	 And if he does not come [down] as we have said, give him a mixture of alum, oil from sesame, melted gum, and grind everything in the mortar; then put it inside the nature of a woman [or womb] and apply this ointment outside; then make her sit in hot water up to under the ribs; when she becomes softened below, take mirabalm oil, and place it on top, and leave for an hour; then make her sit on the seat, then make her vomit and hold her mouth and nose, and gently press her belly, as the infant is now coming.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the birth of the child on its knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	 When the child comes in this form, place the child's hands palm to palm; then lay its head on its neck, and hang its legs downwards, and let it lie on the bed; bend its arms little by little, and then grab its hands above the belly, and break the hips bones beneath, until it is prepared below; and if the child does not scream, take its feet and bend them forcefully, then bend the belly upward, then push your hands; and handle the child palm to palm; and command the woman to hold herself as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	The discharge from the child comes down one hand wide.
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	 It is necessary to engineer a way to return the hand: if it cannot be returned, lift the woman and go; if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, bend her legs forcefully; then bring the mustard plaster that I have mentioned; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study how to return the hand; and handle the child according to its natural shape, make it vomit, and command her to hold herself as much as the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	Hold the baby by its neck and spread out your hands, then turn its face towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	 It is necessary that the maidservant holds her hand, then turns it little by little and gently; and when it is equal, place on top of it a plaster made of alum and oil, as we have said, then command that she move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grab it; and make her vomit.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	In this same way, you must follow it through to the end.
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	 When the afterbirth comes in this manner, seize the afterbirth with your nail until the membranes are empty; and if the child presses against its face and neck, seize it from the buttocks so that it is not held back, and let the child die; then push the child inside, as much as you need to, and command the woman to grab it lightly.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the birth of twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent .iij. ou .iiij.; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes triplets or quadruplets; and this is not strange and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	 These are strange things that do not live unless they are named; I know that they multiply, and are desired by the one who invented them, which is linked to the devil; and sometimes they issue forth as naturally as grass grows, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	 And if they issue forcefully, the treatment should be as we have said, and make the poultice subtle, and do it quickly and easily whatever it requires; and do so as much as is needed for healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	 They are sometimes formed in the shape of a man or two or three or four or five or six, or even up to fifteen, and they are all shaped like a child by the measurement of the wise healer, and it is necessary that the poultice knows this because similar things often happen; so do as needed.
de l’enfant mort	Of a dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	 When you cure the woman of a dead child or womb, as I have said in the division, and it does not come naturally, and you are forced to perform manual work; then you must know if the woman is in good health and has no accident or fear of death; then the woman should be supine on her back, and her head inclined downwards, and her legs raised; and the attendant should tie her with strips, or she should be tied to the bed so that she is not treated at the removal of the child; then rub the wife's mouth with oils moistened with musk and aloes and linseed; then anoint the helper's hands with these oils and these musks; then place them gently into the wife, then hold the place where the fingers are inserted so that they are comfortable to her, and be aware if the baby is exposed on top of its head; then insert the fingers in her vagina or neck or mouth or palate or below the beard or in the navel or near the sides or near the costal area; and it must be held by the right hand and the curvature between the left hands, and pushed gently into any of the places that we have mentioned, until it reaches the empty place; and this is the form of the fetus:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	 Then, push against each other in opposite directions, or use whatever tool you need to make the extractions equal; and then straighten them equally by moving from one side to another to bring them out, and keep the bones dented to hold them while they are being moved, as shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	 If there remains a part of it, then the physician should insert his fingers with oil into that part and push out the other part; if no part remains, then place this bone higher in its joint and perform this action until it completely emerges.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	 And if one hand comes before the other and cannot be brought back by holding it, then you must roll up the cloth over it until it is completely rolled; then you should break it at the joint of the foot or the toes, and you must perform this action on both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	 And if the child's head is large and it is difficult during delivery, or if the baby has a swollen head assembled, you must insert the pointed sponge between your fingers and push to extract the water; or you may use the instrument called "almidach", from which the form comes with the tools or chapter following this one; and do the same for the child naturally born with a large head; then pull the bones apart using the pliers, and if the head jumps out and is held back by force, it should be cut, as far as the moisture that is more difficult to deliver; and if it cannot be delivered, you must chop it into pieces where you can. If it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, you must pierce it until the moisture comes out.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the baby is above its feet, it moves lightly, and the alignment towards the mouth of the birth canal is slight.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	 And if it is strained in the abdomen or hip, you must straighten it on the drapeau (folded cloth) suspended over the hand; and make the abdomen or hip, as far as the moisture that is there recedes; and if other members are dislocated, and the joints remain, press the ball of your hand deeply into the wound, and drag it until the wound opens; then insert the thumb or finger and pull further; and if the wound opening is constricted by an abscess that has come there, you must not work on it, but administer moist and fat substances instead; and administer plasters, and soak in warm, softening and moistening solutions.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	 And if the infant is on its side, and you can put it straight, apply what has been said in the live child; and if there is no ability to do so, tear it apart piece by piece, and leave nothing of the afterbirth.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	 And when this has been done, apply what has been said in abscesses that come in marriage; and if there is a discharge of blood, it should be put in a tight restraint, and other treatments applied.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut .i. autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	I saw a woman whose belly had been stillborn, then consulted with another on this matter, and revived the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess came in the armpit, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called to heal, and I thought for a long time, but could not close the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a strong plaster of attraction, and afterwards, some bone came out, and after several days another one did.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marveled much, because the stomach has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	 I will treat the wound and break many bones while the woman is in the best position; and the woman may live for a long time in this state, and then a small amount of bone will protrude; and I have not found this chapter except because when masters find an unusual thing that they know how to help.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to return the husband to his place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a .ij. tornans as .ij. chiés des .ij. liiens.	Here comes the first sentence to translate:
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	 The first corn should be more subtle in the restrictor, and it should be made of ebony or boxwood; and the opening of the rod's mouth should be wide, and the tree bark edges must be smooth, and a half palm long; and between the two limbs there should be two alignments of the same rod, which are tightened in one and the other, half a palm long or a little more; and these two alignments are inserted into the mouth of the keyhole for opening when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	 Another form, similar but more subtle and lighter, should be made of a rod of ebony or boxwood in the shape of pliers; and have two alignments for both horns, as you can see, each one a palm long and two fingers wide; and when you are ready to open the keyhole with all the tools, make the woman sit on the bed, her feet dangling and legs spread apart, then insert the two alignments together into the keyhole, and hold the head of the tool under her thighs; then work your hand with all the tools as you did with the pliers equally, according to the quantity that you want to open the mouth of the keyhole, until the bail does what it wants.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	These tools are all mounted, and have similar appearances; and when the smith has equipped them, he works more quickly, and higher for men according to their size.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	Do not disdain the tool that you have not equipped, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	 When the afterbirth is retained at childbirth, it is necessary that you command the patient to hold back her lochia (afterbirth fluid), then make her vomit with something bitter, and hold your hands on her mouth and nose; and if she jumps because of this, it is good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	 If it does not work with the hand or a spoon, and you take a pot or cover and put herbs that can open the mouth of the woman, such as rue, anise, camomile, cassia, centaurium; all these herbs, or some of them, should be cooked or boiled in water over fire; then put a chain or spoon from the pot and the other end into the woman's mouth, and hold it until the vapors come into the woman; then make her vomit, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the patient suddenly falls down.   In this medieval medical treatise, the author provides guidance on various medical procedures such as cauterizing wounds, treating dislocations, and administering herbal remedies. The text also acknowledges the potential dangers of these procedures, such as the risk of death due to fear or complications. It is important to note that while the language used in this treatise may seem archaic and difficult to understand, it provides valuable insights into medieval medicine and healthcare practices.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	 And if it remains after this treatment and does not break as commanded to the woman that she moisten her left hand in sesame oil or musk-garland from aloes, then she should put it on nature and wait for it to swell; and when she has found it, she should take and stretch it gently straight, so that the mice do not choose to leave at extraction; but it must be moved lightly to the right and left, and then pull; it will come out and detach itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	 If the mouth of the mouse has been stretched wide, we have said the cure for it is to poultice and fumigate with herbs; and if it does not heal as we have said, be careful when pulling it out; but whoever is at the mouth of the mouse, tie them to the woman's leg, then clisterize with ointment four-formula; she will hold and pull it out, and it will break; however, when she pulls it, if a bad smell comes from her stomach and head, and makes the patient ill.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	Therefore, it is necessary for suitable fumigations for this purpose: no ancient one has proven the fumigation of dill and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The shape of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the expulsion of the afterbirth is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	 And it appears to be a piece of glass resembling a dog's head, and the soft part is placed in nature, with the broad side over the fire; and let there be fumigation on the coals, and let the tar continue until it is wasted, then start another one.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced but rather stopped up by some obstruction; so it is necessary to make an incision in that obstruction at the correct point, and do not cut it with a sharp spur, and ensure that the membrane is not touched; then place moist linen on it in wine and oil, and let it be cured with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will stay in place, then insert a wooden peg, and leave it for many hours, and remove it when the patient sees fit to move to rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes there comes a sudden swelling of a wound or an abscess; in this case cover it with lard (i.e., pork fat). If it is to be treated, do as we have said about the wooden peg.   This text suggests that the authors are discussing how to treat wounds and abscesses. They recommend using a wooden peg for certain types of injuries, and also suggest covering them with lard (pork fat) if they swell suddenly.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula (a passage between two organs or cavities that is not supposed to be there, such as an anal fistula) from its base    This line suggests that the text is discussing a medical condition known as a "fistula" which is an abnormal passage between two organs. The phrase "de la fistule dou fondement" refers to treating this condition from its base.
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	 Fistulas that come below the foundation are nodules and grow larger when they come out from the foundation in the space between two parts, or there is one fistula or more; and when that nodule is old, it opens up, and moisture causes swelling or a slight bowing, and sometimes these fistulas are persistent; and they are recognized by those who can see if there is discharge or ventosity, when the patient makes discharge, and in some cases they may cause a sudden jump upward.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas penetrate to the bladder and halfway down the penis; and they reach as far as the knee joint, and into the hollow of the cavity of the hip.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	 And thus one recognizes the persistant fistula at its base, and not a non-persistent one: and it is that you place your finger at the base or foundation, and place a fine needle of brass or iron in the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	 If there is tortuosity, place a fine probe of wood or horsehair until you feel the probe or hair at your finger; and if you don't feel it, and it does not produce pus, gas, worms (as we have said): know that it does not pierce; hasten in the treatment.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced up to the bladder or the urinary passage, if it urinates through it and cannot be sealed with medicine.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	 If it is pierced to the joint of the thigh, then the probe goes to its place; if there is no tortuosity and the pain disappears around it, it is that it has healed, and no medicine or salve through ointment helps it; and in these persistent fistulas there is no cure except labor, and the vanity of foolish people who interfere with them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	 In one who is not paralyzed and not old, in hope of healing with iron, as I have tested, the patient lies between your hands on his back; you lift the legs up to the thighs, and keep the thighs inclined towards the abdomen; then press a tent of iron or wood, if there is tortuosity, until you know where the dislocation comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	 If the patient feels it around the foundation, you must press your index finger there, then if it feels as if the tent has penetrated; and if you find a gap or flesh there, know that it is paralyzed; do not move it, for it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	 One should know that some can be healed well, but it happens rarely; and the aid one gives, it is this: one heats the cautery subtly according to the width of the fistula, as previously said; and pushes it all hot into the fistula until it reaches the base; do this two or three times, until you know that these charred parts are burned, which resemble a feather of an eye; and then cure them with dampened rags in butter, until those charred parts are gone; then apply ointment soothing and binding.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 But if this is done well, it's good.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	 If this cannot be done, and if the tent enters into the wound until it reaches the base, and between your hand and the tent, place a thick covering of skin or silk, so that the fistula remains covered with care; strike at the beginning of the fistula, then advance towards the tent, and apply the cautery after, until it reaches the top of the tent; then the tent will be released, and charred; remove those charred parts which resemble a feather of a bird, and nothing remains.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the flesh wounds itself, cut between you and the wound; then cauterize it with fire or medicine ointment.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	 The fire cautery brings about two good things: the burning of these attached charms, and the stopping of blood and removal of moisture; then it treats wounds moistened with boiled tent-linen or cheese crushed to a pulp until the flesh boils, and then the burned char should be placed on the wound of hardened sores, and the medicines are dry.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it becomes healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if a fistula comes up to the full depth and is removed from the body, push it down towards the foundation and examine it.   The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in Old French, around the 12th-13th centuries.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	 If you feel the tent, and between it is linen or silk or charms, or it is about to be pierced, there should be no hope but faith and expectation through the administration of one of the three ways: either cauterize as we have said, or strike to the bottom, or if you can, place a tent and treat as first mentioned; do not go too deep, making sure to cover the underlying tissue, and let the pus come out by its own will; then treat, as we have said; it may heal, or you remove that covering which is above the bottom, either with a tent or another instrument appointed; then discard the char that has been placed on the wound, as much as possible; then study to restore the wound, and to keep the fistula away from the underlying area: this will be easier for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	 And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner: and it is when you bite the tent (intestine) at the fistula, and it is where it adjoins to the bottom of the skin above, take a pierced tent (intestine) by the head in this shape:
Et i boute .i. fil tort en .ij., et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	and push one thread of cord through it (the small hole), and push the tent into the fistula all the way to its end, along with the thread.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	 If it is pierced on the margin of the foundation within, then draw out the thread (intestine) from that wound, and pull out the head of the thread, and bring the two ends together, and bind them to each other, and leave for a day or two; and press occasionally, until the threads touch the hard parts that are between them, and open; then cure the wound until it is healed and healthy.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If there is no fistula, make it pierced in all ways that you can, if it is not too deep.  \[Fistula is a tube-like passage between two organs or through the skin.\]
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	It is not right to cover the fracture with a bandage immediately upon setting it, and then heal it as we have said, until it heals completely.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	 The form of the spine-like splint used to make a fistula is very sharp on one side and blunt on the other; not so, because it should not be struck where it should not be struck, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	 Emorroid formation comes in two ways: either they are inside the foundation like grains of resin, with both small and large ones, and on the outside there is blood and one or more; and are deflected from the foundation and at the head of the foundation; but those that are deflected have little moisture, and either a small amount of citron juice or a small amount of blood, and have the body's color; and the treatment for those that are inside the foundation is to instruct the patient to strain in bed until the foundations go away, and the threads appear; hurry up, and grasp it with pliers, or with your nail, then strike at its roots; and if the threads cannot hold due to moisture, grab them with a cloth or cotton, or a piece of camel's wool; and stretch them out, then strike, and sprinkle some hot powders that serve as cauterization on top; or you can cauterize them as mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, followed by other treatments until they are healed; and if the foundations cannot go away, treat the patient with a biting and sharp enema to clean what is at the foundation, so that it can come out easily; when the patient strains and the threads are gone from the foundation, it is an easy cure; and you grab them with your nail or pliers, strike, and treat as we have said before, until they are healed, and be careful not to make an incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 You should stitch the wound in this manner: take a twisted thread, insert it into a needle; then draw the thread above and pierce the needle from the other side; turn both ends of the thread beneath the needle, making sure it is wide enough; twist the thread tightly, then knot it, remove the needle, and do the same with all the others; leave some room for the blood to flow; place a damp linen cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the wound foundation, and command the patient to rest; leave it until it bleeds, and when it stops bleeding, apply ointment and other treatments until it heals.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of drying from the fire or foundation   (This seems to be incomplete as it's not clear what "of" refers to)
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is drying from the fire in the intestines and by the constraint of nature, and when the sickness is old and medicine does not work.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 It is necessary that you burn the bark of a splint or your nail with fire to prevent it from getting wet; then heal it until it becomes dry as needed; and if it cannot heal, repeat the shaving stronger than before, until it heals and becomes free from infection; then heal it until it is completely healthy.
dou fremit	great trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	 Formices are small boils that appear near the body, and they grow quickly; sometimes they trouble the throat, and one feels them like death trembling, spreading throughout the body, and more in the hands than other parts.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	 And the cure is that you take a reed from an owl's feather or a strong bird's quill and place the reed on the trembling, making it red all around; then turn your hand around the entire reed until you cover the trembling completely and push it in deeply, removing the trembling from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a cane of iron or copper according to the following form, and it should be fine-tuned both inside and outside:  (no direct translation for "subtilz desoz et traians desus" which could mean finely made on the inside and smooth on the outside)
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce, to keep it warm and press; and if you see it tremble, cauterize the quiver, as in the chapter of cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	Of the shape of the cluster
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Sometimes they make a silver or arsenic suppository, or melted lead or wax; and sometimes they make small and large instruments, according to those for whom they are prepared.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Therefore, those who are treated in children's care or who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The form of the cloister is both small and large, or the bellies are bound in this way:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	 And it has an opening where the belly is tied, as you see, and the shoulder is pierced within; and it has two holes on one side, and one on the other; and put a bladder of an animal or parchment into the belly, and pierce it all around with small holes, and there should be space between each hole; then put strong thread through these holes, crossed in X or any shape around, and assemble the belly like a goat's pouch; and when the medicine is inside, tie it to the instrument before a strong thread, then close; and this is the form of a circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	 And the medicine should not be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clistere with oil or egg yolk, or similar things, then gently insert it; then the servants hold it in their two hands together until it is fully inserted, then remove the clistere, and make the patient lie on his back, and if the medicine is visible when released, squeeze as much as possible; and if it does not come out all at once, let him sleep all night, as it will be more help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you treat the disease of swollen stomach with a poultice, and the medicine comes out quickly, continue to apply it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	 And if the hemorrhoids are founded or abscessed, it should be cleansed as well with a very subtle enema; and this is the form of the subtle enema on which the skin is stretched:
des plaies	for the wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already said in the previous section about the treatment of wounds; now we shall tell you the treatments for hands and medicines, according to their completion.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of, and according to the places where the wounds are made, and for how they were made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	 The things that wounds are done by are by the impact of stones, cutting with a sword and knife, or spear or lance, or similar things; whether they are made according to the laws of the body, such as wounds that fall on the neck, head, chest, stomach, liver, and similar members; and I will tell you the cure for each wound, and I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	 I say that when a simple wound comes or an abscess, and the bone is not broken, beware if it is from arrow or similar things, and the skin is all torn and the wound is large; doubt the formation of an abscess: let it purify itself from the head itself immediately, even if blood comes from the wound; purge the patient of repletion of wine and heavy foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if it does not want to purify itself, let its food be reduced, and do not drink wine or eat meat; and put on the wound, if an abscess comes, soft cotton in rose oil only, or in stiptic wine; and if there is no abscess, put on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and it is not moved by air, a little powder, which I will say hereafter; and if fire has moved it, put some ointments on until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, such as the size of a sword and similar, and the lips cannot be brought together by tension, then bring them together by stitching, as I will say about abdominal wounds, of the stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	 If the wound is opened to the bone, gaping, and does not hold together, press it; then cure the wound with medicine, and restore hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat thick foods such as roasted meat (like beef and wheat), poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	 And if you find or skin putrefaction not reaching the bone, press it all together and throw away the pus, then cure it; and if there are arteries in the wound or vein that cannot be stopped without cutting, try to tie them up with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: it is that you put this powder on it which will harden as soon as the arsenic moves it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	 And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; three parts of live coal, and grind it finely, and apply it to the wound, press firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it to dry if it does not swell; for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	Occasionally, one does this with alum only, when there is no incense or dragon's blood, but the sore has not moved.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the fire has burned the wound, it is necessary not to put this powder on it; but place some soothing ointments made of flour of barley boiled in water and honey, until it stops weeping; then heal it with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	 And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine tweezers; I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound on the neck   (or "wounds of the neck")
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If a wound occurs on the neck and it is simple (without complication), it does not differ from that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the arteries are severed.   (or "If a wound comes about or on the neck and it is simple without any difference with that of the head, but if the nerves or arteries of the neck are severed.")
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	 If it is nerves, there should be no other instrument but to let them heal naturally and not put anything restricting; because this hurts the nerves and makes them recede; and do not put anything cold on the wound, as the substance of nerves is cold, and their continuation with the brain, which is the highest member; however, let the medicine be warm, such as warm water washed in sweet oil, and cooked again in warm water in the same way, and other similar stones according to this method, and immediately moistened.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the wound is large, tie it with strips, then treat it until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	 And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or cut it lower; if the arteries are severed, bleeding will ensue, so stop it, lance it, and cauterize if necessary; if the spine of the throat is severed, or if the carotid arteries, keep them closed, so that the meat goes upwards, and do not touch the throat but move it as naturally as possible; then pull it out gradually, and leave it for some days, then treat with strong herbs until it heals; if the pressure has made an impression on the bone, drill it; if there are fragments of bones, remove them all as you can, and leave the rest until the wound discharges and aligns its exit; if the wound is fresh, sprinkle powder over it, as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and it has a fistula, treat it as I said in its chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of a wound from a lance or sword
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	 If it is a spear or knife wound and the injury is deep, check if bubbles rise from the wound as the patient exhales: know then that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put powder on it at first hour nor bind it for the blood that dissolves completely, and return to the patient; but apply atracite ointment, and reapply twice a day; and if you don't have ointment, apply old cotton in the wound to absorb moisture, and make the patient sleep on the wound 3 or 4 days, or more; there will be no spasms, nor bad heart tremors or strange signs of pain; and when you see good conditions, know that the wound is healed.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	 Treat the condition and other remedies while the patient is healthy; and if it cannot heal, open it up, because there is a fistula; treat it as necessary.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	 If the wound is from a sword or knife, and it is simple, deep or shallow, treat the front part of it; if it is large, stitch it up; if it is small, apply powder; if it is embedded in the bone and has pieces inside, either pull out the pieces, and stretch the wound open if necessary; if they are not separated, let the wound drain until the pus collects; and for other wounds on other limbs, the treatment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	The rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	1. The dislocations of the abdomen are great, medium, and small; from a large wound, the intestines may protrude once or the intestine's nerves, due to which the insertion is difficult; and the stitching is more troublesome, and sometimes a small wound is worse than a large one because it requires more effort to put the intestines back in place if not done carefully. This is because the intestines inflate quickly and return more easily, making the medium-sized wound more manageable because you can repair the protruding intestine at its proper place rather than other wounds. You should know that abdominal incisions are according to four types: the two common stitches occur in abdominal stitching, and the stitches for other body parts and others specific to other wounds are common for other wounds; but they are more specific with abdominal stitching, and I will explain each one.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	 I say that when the wound is small and nothing from the intestines protrudes, it is easily set right in one of two ways: either because of the small size of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen from cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	 And when it is cold, heat it in one of these ways: moisten a sponge or wrap a damp cloth only in warm water, or cook in warm wine and cinnamon and juniper and spike, and rub the intestines until the swelling is removed; and sometimes make this wine restraining, and it will be moistened so as to dispel.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	 And when you see the swelling recede, if you moisten the intestine with warm or hot water and herbs such as mallow, for it closes the entrance to almost nothing; and if it cannot enter, then make a small incision at the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and the first treatment is moistened like cutting, and one should not cut too much unless there is great necessity; and this is the instrument to split: cut inside along the curve and do not pierce through, and look for this shape:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	 And when the wound is widened and the entrails leap out, put them back in place according to their natural form in their proper position, if you have the power, for it is necessary.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	 When the wound is in the part beneath the stomach, you should make the patient lie on his back and raise his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the part beneath the stomach, you should raise the head and buttocks higher than the parts beneath, and similarly, if the wound in the abdomen is in one of the two parts, you should attend to making the affected part higher than the other, and similarly administer this for large and small wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	 For small wounds, you should prepare what is needed, then use a thin tool that covers the entire wound with your hand and hold it together; this is the common way of suturing, and you should take an awl or more, according to the size of the wound's width, then leave a gap at the top of the wound and insert an awl with a strong thread; pierce the two edges of the skin with the two edges of the sinew that is beneath the skin inside, as far as you can pierce it in this part, and bring together the four edges; then wrap a double thread around the awl on two sides, then bring together the two edges of the wound accordingly, leave a gap, and insert another awl; tie the thread in the same way as you did with the first awl, and do not stop until the entire wound is sutured; and the awls should be medium-sized, neither too thin nor too thick, because thin awls pierce all the flesh, and too large awls cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium-sized. And do not insert the awls excessively far from the skin and fat, lest they cut and open the wound before suturing; then close the edges of the awls so that they do not prick the patient while sleeping, and put weights or bandages on the edges of the awls to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound is healed; this method of suturing with awls is more suitable for small wounds, as one large awl or two secondary stitches are sufficient, and it is that you bring together the two edges of skin and sinew together with a medium-sized awl and a strong thread; when you have pierced all four edges entirely, remove the awl to the part where you started, in the manner one cuts drains. And leave a gap between each stitch as wide as a large egg. I sewed a wound of a man whose abdomen was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than one palm wide, and his intestines were about two palms long, and the wound was inside the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	 I brought back the intestine as it had been away for 24 hours, and the wound was healed up to 15 days, and it healed, and became healthy.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	 They had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; I did not anoint it with any ointment because I was in a place where none were found, nor any medicine; I put wool on the wound twice a day, and washed it with water of honey until it became healthy.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	 I will tell you the two proper ways of stitching: take the needle, and thrust it from the outside to inside; when it has penetrated the skin straight through, if the tip of the skin or place where you have thrust the needle is raised, puncture it again from the inside to the outside at that point; and the meaning of this stitching is that you sew in a way like furriers sew fur, and leave a space once on one side, and return to it on the other, until the stitching is completely finished.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	 The second method of stitching, which Galen calls specifically, is like any who join two parts together naturally, and apply one head to the other head in this manner: thread a needle or head of the mirror nearest, and pierce only that place; then turn the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner, through the two heads of the joint; then pierce both from the outer part to the inner, in the two other heads of the mirror that are opposite each other; and this is the turning method of stitching and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	 Galen says this, and others testify to it, that the belly should be sewn with two needles, each having thread in them; one needle must be inserted from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew corsets; and know that when the wound is within the belly, the stitching is more difficult than on the other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	 The judgments of the wound are similar to those of other wounds: and it is that when you probe the fresh wound with all its blood, before the arse has moved [the intestines], you should then return the intestine and the caul; afterwards put powdered herbs on it, and if the arse has moved [the intestines], apply any ointment that is present, until the wound swells; then sew the edges, and bind the sifac [sphincter]; then treat the wound as other wounds, until it heals; and if you have no medicine, immediately put old cotton on it, and stir it two times a day, until it heals.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	 You do not need any other medicine for the treatment of many simple wounds, except when you doubt that the wound may spread to the principal members; then moisten light linen in warm oil or rose oil and place it around the injuries and under the buttocks; if there is pain or pus in the belly, which often happens, cleanse it with black wine vinegar, and especially so if the putrefaction reaches the intestines; puncture it and find that when it is the large intestine, it heals more easily than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	 The intestine called "jeun" cannot heal when it is perforated, and this is due to the planting of veins within it, and the subtlety of the entire body, and the proximity of its nature to nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	 And if the hernia jumps from the wound, reset it in the same way as the intestine while it is fresh; and if it becomes old and turns dark or black, you must tie the dark part so that no blood comes there, for there are veins and arteries; then seize what is between the hernia and the flesh, and hang the two heads hanging from the part beneath the wound to align the extraction when the hernia falls out, and the wound swells.
de la routure dou boueil	of the swelling of the boil
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	 When the intestine is torn and the wound is small, it can be restored in some men, for I have seen a man pierced or stabbed by a lance; and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, became abscessed and turned into a fistula, and there was evacuation and bloating; I cured it according to what I knew, and did not stop healing until it healed, and the wounds were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	 And when I see it sutured, I feared that the patient had pain in his stomach; and there was no pain, but he stayed better, improving with diet and drink; and any experienced person said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: take strong farts, then gather the lips of the wound, and when the fart has opened the mouth, place it on the two lips so that it stretches open; and then strike the head, and hold it so that it cannot slip away, then attach another fart in the same way until the wound is fully grasped; and sew up the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	 If the head (of a body part) becomes inflamed in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and the intestine can be tied with a thin thread cut from an animal's intestine in this manner: take the end of this thread of intestine that is very sharp, then tie it to the head (of the body part) with a fine linen thread twisted around, then push the thread through the needle, and sew up the intestine, and pull the thread along its path; and this method of sewing does not help but according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the great intestines, there is no remedy or cure, unless through subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or that it be.
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	 Know that every wound or abscess, when it swells, is universally called "fistula", and similarly when it bursts and releases pus.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	 And fistula is according to the truth, a hard and white nodule, where there is no pain, and it is as swollen as the feather of a bird; and sometimes it bursts clear, and other times thick; sometimes small, and other times quite large; and I have spoken about it in the division of wounds, that every wound that is not healed, and there is no flesh there, it is neither healed by any of the 9 causes: namely, due to the smallness of the blood or body; or due to its malice; or because there is hard flesh inside, and above the lips, where no flesh grows; or there is too much pus; or the place is pressed, and the matter is of poor quality; or the medicine is not good in the cure; or the corruption is a type of plague; or due to the slowness in the region's digestion, the healing is late, and the flesh shrinks by nature; or there are veins or bones: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and the medicines for cures in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	And I must tell you the cure for a fistula that is made by manual work.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	 Know that fistulas occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, arteries, nerves, or the stomach, intestines, bladder, one of the ribs, spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and when it comes to the property of the main member, and similar locations.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	 And all these fistulas of this kind are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if any fistula does not come up to the level I have mentioned and you are certain of its cure, and you recognize it, take a tent of hog's bristle or iron, if the fistula is straight, use it; and if the fistula is twisted, look for a thin probe made of wood, as the splinters bend around the twist; and if the fistula has holes and you cannot find it with probes, cauterize it through one of the holes, for moisture goes from one hole to another and cleanses it; then clean it carefully to your ability, knowing whether there is bone or nerve, and if it is full, ask the patient about the pain he feels in pressing your hand, and where he feels it; and when you know truly the place where it is, and if it is far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places I have mentioned, then cut according to what I have said, and remove the damaged flesh and corrupted char that are inside; and then cure it until it is healed, and if the fistula is deeply embedded in the correct place, you must cut through it completely, as much as you can, then put moistened medicine-soaked probes into it, and push them up to the head of the fistula, so that the medicine corrodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and then put healing ointment on clean char, until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is rotten from the fistula, cut it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	 If vein or nerve does not burden you or your main limbs as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, remove all the corruption while it is still soft, then treat with healing herbs until it is healed; and if it is not healed and returns bowed as before, know that you are not yet at the fountain: expose it further and dig until you reach the bottom, remove all the corruption, then restore its place; and if it is thus healed, it is good.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	 If the corruption is too deep that you cannot reach it; and if there is only a little corrupted bone, which you can extract with pliers, then extract it as far as possible to that place; and if there are many bones, extract them all without leaving any; and if moisture opposes you and there is no error or fear, strike and press the moisture and the flesh, and release the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	 And if you cannot remove them within an hour, place something stinking on the wound and leave it until the flesh is rotten around the bone, and then the bones will be more easily removed; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, press only the corruption until all blackness is removed, then restore the wound; and if there is a great part of decay and comes up to the bone mole, it must be cut off and covered up to the decay, and then heal it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so you can take an example and help in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	 The young man was about thirty years old who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so that the matter came to the leg and became an abscess, but he did not have a cause to drain it; however, they operated foolishly on it until the abscess opened, and they corrupted much of the matter, and it became a fistula, and many more problems came up that all went bowel and moisture from the body; and many physicians tried to cure him for two years, but he had no wise man in the art of hands, until I was called, and I saw his leg and the medicines with which they treated him, and what escaped through the sores at great cost; and the young man's body became red, and he had a citron-colored complexion.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	 I applied a patch to one of the wounds, then I searched for all the wounds and found that some were coming together from every part of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	 I hurried and cut into one of the wounds as deep as I could find a part of the bone, and it was rotten and pierced, and the corruption extended to the bone within; what I saw of the rotten bone seemed to me to be the only corruption, and I thought that there was no other corruption except for this one that I left; and I began to heal the wound with salves for a long time but could not close it; then I tried again, and found the bone as before, and the corruption continued in the bone, which I saw and left; and I attempted to set the joint, but I could not until I wrapped around a palm of the bone, and pulled it out completely, then I set the joint with salves; and it healed and closed quickly, and no further work was needed except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and the fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	 Because of the blood evacuation, it often became healthy completely, and a hard cyst grew in its place on the bone, and it was well-disposed with no harm or contrary effect in any way, neither inside nor outside coming.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	 And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated thus: take a thread and tie it at the open end of the bone, and command someone to pull it upward; place another thicker thread on top of the cyst that is away from the bone, hold it firm so you draw out the corrupted cyst below, exposing the healthy cyst where you wish it to be, ensuring that it does not pierce the healthy cyst; place a splint or a hot iron under the bone to cover the corrupted cyst; continue this as long as you can see and feel the corruption, and do so again.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	 And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in a specific area or in the middle, you should remove all the flesh surrounding it; then insert the iron beneath, and press the affected part of the bone against each other to the length of the corruption as we have said; and if the corruption is at a joint, you must break the corrupted joint, and hold the bone on either side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no other choice but to cut it; and if the corruption is at the tip of the finger or toe, this is a difficult thing, but nevertheless it is necessary that you explore the corruption, how it will open; and clean it in all ways possible, but be careful not to damage the vein or nerve; and know that the cutting instruments and pliers for breaking bones are numerous, according to the nature of the bone and the appearance of the affected area, its thickness and thinness, its size and smallness, and hardness; and therefore it is necessary to equip each work with the appropriate tool; and know that the work will show you the tool that you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the evidence of the nature of the disease; so choose the tool that you need based on what is required.
dou feu	The fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	 The head may become rotten due to an internal or external cause, and when you have applied the corrosive medicine for its treatment, but it does not help, you must cover that member up to where the rot originates; otherwise, the patient will suffer death from this, or a more serious malady due to the defect of the limb; and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and afterward it turns blackish, since the rot spreads from member to member, taking over the entire body; hurry up with covering, and if this is due to the sting of certain venomous animals such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar, cover the head, and do not give it any space to reach as far as your hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	 And if it reaches as far as the hand, strike at the joint, so that the corruption does not reach the arm; and if it reaches the arm, strike at the bone; and if it passes the bone, it is death, and nothing can be done but to administer the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corruption comes or falls: if it comes at the first joint, then strike after the other joint; and if it comes or falls, strike the entire joint; and if it reaches the leg, strike at the knee joint; and if it goes beyond the knee, there is no other remedy for the patient but to let him die; and the manner of striking or soothing the limb is that you bind it above and below, and extend one of the bandages downwards, and the other bandage upwards, and you sever the flesh that is between the two bands with a spatula wide enough to expose the bone; then strike or soothe, and put a linen cloth on each side, so that the soothing does not touch the healthy part, and bring about another injury and abscess for the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	1. If bleeding occurs while you operate, cauterize the area immediately or apply some powders that restrain bleeding; then return to your medicine until it is completed, then tie the limb with a suitable bandage and cure it until it heals; and I will tell you what happened to a man in my town: he had a blackness that looked like a burn by fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his foot, consuming all the foot; and when the man saw the corrosion, he cut off the foot, and it healed; and for a long time afterwards, the corrosion returned to his hand, or a finger of his hand, and came to me, and I gave him medicines after cleansing his body, but the corrosion could not be stopped; and he asked that I cut off his hand, but I refused because I had no hope of stopping the matter; and I also feared that if I amputated his hand, he would die, for the vitality of man was weak; and he despaired completely and returned to his land, and again cut off his hand, and it healed; and I have never heard of this happening except as a result of someone doing something different, if it is needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	 Aposteme sometimes occurs in charnut place and remains for so long that it forms a large abscess; and then it grows and bursts, and the abscess stays open, as a wound does, and the flesh that is over it is as thin as cloth unraveled, and it will not reach the bone or nerve, and such disease is called "sain", not "fistule"; but if it extends to the bone completely, it is called "fistule"; and the skin should be cut all around, and similarly when it is thin, as cloth unraveled; and it will not heal due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	1. And if the skin hardens and corruption is not complete, and the flesh is thickened, cure it with a suppository in this way: check if the nipple is large, and the abscess that is under it smells foul, then use the Egyptian remedy for suppositories which is made like this: take asafoetida, oil, and litargyrii, equally, cook them together in a pot over fire until the medicine turns red and thickens like honey; then take as needed from this mixture, make it into water and honey, and insert the suppository in the nipple, and press firmly; leave the medicine for two hours, then remove it by squeezing; do this often, until the nipple is healed and the pus is expelled; and sometimes use a suppository of vinegar from burnt vine ash, when the Egyptian medicine is not available, and take ash from a vine stick, pour water on it, then insert it as a suppository, until you feel that the nipple has been cleaned well; and if the patient cannot endure it, or does not tolerate the Egyptian remedy or vinegar of burnt vine ash, use a suppository of water and honey or milk with a little pulverized litargyrii; or use suppositories made from various medicines and ointments, whose properties I have mentioned earlier; and if the opening of the nipple is small, and the size of the suppository cannot enter it, widen it with a bit of iron, and cover it with an Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment, until it is widened; and if the wound is too large, let it heal on its own, but allow the level or the suppository to enter, and if the abscess contains pus, press down or lower the nipple.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	 When the intestine is fully protruded, do not let any char be introduced into it; and if you cannot cover the opening of the abdomen as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the intestine sinks to its lowest point, because when the intestine is fully protruded, do not let any char be introduced into it and if you cannot cover the opening of the abdomen as you see fit, arrange it in this manner: let the intestine move gently downwards, and do not leave anything from the intestine; take medicines for application on the wound, and place linen cloth over the entire wound; then press forcefully towards the wound hole that is larger than the first, then apply oil on the other cloth according to the size of the wound hole, and place it on the wound hole to align the intestine, and do not remove the large cloth except after many days once; and he who is on the wound hole, frequently removes it in order to realign the intestine, and recognize whether it comes from the intestine, whether it is venom or pus or gas, or digested or indigested; be aware if the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has been applied in this manner and you see the nature that arises on the wound hole, recognize that the intestines are already closed, and approach the healthy state; then unfasten it in the morning or the third day, and when you unfasten the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the oil.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breasts are swollen improperly after many days, know that the breasts do not heal.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	 And if subtle poisons act after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	 For there are people who have delay in healing of flesh in their wounds and those who act contrary to it; and if the breast swells indigestible for many days, know that the breasts do not heal; and if the breast is slow to swell, it hardens and becomes hardened, then apply medicines drying moist in substance and dry in virtue, such as linseed oil, for there is great part of vitriol and this is the last medicine; take linseed oil, and make it with rose oil, and equal old wine in substance; then boil it and use it; and the same can be done better cooked when linseed oil is not present, or you can take myrrh and aloes and incense, grind them, powder them on the honey when it is above the fire; and then glue the cloth to it, and apply it to the breast, and sometimes administer long Aristolochia root, and celestial roots, which is like flour and centaur; and use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, put on the honey I mentioned, and use it; and if the cure is slow, and not cured by this cure, then know that corruption is complete, and makes impression in the bone or hard members or ligaments; if the cure of fistula is used, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess at the nailbed
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	 Parasite is an abscess that grows under the nail of the finger or toe, or it may grow in other places; and when it swells and care is not taken, if it bursts out, it runs and spreads as it runs along the root of the nail, and sometimes it spreads completely; and the corrosion goes up to the bone, until there is a foul-smelling pain, and the joint becomes wide, and the color turns yellow.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	 When you treat it as we have said in the previous section, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterwards.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The cautery is very helpful if the bone is healthy and the nail (claw) is also healthy; and if the nail grows into the flesh, starts to thicken, and becomes swollen, you must put the iron under the nail so as not to touch the flesh, push it upwards, strike the swelling gently and lightly, and apply on top of the remaining swelling, burning and corrosive medicines to remove everything; then cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	 And if the corrosion is in the bone, strike it and draw out pus, for as much as the bone is corrupt, it cannot heal; and if you see it becoming more corrupted, strike it with the iron as described before, then heal it until it is healed; and if it is pierced and swollen, and causes great pain, it must be drained first; then cut the nail with a sharp spatumile (instrument used for removing the nail) from one side cutting across, but ensure that the cut does not reach the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something to alleviate the pain.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain in the hand is fading
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	 The one born on the hand of some men by chance is entirely fleshy, and by chance it has skin or bones, and sometimes it has a nail; and none of them are born in the root of the joint, but rather they arise in any of the fingers of the hand.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	 The one who is born in any nail of the hand does not move, and the one who is born at the joint of the hand, by chance may move; its size is light in this manner: cut it off from its root with a broad lancet.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	One born at the root of a joint is difficult to cure; keep it covered.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 In the one who is born or should be in the little finger, it is necessary that you first cut the round flesh up to the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate saw, and heal it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The dislocations that come to the joints all at once are due to birth, or from a blow to the wound, or by burning, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	 If you need to suture that wound, it should be repaired according to its natural forms; then put between two tents or dampened cloths anointed with oil rose, so they do not stick together; or put between two thin pieces of wood until the edges are sutured, as necessary.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If one of its two sides comes with the palm, then strike the splint as required.
des vils	 peasants
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	 The swellings are large, enveloped, full of melancholic superfluity, which come upon many members of the body; and it happens more in the legs of those who walk much and work and carry things, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must sometimes administer cleansing with vinegar, and then apply the basilica (a medicinal ointment or paste made from powdered herbs).
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	 The iron cure is according to two methods: one is that you cut them and draw out black blood; the other method is that you tie the swelling and drain it all.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	 The thigh is to be treated in this manner: first, boil the leg in very hot water strongly until the flesh softens, then hold the patient's leg above the knee up to the part below the groin; then cut open the vein in one of the places (I, II or III), of a large size, then separate and draw out the black blood to your hand, from one end to the other, as much blood as the sickness can bear; and then tie it, and command him to eat food that is darkening the blood; and start the evacuation and bleeding again when the veins are full, and this helps the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	 The swellings are to be treated in this manner: press the sick person's leg, if there is much hair, then put it into water (or boil it), and boil the leg in hot water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if there is no water available, heat the leg over a fire, and then cut on the long side of the thigh towards the knee or below at the ankle; peel off the skin around the vein from both sides, as much as you feel, until it appears red and black, and when it comes out (the blood) it looks like a white cord; push the finger down, making the blood come up through the skin, and then lift it to the edge, and do the same in another place; then make another cut, or more if necessary, lift, and press on the foot, then draw and lift until the second cut; pull out piece by piece until all is emptied, then press; and if you cannot draw it out, insert a sharp double threaded needle into it, tie and draw, push the needle down, and turn your hand from one side to the other until it comes out; be careful not to burst it, because if it bursts, you cannot draw or lift it, and this would harm the patient; and when you have treated it all, place damp wool soaked in vinegar and oil over the wound; and let it heal until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	 And if the face is contracted, twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it forcefully, but do not cover it; drag it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	 The shape of the iron used to pierce the face is curved and does not cut the vein; it has a large curve because if it were fine, it would pierce the vein, but let it be thick as we have said, and this is its shape:
de la voinne civile	 of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	 This vein is engrafted in the legs, in warm areas where no grass or trees grow and in soil without moisture; it may also sprout elsewhere but this happens because of the corruption that comes from under the skin, as it comes out of the body towards and through the serpentine path, engrafting between the skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	 And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are that a very large inflammation comes in the leg and then the vein starts to burst out, just like a plant's root.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	 When the joint opens, you should wrap around a piece of cloth from 7 to 10 inches wide and sew it up, and leave the cloth in place on the leg, and each time it leaks out, you should rewrap around the cloth and sew it up; if it is too long, cut off part of it and rewrap the rest, but do not cover its root, until it is completely out; for if you cover it, it returns to the flesh, causing abscess and purulence or a bad disease; therefore, it must be treated gently and gradually up to the neck, and nothing remains in the body; and sometimes this vein, when it is treated, can be 5 feet long, or even 10, and once a man came to me, whose vein was 10 feet long, and when you cut it open, you should push out the pus or blood, pierce it through to the bottom, so that everything comes out; empty the material inside, and apply medicines against purulence for several days, then treat as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	 And sometimes in opening this vein, and especially when it opens at the joint of the arm or leg, much bleeding occurs, and it can jump around; heal it then as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	 of worms that are born between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	 This disease is called "cattle disease" on our land because it often occurs in cattle, and it is a small worm that is born between skin and flesh, and moves throughout the body expanding and shrinking, and it can be felt in one member after another, until it reaches the skin or leaves, and jumps away; and it is poisoned by putrefaction of some humors, as snakes and serpents and worms from the stomach come; and there is doubt about its malice, for when it moves through the body, and goes to the head, and comes to the eye, perhaps enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	 When you wish to cure and draw it [the affected part], one can force it out only when it moves: therefore, you must hold the limb above and below with a strong and tight ligament, then strike upward and pull it out, and if the end enters fully into the flesh and you cannot extract it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm that it does is that it burns oil, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the oil, hold under it the cautery in shape, then strike upward, and pull it out; and it is necessary to use the patient with purification of the body with soluble medicines for bad humors, and avoid eating sour foods that produce putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	 Pain from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	 This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that arises in some members, and it moves from member to member; and I have seen this myself.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	 I was summoned to a sick woman, and when I examined her arm, I found a small swelling in the armpit; then afterward, I saw it rise like a worm toward the shoulder more quickly than anything else, just as quick as hot silver cuts from one thing to another; the pain separated from that place and pierced into the shoulder, and shortly after that it ran all over her body until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it repeatedly returned around her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I marvelled greatly how it moved from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a manner.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	 I wished that many had moved the pain from one place to another, but I did not want it, as I saw in the woman; and I thought that was because the woman had dry body and open veins, and because of this appeared the constrained ventosity; and it does not appear according to this reason to those who are delicate, and who have moist bodies and covered veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	 And when you wish to cure this disease and the patient feels that pain, if she opens as we have said, then hold her quickly above and below, and then strike on it until the constrained ventosity goes out at the place; and cauterize the place; and if you do not see it in your hands, then cure it with those who expel the ventosity, such as fetid pills, and pills of serapin, and similar others.
des saiettes	 arrows (in modern French)
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are diverse, according to their appearances and according to the parts of the body where they strike.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	 The various types of them are that there are those with large points and small ones, sharp and blunt, straight and barbed; and those with two edges, and those with tongues, and those with fragments; and one that strikes in any member does so in several ways: either in a principal member like the head, heart, liver, spleen, lung, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	 When it strikes in any of these members, and the sign of death that I will tell you afterwards will appear: then you must be cautious about removing this arrow, for death comes after in many ways; and when this ill sign does not appear to you at all, and the arrow is not completely in, pull it out, and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	 And the sign of the brain when an arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the swelling above the brain occurs, is when it becomes hard, swollen and twisted, inflamed and red in the eyes, burning and reddening of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile; and possibly without fever from the nose or ears; and perhaps loss of speech and voice; and a white moist discharge comes from the wound like pus, and also similar to charcoal; and if this sign appears, refrain from treatment, and pull out the arrow if it is not embedded.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	 The sign of an arrow wound when it strikes or enters a hard object, and not empty, is that it feels like it has been lodged in something hard; the arrowhead may swell like pus, and emit black blood, coldness and sweat, and fainting: therefore, it is certain that death is imminent.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	The sign of the arrow that does not pierce the flesh is when bubbles of pus jump out of the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient turns pale, and breathes heavily and seeks cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	If the arrow falls on the bedcover of the sick person, it is dislodged from the side ribs; and it releases a lot of fluid and pain and heavy breathing; and all the limbs of the shoulder move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if an arrow or food sticks in its wound, by chance something from the indigestible meat might jump out of the wound.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if an arrow or stomach, and something from the intestine passage might jump out, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if an arrow strikes in the bladder, and the urine jumps out and flows out, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is deadly.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other members, such as the face, neck, shoulders, shoulders blades, spine of the back, wrists, hips, legs, and similar, are safe according to various conditions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery and it is not poisonous, as I shall tell you what happened to me, you do the following.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	 The arrow or spear struck the man in the root of the nose: I pulled it out from another side beneath the ear fat, and there was no pain sensation.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	 And pulled out an arrow that struck in the fat below the eye under the paper, and the arrow was straight, and could not be touched except the tip towards the wood, and the arrow was big as a Turkish bow, all iron on both ears; the man was unharmed, and no bad accidents happened.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	 And pulled out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was Arabic with iron ears; I shaved the beard, and made it thin enough to pull, and the Christian was unharmed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	 And draw out an arrow from a man who was struck or wounded, and I thought he would die; but after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change; I cut above the arrow, and pulled it out, and there was no bad outcome.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	 And if an arrow strikes a man on the back or body, and the wound is healed over it; and the arrow remains within him, and his natural dispositions do not change, nor does he find any harm in his natural works.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	 And if another man is struck by an arrow in his face, and the wound heals over it; but he continues to suffer great pain for a long time, and many other similar things happen.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	 And I was summoned to treat an arrow that had struck the prince's arm, which was hanging limp inside the knee, slightly tilted to the right side; and the arrow was completely buried for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	 I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	 I pierced it with a very thin wire, and felt nothing; but there was a pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	 I thought it was the tip of the arrow. I put on a healing plaster, as the wound did not swell; and the arrowhead appeared.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	 I left the plaster on for many days, and the wound healed completely, and the patient waited a long time, until he felt the arrow inside his knee for a day; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	 I place the wound with corrosive medicine for several days, until it is opened, and I probe it, and feel the head of the arrow which sticks in the flesh; then I bind up the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine, as long as the head of the arrow appears visible; and it heals well within four months, and then the wound which I made the incision swells so much that I cannot insert the pliers; therefore I did not stop refining and devising ways to extract the arrow, until I made the pliers well on the fourth day, according to the shape that will come at the end of this chapter, until I pull it out and return the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	 And the mirrors judge that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I shall then restore it, and the wound was healed, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	 And I have told you the quality of the extraction of some arrows, but not all, for books cannot grasp everything; but wise masters learn much from very little, and from what is present and failing, true nine works, and find nine instruments, below the things that happen in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	 I say that arrows enter the limb where they are thrust only in two ways: either by the side through which they enter or from another direction; and that which jumps out from the place it entered is an arrow penetrating into the flesh, and sometimes leaps away again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	 And if it does not jump now, leave it until the flesh is ripened around it and the opening is wide; and likewise if it is pierced in the bone, and it cannot come out, leave it for a few days and move it every day; then it will jump, and if it still does not, perforate all around with a sharp instrument until the surrounding flesh is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	 If the arrow is pierced in the head and goes to one of the ventricles in the brain, and any of the accidents I mentioned earlier occur: do not pull it out at all, but leave it until it is straightened after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the sinus, that is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	 And if the arrow is not driven far beyond the bone but only scratches it and the patient remains with a bad condition for some days, then seek a means to draw it out.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be withdrawn, administer tourniquets around it, as I have told you; then heal the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	 And if the arrow is lodged inside the body and cannot be seen, seek it out with all your strength; if you feel it, use any device to draw it out; if you are unable due to the narrowness of the wound, and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve or vein in the way, open the wound as much as possible; draw the arrow out if you can, and if there are ears on the arrow like they are held, remove the flesh that it is stuck in by two parts as far as you can, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow so that you can pull it out; be careful not to break the arrow while doing so, but rather to draw it out more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, press the flesh around it, then pull it out, for extraction will be easier.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	 And if the flow of blood interferes with your treatment, follow what we have said in its chapter for care; and beware of incising the nerve and vein, and bring an instrument as you can draw out the arrow safely, quickly or gently; and place the patient according to the shape he was in when the arrow struck him, for this is the greatest help that there is, and if you cannot do it, then lay him as the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	 The arrow that comes from elsewhere opens something of it or the skin is swollen in place where one can see or feel clearly; then cut above, as far as the pliers can take hold, and pull out; if it jumps now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, then round your hand and push it into the bone, expand the bone, and pull it out.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	 And if it cannot come out, leave it still, and then continue the extraction until it comes forth; and if it is of an arrow and it sticks in there, push it all the way through; and if it falls off, you must manage to hold it tightly, for managing to administer a splint, so that the point of the arrow enters the hair of the splint; then push further, and if the arrow is in the splint, push the splint with pointed entry, to make the extraction easier.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	 And if the arrow is touched, you must cut off all the flesh around where the poison is, as much as possible, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	 And if the arrow falls or lies in the side or stomach or bladder or ribs and is near, and you can cover it, then cover it; and be careful not to cut into the vein or nerve, and pull it out, and then sew the wound, if necessary; and cure it until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shapes of the tweezers used to extract arrows are similar to an eagle's beak, and here is their shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many ways: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	 The shape of the growing hair is similar to that of a bird's feather, for pushing against the tip of an arrowhead, as shown here:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	The form of pliers for pointed and for measuring, as shown here:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins in the human body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	 The veins from which one recovers are thirty-one in number, of which there are sixteen main ones: two areas behind the ears, which are called "doubles herbech"; two arteries in the temples visible; two veins in the inner corners of the eyes, called "aspirres"; one vein that is on the forehead; one vein at the top of the nose; two gullets that are at the neck; two veins above the lips, and these are called "augeherich"; and two veins below the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	 The veins commonly healed are V in each arm: one is called the cephalic, and it is located on the left costal side, and laypeople call it "arm vein"; the median is called "fistula", and is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and laypeople call it "vein of the heart"; the basilic is either on the right costal side, and laypeople call it "ventral vein", and is above the forearm, and it is the one from which bloodletting is performed, which opens clearly at the elbow.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	 The cubital vein is the one that is between the ulnar and the radial, and it has two rains; and in the leg there are three veins: one is under the wrist of the left costal side, and the second superficial which is at the right costal ankle; and the vein called "nesse", which is at the ankle of the other side; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	 The first hairs of the vein behind the ears aid the old-style cathartics and purgatives; and their quality, as I tell you, is that you seize the patient's head, scour the place where the veins are with a rough cloth; then hold the patient's neck with a screw (a vis), until two veins appear behind the ears in their respective dependent places of the head: then, when you feel the pulse beneath your hand, press firmly; next, take the lancet and thrust it through the vein to the bone, then pull your hand all along the vein, striking and piercing the skin and the vein well two or three times, causing blood to flow; then tie and hold until it is healed; and I have already mentioned the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	 The first artery in each temple is useful for treating old, soft, and common otitis media, and for the treatment of tears of the eyes; the quality of the artery is as I say: the patient extends his neck, so that both veins are clearly visible; feel the pulsation below your ear, then press it upwards on the vein towards your ear index, push the lancet into it, raise the vein and cut it, as you have done with other veins, and perform bloodletting according to your need; afterwards release the patient, place your hand over the vein for an hour, then place cotton on top of it; then form a dressing and leave it until it is healed; we have previously spoken about their bandaging and extraction, which begins the book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	 The vein of the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic vein in old facial diseases, and it has migrated and reddened; and its quality is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting it until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose shape is:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	 And place the point on the vein and raise it with your hand, or something else, and let the blood come out according to the amount that you see; then release the patient's neck, and tie the vein until it is healed and not used again with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	Moreover, the flame should not be too sharp; and the vein should be cut across because the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may break if it is too thin.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	 The veins of the two eyes that are in the eyelids help with inflammation, redness, swelling, and oiliness in the eye, and old facial diseases; and the quality of their vein is that the patient stretches his neck while twisting it with a loop, as before; then tie it, and the vein should be tied with a small amount of flame, for there is no heat.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is fine, perhaps it breaks; then make the sanitizer of the blood, as much as you need, and then lay it on cloth, and bind it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	 The vein of the nose in the nostril is useful for treating headaches, and scrofula (a type of tuberculosis), and diseases of the face such as migraines and redness that come from the face; especially when it is old; and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient bends his neck, then holds his nose with your left hand, takes subtle flame long, and pierces it through the space between the two nostrils, because the vein does not open easily and the wound will start to heal; do not go too deep, and make the wound bleed according to your need, then let it rest for a night, as it is quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	 The strain of the second anus [or intestine] aids in the treatment of the rectum, the beginning of inflammation, many diseases, worms, corrosion, herpes, and ulcers; and the quality of the straining is that the patient strains his neck under one and the other, as we have said; and the master being above the patient's head, and the patient bends over the seat, then opens the vein gently, then draws out the blood moderately, or as much as necessary; then he changes to the other vein, then unties the ligament, and holds all the veins moderately so the patient does not strain; and leaves it until morning, for the wound to heal.
de la sainie des leivres	 Of the liver incision
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The healing of the wounds on the lips above helps with the congestion in the mouth and corruption of gums, and cuts or cracks in the lips, as well as toothaches and around.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	 And the qualities of the incision are to seat the patient in front of you, hold his neck as I said; then turn the liver, and observe the two veins, one on the right liver and the other on the left, and they are recognized by the fact that they are black, and by the small veins surrounding them: cut one and the other, and if you do not know which ones to cut and you have doubts, cut the largest of each, and likewise for the veins above and below, because it is the same method.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	 Of the incision beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	 The incision of the veins that are beneath the tongue is performed after the cephalic incision, and it is in the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the eye, and diseases of the mouth; and the qualities of the incision are that the patient should lie down between your hands facing the sun, and lift the tongue, and look beneath on each side a black vein: cut one and the other, and do not go too deep, because below are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	 The veins from which one commonly heals are usually healed in two ways: either by burning them with a large heated iron, or with subtle olive oil as you sharpen a knife, and it is called "anesil"; and they are both wide and fine according to the size and narrowness of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of fire mirrhine is very famous, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	 It is necessary to open hairless, flat veins containing thick and turbulent blood, and this is the form of hot olive oil.
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more subtly pointed out, and is for healing subtle veins where there is subtle, citrus-colored blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	 The healing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are beneath the throat, neck, chest, and stomach; and it is necessary for the patient to heal quickly, and he must be cauterized under the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	 And if it wounds the artery and bleeding comes out, it must be stopped, as I have said; and the flame should not be pricked, but cut as an aniseed.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	 And if the basilica does not open up clearly, you must force it and change another [opening], or you seek any other opening in its place, such as the vein in the arm; it opens up clearly; and cut into the flame with an aniseed, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	 And if you want to locate the place of the vein, then you must also forcefully pull on the arm and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the location for incision, tie the arm, and cut into the vein with an aniseed; be careful not to cut in the artery when you see the vein swelling, for it is from the artery; avoid that.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if you see it rise high like the urine of a child, and the wound is red and thin, know that it is not from the artery: hurry up then, and put your finger on it for a long time, then cut off your finger when the wound stops bleeding; often it happens. If the arm swells, leave it as it is, and do not move it. Let the patient remain in fear, and do not move it until it heals.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	If the wound is not bleeding and it swells, and the medicine is not present, then cut open the artery if it is open, because it will shrink; and stop the bleeding from the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	 Take a piece of fennel, break it and take one of its halves and hold it over the other day; if the wound stops bleeding, that is good; if not, treat it as we have said with powders that stop bleeding; and stopping the bleeding should not be rushed in many positions due to the small size of the wound and the thickness of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	 The first vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, as it is composed of basilica and cephalica, as we have said; and the healer should be careful not to pierce it too deeply, and if he does, he will find the nerve, swell and the patient may suffer harm, and in some cases it may not heal; and this nerve opens often, and if it does not open in any man due to his subtlety, you must cure it with an instrument of cautery; and avoid touching the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les .ij. ners, si la fent dou lonc.	If there is a vein between the two nerves, make it long.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	 The first vein of the head helps to drain blood from the head and aid the eyes; and it should be cauterized with olive oil or myrtle fire, as it is the safest of all veins because there is no nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	 Therefore, one should seek the easier joint and not be afraid if it needs to be moved for the first time, and you can try again; and sometimes joints swell in some men when moved for the first time, but do not be afraid in this case.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the wound, according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	 The first thing you should know about bleeding is that it is not done for any other reason than to maintain health and avoid future illnesses; and bleeding should be performed in one of the three veins mentioned: cephalic, saphenous, and basilic; and bleeding should be done at the beginning of spring, in summer and in winter after eating, when the signs of fullness appear; and bleeding should be done on the first or third day, after two to three hours or on the second day.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	 The sacred art of healing that is applied to diseases has no fixed hour, but when need arises either during day or night, in all hours and at any time; and it is not advisable to heal children until they are fourteen years old, nor women carrying a child before the fourth month up to the seventh.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez .lx. ans.	One should not heal the elderly who have passed 60 years.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	 When someone wants to heal themselves in any manner, if possible they should empty their intestines with a gentle enema, especially if there is much gas retained, so that veins are not filled with waste products harmful to the main organs; nor should those who are overly fond of meat, drunkards, or weak from fluid retention be healed; and one should not heal after a colic attack, vomiting, stomach disorder, excessive urination, physical exertion, staying awake, eating too much, or consuming alcohol; also those whose vitality has been drained by some event or weapon wound, or by illness of the body; then refine the humors by diet and drinks and medicines if possible; then immerse oneself in a bath, unless there is something preventing it, to soften the blood, and heal the vein from below the third, as we have said; and on that day avoid labor, pain, lust, and similar things; and be relaxed and cheerful, and let the healer stand above the one being healed, and rub his arms two or three times, then gently pull the ligament above, for when it is too tight or constricted, it cannot heal properly; then rub the area with both hands until the veins swell, and feel them; then moisten the healer's fingers with a little old oil, then place his thumb of his left hand below the vein where healing is desired, so that the vein does not move away from the fire.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	 For there are veins that run like cords in the body, and some of these are filled with pus, so that when heat is applied, it contracts and cannot open the vein; such is one's case; and if the vein opens, the wound is too narrow, thus the healers should be aware of these things.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens for the first time, that is good; if not, then continue a little more under that level or quickly above it, if the area is not inflamed.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	 If the limb is swollen and the patient fears, he should let it rest for a day or two without tying the arm: perhaps pus will come out; do not immerse in water, then resume healing if it pleases him; and if the wound is small, or the opening is narrow with subtle cautery, and you doubt that it does not let as much blood as you see, proceed with heat directly on that wound itself; open it slightly, so that the limb swells again; for this happens many times when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	 If you see the joint swollen, do not start draining it immediately, put a little bit of oil on it, because it softens the body with blood and oil is made in this place where the oil is applied; and in this way administer the oil to every wound you drain to stop the flow of blood; and this also works for scissors and saws when they are placed on the joint; if it is too subtle, it will spread when it is too large.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	 And if a large abscess occurs, which often happens when the opening of the vein is small, hurry and put wet sponge on it with hot vinegar for an hour; and it should be done after the blood flow from the vein has stopped, and if it remains in place after several days without any black or green discharge, it will not hurt; and if you see otherwise, put something of aloes or myrrh below the plaster or poultice.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often there is an abscess and appearance in the sanctuary of the basilica; therefore, put your hand on it, and if you feel it soft under the pressure of your hand, then it is a bad sign.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai .i. emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not place anything on it from what we have said, because by chance, in court without the artery; but make one dry plaster to harden the place, then treat it with other treatment until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw blood from each according to the quantity of its power, and of the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the wound is black, let it bleed until it turns red; and if you see it thick, let it become thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool down.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	 And it is necessary for those who are full and swollen, and have a need for bloodletting, to make a larger incision, and let the veins be wide; and for the weak ones, do the opposite, and it is necessary to bleed little and often, and it should be done by cutting across, not by pricking; and this method of bleeding is safe from displacement of blood and compression of nerves, and it is better than the long bleeding over the wide one.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	 For the one whose body needs bleeding, it is necessary to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice beneath; if he is heated, bleed him 3 or 4 times; and for those of cold constitution, eat before bleeding soft bread moistened in sweet syrup or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chicory, and a fragrant syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	 And if the hand is in pain after bleeding profusely, it is necessary to apply a paste of charcoal and a subtle-smelling syrup, and use other things mentioned in the section or chapter on fainting, for the evacuation of blood.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if he wants to dislocate his arm, and strain it another time, if necessary, when it is weakened by excessive strain, it should heal little by little, according to the quantity of its strength continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine .vij. houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever wants to dislocate his arm after the first strain, and it has rest for nine hours after the first strain, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever wants to heal from another part, should heal within two days or three.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	 For there is much blood inside the body that has already been heated and causes fever; it is necessary to draw out a large quantity, open the wound as wide as possible; then you must take care of all conditions of bleeding, place your hand on the pulse when it stops bleeding, so that death does not come in its place, and this happens many times when the bleeders are negligent; and it is not necessary to dislocate the arm, make blood come out a second time, and the wound is closed, but you press firmly; nor should it be curved, but leave it as it is until it stops bleeding the second time; or you apply the tip of fire to the frozen blood that comes out of the vein, and place a piece of damp cloth on it, and press lightly.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, leave it and do not squeeze it until the abscess is soothed.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to draw blood a second time, do so in the same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is drawn from the vein of the head because it is composed [of the same thing].
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	 And the manner of the vein-letting is that the patient puts his hand into hot water until the flesh becomes red; then it should be tied moderately, so that the vein appears well; then it should be pricked gently, not widely or deeply; and the vein should be cut wide open, and the vein should be let near the joint of the hand, and if one cannot draw blood from it, put the hand back into hot water, and let the blood flow in the hot water until you have enough; and if it is in the summer, do not pound the hand into hot water again, for it puts more in winter than in summer; and the vein-letting of this kind is safer than all other vein-lettings, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	 The salve for the swelling of the right hand is effective against all diseases of the liver, and this is the method: grasp the hand, and immerse it in hot water until the vein swells if you see it; and if the sore is on the other side, and if you cover it entirely with everything, it will cause no harm; and do not go too deep, for nerves are all exposed beneath the skin, and then replace the hand in hot water, so that the wound does not freeze up and cannot heal.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have bled the blood as much as necessary, put oil and linen on the wound to heal quickly, and do the same for each wound.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sore on his left hand is beneficial for the sickness of mice, and do as I told you regarding the right one.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	 The salve for sores is effective against all diseases that are beneath the body, such as genital sores, retention of flow, rheumatism, and old legs and thighs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	 And the quality of his wound is such that the patient places his foot in hot water and rubs it on the vein until it perishes, and then binds it above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and from above the foot goes a great many streams; therefore, open up or a larger stream, or at the ankle, is more beneficial.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if [you] pierce it through the skin that is below, pierce also in the same way as in cutting; and let the flame be extinguished.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if [the skin] cannot be pierced out, place the point in the water and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	 If the wound needs to be cleaned for the first time, start again above a little, because the area is salty; do not doubt the nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the sole of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The head of the sciatic nerve is located at the knee joint, and its pain resembles that of the heel when it is hot with blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	 And the quality of his wound is such that the patient immerses or bathes it, and twists above the ankle four fingers in order for the vein to open; otherwise, it will not open; and if it opens, clean it in all ways you can, and by crossing; and it is more beneficial to cover it, because the area is dirty, and it is easily contaminated by hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	 And if you don't straighten it, no remedy will open or close the back of the foot, and turn toward the little toe, and beware of the nerves; make as much compression of blood as possible, then untie the bandage, place cotton on it and hold it in place; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	 of the blisters of the feet
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc .ij. manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Venous ligatures (or stitching) are made of horns, antler, or glass; and venous ligation is done in two ways: by making an incision and drawing blood, or without making an incision.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	 This blistering, which is painful when touched, may be of two types: either it is all fire or with fire; and the blistering made by wounding and bloodletting is performed in fourteen inches of the body, from which one is entirely at the head; and others are at the neck; and others in both shoulders; and blisters under the chin; and blisters in both armpits; and blisters on both legs; and blisters on both ankles; and blistering does not treat blood, except for small veins scattered throughout the flesh, and therefore it is not suitable for use unless as a venesection; and it should not be administered to any disease that comes from repletion until all the body has been emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	 And if there is a need to perform cupping on account of illness or custom, administer it every hour at the beginning or end of each month, or whenever necessary; for there are those who, when they have to be cupped, have heavy heads; and those who experience distension and reddening in their faces, necks, and throats; and those who develop a spot of blood in their mouths, have swollen tongues, bleed, and similar symptoms.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés .iij. houres dou jor.	And when we observe these signs, especially if it is within the month, we order to fumigate after 4 hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	 The cupping of the nose helps to relieve headaches... that come with the eyes, and it should not be done after the evacuation of the entire body; this cupping is in place of cephalic cupping, and those who have a cold complexion or constipation should not use it, for it does them great harm; and therefore, it should not be used by those with cold head diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who recovers often becomes negligent, and for this reason it is necessary to place the cupping glass slightly lower due to the doubt of negligence.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	 The ventosation in the neck is located near the throat and basilica of the head, which makes it valuable for compression of the windpipe, for slitting the channel of the larynx, and for strangulation and suffocation; and it should be used carefully, as if it holds too tightly, it can cause death by suffocation or obstruction of the stomach or heart.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	 The ventosation on the costal cartilage of the neck is useful for headaches, otolaryngology, and migraines, strangulation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; it is located near the basilica artery; you must instruct the patient to press gently with his hand, not to compress the artery, and no loss of blood should occur.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des .ij. levres.	The ventosations (ventosation) beneath the chin is useful for mouth diseases and gum corruption, and similar oral ailments; and it is located in the vicinity of the salivary glands of the two lower lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventosations (ventosation) of the shoulder is useful for diseases caused by heat and swelling.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	 The ventosations of the ribs is worth as much as three veins of the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the patient not to press too deep, for the flesh is bare there, and knows nerves and arteries underneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The poultice that is on the buttocks is useful for piles from their foundation and diseases below, and it should be large, made of flax, which needs to be well drawn out; and by chance, if it were fine, it would break; and it causes big wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des .ij. sophenes, et des .ij. chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	Poultices on the legs heal quickly because they draw blood from the entire body, and are useful for old pains in the knees and ankles, and bladder and urinary tract problems, and remove inflammation; and they are located between the two shins and two ankles, and weaken the body over a long period of time, causing swelling in various positions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of putting on the bladder is that you first empty it, and fill it promptly, and place it hastily, and move it equally, and not cease doing so until you see the area turn red and swell, and appear the color of blood; then tie, and replace the bladders, and take care in the positioning of the body, for there are some who have soft flesh and clear veins: it is necessary to pierce only once, and it is necessary to make large incisions, and one shallow; and suck lightly.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir .ij. fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	If the flesh is thick, it is necessary to pierce twice: the first time to refine the way of the thick blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	If the flesh is very thick, it is necessary to pierce the third time; and when we want to draw blood little by little, we should only prick once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	 And if we want much blood, we should frequently let it out; and if the skin is thick, press deeply, and take care that the veins are pierced suddenly, and it is necessary for those with thick and hard skin, and narrow pores, to anoint the places of the ventosations with stimulating and dissolving oil: if it is in summer, use oil of violet, or sweet almond oil, or seed oil of cucumber; and if it is in winter, use oil of parsley, or lily, or chamomile, or something similar.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is thick and cold, take amaranth oil, or balsam oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	 And if the person whom you are treating has tender flesh with large and open pores, no oil should be applied; instead, it should be washed after ventosation with rose water, cold water, water of morello cherries, water of cucurbits, water of porcelain, or other similar substances.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture should rise from ashes of myrtle, or water of bilberry, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	 Those with large superfluities rise from old wine or sour milk, or decoction of anise or camomile, or other similar substances; and no one should saigne by ventosation before the bath or in the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two; and one should not sleep after ventosation, and it is necessary that he evacuate, when he should be ventosed and when he has been ventosed.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	 And let the person who is healthy and bilious, and whose bile lacks being too sharp and inflamed; it is necessary that he take cold things, such as green apples, endives, lettuce and similar foods; eat little meat, and meat of chicken, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	 And the person with a cold complexion, let him take honey syrup and fragrant old-young wine, and eat little bread and little meat of birds and small birds; and on the day he will vomit, he should drink more than eat; it is necessary to give some men certain times triacetum or musk before or after the vomiting, to comfort the principal limbs; but let them be subtle, but not too hot for those who drink.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	 The hollow bladders placed on wounds are those placed on the liver, spleen, gout, stomach and the buttock, the backside, flank and haunch; for these limbs cannot be pierced elsewhere except to draw blood from one member to another, such as when we put them over breasts when a woman is lactating; to drain pus from the member, such as when we place bladders on the stomach or buttock to reduce swelling; and to alleviate pain when there is obstruction or stone, such as it draws out the obstruction by chance or expels the stone from its place. This is done when placed over the liver and spleen when there is retention of wind, and these bladders are administered empty for only soaking; sometimes they are administered with fire, and sometimes filled with cold water, as in diseases of the pleurisy, and in this way the bladder is filled with hot or cold liquid where it has been cooked with herbs such as cinquefoil.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The shape of the bladder (or cupping glass) treated with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	 And it should have a width of two fingers and half a palm's breadth, and have a notch around the middle, as to thrust an awl through, made of bone or soft wood in front so as not to hurt the patient when placed on the limb; and there should be a rod of the same length as the thickness of the middle crossing it, made of bone or iron, to hold a plaster in place, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and age of those who take them; because the swellings of children are different than those of old people, and thin ones from fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	 And this plaster should be placed on the limb: take the plaster made of wax or linen and put it across the rod that is within the bladder, so that the light is at the bottom of the bladder and does not burn the patient; then place it on the limb, as the fingers have been described above, so that when one looks, if steam goes out, remove the bladder; take the linen again as before and repeat frequently, if needed.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	 In the bladder, which is administered in pleurisy disease, not sharp or punctured, and is not brought forth except when it is full of liquid, and placed on the member only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	 Without sores are not brought forth except in members where bladders cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar places; and in places denuded of flesh, such as palm or sole, and other similar places; and the quality of the user is that when you find bladders filled with sweet clear urine, you can take them; and put one nut in sweet urine, until they become accustomed and have nothing in their bellies; and then they are to be drained from vein and bladder, then rub the member as much as it turns red, and place the bladders on top; and when they are full and warm, if it is a place where a bladder can be placed, place it there, because this is very beneficial.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	 If it is not so, lift the limb gently, then strongly and press; and if the limbs are healthy too close to the body, moisten a linen cloth with cold water and place it; until the swelling subsides; and if the swelling multiplies, place crushed vitriol or similar things on it until it subsides; or you may put half-peeled beans on the limb, and leave them until they harden to the limb, which will now stop the bleeding; and if necessary, take more linen cloths.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	 And if the swellings do not want to take, you rub the limb with fresh blood, or you pierce it with a needle so that the blood comes out, and then place it; and as soon as they feel the blood, they harden; and when you see that they bleed, you sprinkle some powder of aloes and soap or ashes on them, which will now stop the bleeding.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	Here begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine and concerns the treatment of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	 Inform the dear child that the fool who reads this chapter will never see any of the old books or read letters from them; and for this reason, the science is alienated in our land, for I have never found anyone good at it; and I know nothing about it, except through the knowledge of the old books, which I have studied extensively and treated the science, and by experiment, and by the habit of my life; and I have described in this chapter what is contained therein, and have abridged it in the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are brought about, as I have done in these two chapters before.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, let us now say the prologue of this book, the subjects in which wisdom places its understanding, and dwell on truth, so that those who are experienced know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	 When a fracture or dislocation or twisting or curvature comes to anyone, it is necessary that you treat the patient from both sides, unless anything prevents you, such as weakness of body, or infants, or old age; or if the time is not very hot or too cold; and avoid cold drinks, that is, chilled drinks and meat from the eye and shin, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, nor fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt about the abscess heating up or the spreading of matter to the member; then the patient returns to his first natural government as he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bones begin to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with foods that make good nourishment or have thickness, such as cooked wheat in water, meat, head, feet, pork, eggs, fresh fish, strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	For this nourishment, the bones heal faster and sooner.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	 And know that the broken bones of the old and weak cannot be well regained nor fastened according to their nature due to the decay of the limbs, nor those who are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but it does not matter, place the large tendons on the broken bone which straightens and joins the limb together, until it enforces itself as it was before; and do not move it at all from its work, and for this reason you should feed it with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are various in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the hip, or the leg; and I will tell you in this chapter all kinds of fractures.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there is a fracture that heals by itself, and another that becomes sharper, like the tip of a feather for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if it is a fracture with an open wound, or one with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	 And each one has its tool and device in the restoration, according to what memory comes to its place; and it is known that the break of the bone by this means that the joint is twisted and clearly apart by displacement, and pressured by hand; and when there is no twisting nor touching, and the patient feels no great pain, there is no fracture; but it can have a twisting or fissure, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	Do not move the hand, but put on medications that come after this, and then hold it gently now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	 And know that the breaks which go into the armpit, and are the two parts disjointed, they must now be put in an even position, so abscesses do not grow there; and if abscesses grow there, leave it for a day as long as the abscesses are soothed; then make it equal to the joint that you can easily and skillfully move; and know that the restoration of it is lighter than the restoration where there are pieces; then straighten it, as necessary hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	 If the bone is broken into pieces and divided into two parts, whether it be a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small member, or by two ropes, or one rope and your hand; then put the member according to its natural shape, so that when the parts of the broken member are dislocated, you align them all using every means, and ensure that by your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and join together well the two bones of the bone according to the best shapes.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	Feel it with your hand if it seems not to be well aligned: straighten it nicely and do not strain or press too much as those who apply pressure through their work cause abscesses and contractions in the limb, as we have often observed.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	 And when the limbs are set, punish the patient well so that he does not move them, neither by watching nor sleeping, neither by turning, nor in any other way; and take care that the limbs are as secure as possible, so that they feel no pain at all.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	 If they feel no pain, they are not set correctly; it is necessary to put them in such a position that they feel no pain; and beware that they are straightened, so that twisting does not come when they are restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are as I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs come in various shapes, sizes and forms.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	 For small members, such as arms and fingers: it is necessary to wrap linen cloths that are soft and thin; and for large ones, such as thighs and legs: it is necessary to wrap with a wide and hard cord, because the thick cords encase the entire large member and tighten it equally on all sides, so that there is no swelling; then tie lightweight bandages around them three or four times according to the limb, and tighten your hand slightly on the cord, then go above the break and tighten less, than the break, then move a little away from the break; and soften the cord little by little, until you take a large part of healthy flesh; then take another cord, and twist it back over the broken limb; then return to the part below the break, and tighten moderately, neither too strongly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first rule above; then put linen or cloth bandages between the cords until they are all even, then tie them altogether with linen or cotton and finally place well-made splints on top if there is no abscess or inflammation.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	 And if there is an inflammation or abscess, place a cooling substance over the abscess and one who removes it; leave it in such a state for several days; then hold steady your forceps, and they should be about half the thickness of a large cane, sharpened carefully, or splints made from palm leaves, and shaped as follows:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	 However, the forceps that one places over the fracture should be slightly larger and wider than the others; and it should also be as long as necessary for the limb of small or large size; then hold steady the forceps in the same way as you did at the first location, then tie a suture above it, as in the first location over the fracture; closer together, less wide; and it is necessary that the suture be medium-sized, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of flax yarn; for if the sutures are thick, as I have seen in the works of foolish people who make their ties with twisted flax thread, and this is a great error, because the suture cannot be even if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two finger spaces between each forceps.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient has a splinter in his shoulder bones after setting them in healthy places, place lin or wool padding over it to prevent bleeding.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with a break and the veins are cut open, I will tell you the cure below.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	Know that it is not necessary to set all broken limbs immediately on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	 For when the limbs are large, no splints should be put on it before five or seven days, according to your certainty of the abscess healing; and here is the method for ancient plasters to restore fractures, dislocations, and twists: and it is that you take flour which is held in the mill walls, mix it abundantly with egg, and apply this mixture, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common method of the plaster restoring the fracture in various positions, and especially for women and small children, because it is not either too hot or too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana .x. З.; mirre et aloes, ana .v. З.; alechil .viiij. З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Here is another method of plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take barley meal, linseed oil, elder, marshmallow root, mastic, anise, cinnamon, and gum arabic, mix them in equal parts; add myrrh, aloeswood, and seven times as much alkanet root; make this into a powder and mix it with enough egg; if the complexion of the patient is hot, use this plaster, for it has a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	 Another plaster method for twists: take mugwort and mallow, boil ten parts; myrrh and aloeswood, nine parts; cumin six parts; Armenian bole ten parts, grind well and mix with vinegar or abundant egg white, and administer it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	 Another method of dislocation and dislocated bones treatment, relieve the pain that occurs, and cut off the bone using a tool, and break it: take new linen, soak it in vinegar and cooked oil, and place it on the joint.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	 This plaster does not restore, but it is good to relieve abscess heat and bone pain properly.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method of plaster that sets broken bones: take dried leaves of the fig tree and leaves of ground ivy, grind them together, and make plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	 Another method of plaster for the restoration of broken bone and to hasten the healing of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	 Take root of mallow, chamomile, violet flowers, beans flour, each one in equal parts; grind them and mix with wine, and if the limbs are scalded, mix it with moist coriander water or vinegar and apply it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	 Another method of emplastrum (medicine) more forceful than the first, when an abscess hard comes to the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	 Take roots of comfrey, flax seed, balm, clover, and wormwood, and flowers of violets and camomile, in equal parts; grind and mix with salt water or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its condition.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Hippocrates says in his book that nothing other than beeswax and oil should be put on a broken limb to restore it, and it should not be too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	It appears Galen says that dry and slightly warm substances should be put on a broken limb to restore it, such as myrrh, aloes, incense, and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another method of plaster that is beneficial for injuries and pain: take ground mugwort and crushed human hair, or feathers of birds, and equal parts of vismale and oil, and grind them together, and make a plaster from the mixture.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	 Then untie a little afterwards, and make sure that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved out of its place; if it is not untied for many days and pain comes to the place, or there is itching, without rest or swelling, hasten and untie, and remove the emplastrum immediately; take a thin cloth and sea sponge moistened, dipped in water, and lift up the place, until the itching stops and the pain is relieved; then let the member rest for an hour, then put on dry linen moistened with water or rose oil, and tie above a nut, until you are sure of the abscess being hot; and let the inflammation of the member be quieted and the pain removed, then continue the subtle application, and a little emplastrum, and do not strain it too much as before; and make thin until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has subsided and the redness, pain, and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need plaster and linen, then begin again as you did before equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	 And if no swelling comes to the limb as we have said, do not dislocate it unless after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes leave it twenty days, according to what one sees, until the break heals and the joint approaches the flesh; then hold it more than before, and make the meat thicker, as I have said before; and if you see the joint drying out more than necessary, know that nourishment cannot enter; then pour hot boiling water on it every time you dislocate it, and every third day, and ease a little the swelling; by this work therefore cut off the swelling from the limb, and hastily correct whatever the foolish healer leaves twisted: this is bad, and it is a fearful work, and I see no other thing than to rest and work properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	 Many types of fractures exist, and they have various forms, and their causes are determined; because there are fractures made by sword impact, breaking the entire bone from the shaft that is under the bone, as a hack or cleave does; and for this reason, this type of fracture is called "hack fracture".
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces .ij. brisures grans ou petite.	When the sword strikes the bone from above, it is called this type of break "absolute"; and the wound caused by these two breaks can be large or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is an embedded percussion, or a fracture or falling on stone, or other similar things.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a persistent break that approaches the membrane located beneath the bone or above it, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	 And if the wound is healed into the bone as fine as hair, and it is a small crack, and for this reason it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by a fall or by an arrow or something similar, and it causes the bone piece to enter below, and the edges are sharp as a smith when he hammers on cauldrons; if an arrow enters within.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	 And this happens more in those who have moist bone-like heads, such as a child's head; and it occurs in all these ways of breaking that small bones are dislocated like joints; and I will speak about it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	We should know all the ways of fractures by traction above them, and the probe for tenting, and the corruption of flesh that is above it.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The hair-like appearance is known by this: when one exposes the bone and rubs above it, if the fracture opens black,
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of a fracture, be aware of the symptoms of the patient; and if you see any bad accident, such as vomiting of bile, loss of senses, extension, swelling, fever, and hairs to fall out and turn red, and other similar signs in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see an uncertain accident, and you hope for salvation, begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when a wound first comes to you in winter, you should remove the bone before the fourteenth day if possible.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is a fracture, hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone is not corrupted, and the consequences as we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	 If the fracture of the bone reaches up to the covering of the brain, you must cut the broken part in this way: it is that you take hold of the patient's head, expose the bone on all sides as much as possible, and above the shape of the wound more gently than possible, and if blood discharge comes out when exposing the bone or abscesses appear, assist with whatever is necessary; it is that you fill the area with dampened linen soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses are calmed, and make sure there is no more blood discharge; then begin to remove the bone around it, and this is done according to two types of work: one type is that you make a narrow cut ahead, and this is the shape.
Et puis i boute .i. autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	Then make another incision larger than the first one.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have many incisions of various sizes, some narrow and others wide, sharp and made of iron; and work gently so as not to pierce the bone.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou .i. cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des .iij. manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is pushed out and hard, you must pierce it around, so that you provide holes with drills, but not so deep that they pass through the bone to the skin; and it should have a margin or circle on top where the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each one comes in its place at the thickness of the bone, so that you have drills for all places; and this is the form of the four kinds of drills:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes .i. tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing around the broken bone are that you place one drill on the bone and turn it with your hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the drill a little to one side, and do this all around, and then cut the space of the bone between the fractures, making it as thinly and gently as possible, and lightly, as we have said, until you draw the bone to your hand or any of the tools you have, such as pliers or tweezers; and be careful not to touch the brain or the marrow.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	 And when you have pierced the bone and treated it, if necessary, press the fracture that remains from the bone with all other similar instruments resembling an incisor, but it should be thinner and more delicate than the other incisors; and if any small bones or scales remain, lightly remove them with the instruments; then heal the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of work is that which the Greeks call, which is more secure; and they highly praise it, and this is their word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	First, you must cut open a part of the bone where the fracture has moved apart, so that when you have exposed that part, you will place the lenticular anvil underneath it as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	 And do not cut it from one side, but split the part into two pieces with edges facing the bone; then strike gently with a small hammer so you lightly break the bone all around, and be careful of the cloth that is under it; if it is adhered to the bone, remove it gently, for it is broken in vain and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	If the bone does not break through the cloth, and the bone is only chopped from above, and there are small pieces, then you must follow that roughness, and remove the scales with a sharp razor, which you should have in various quantities, to provide the most convenient amount for each place, according to the work and the figure of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If (the patient) shaves very closely at first, and afterward with something more subtle, and does not cease doing so until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each other type of haircut and break (injury), you must bring about the remedy according to his condition; this is not something that can be answered by one who has devoted study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	 And if the wound is exposed, you should take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, wet it in rose oil, and place it over the wound; then take another cloth doubled in 2 or 3 pieces, wet it in wine and rose oil, and place it on top of the first cloth; do this as lightly as possible so as not to burden the wound, then provide a bandage, but do not tighten it more than necessary to cover only the wound; leave it like that for a day or two until the abscess has subsided, then remove it and administer medicines such as lily roots, oats flour, incense powder, arsenic, and similar things; make a powder from these things and place it on the wound, and immediately administer faithful medicines without bitterness; ensure that the wound is always clean, do not leave any ointment or pus in it, for when pus accumulates on the cloth of the brain, it can rot and infect, causing great harm to the patient; for when something bitter is put on the wound, it stings through.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, beware of any bad accidents happening to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful with great certainty.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if blackness does not come violently except by medicine that has been placed there, which property it has, then you should take a part of honey and three parts of rose oil and wax on the cloth; then apply it in this manner; afterwards treat according to the appropriate methods until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les .ij. parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont .ij. os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts of the nose above are broken, or one by itself, because there are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, but instead causes swelling or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	 If one of the two parts is broken, you should grind your small finger or tooth and equal that break within your index finger, pressing it outwards, until the nail grows again according to its natural figure; do this gently, and be careful that the patient does not feel pain from your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is in the upper part of the nose and the finger cannot reach the place, you must place it equal to the knuckle of a finger (a thumb) on top of the nose.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	 If the break is in two parts, do it again and hurry to restore it on the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then insert linseed bandages at the base of the nail where the break is.
Ou tu boutes .i. autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Tie another piece of linen on the other side if the break is there; let the cloths be thick enough to fill the wounds of the head.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	 And they said that one should soften the tents in butter, and stir them every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	 But it does not seem good to me, but they should be softened in the mixture of egg yolk and flour powder; then let the tendon remain until the bone is hard and the cartilages harden.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a .i. souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes feathers from an owl are placed instead of tweezers, and if there is a single soft cloth around it, and the breakage is held, and the patient breathes through it; then do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en .i. poc de dyaquilon.	If an abscess bursts while you are working on it, place camphor or cotton soaked in rose oil, or a pinch of alum.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If an abscess has not come, apply a poultice from linen flour and incense powder mixed with egg yolk, then put light bandages on top, but do not bind tightly; if the break in the bone is small and it is broken into small pieces, remove them with suitable instruments, then seal the wound, and treat it with charcoal and sulphur-like poultices and ointments; if there is no wound within the bone, treat the tendons, and put cotton pads on it until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	The treatment for a jaw fracture
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the mandible (jawbone) is dislocated beneath, and there is no wound outside, and the breakage is only external but not broken through, if it can be recognized easily, it is corbeled within.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the breakage is in the right part (of the jawbone), you must insert your index finger into the patient's mouth; if the breakage is in the left mandible, insert your index finger from the right hand and push gently towards the breakage and align it with the other hand.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en .ij., si covient que tu aministres extension de .ij. pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is displaced in two parts, then you must provide two equal extensions until it becomes equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus .i. drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	If movement of the teeth occurs or breakage, hold them in place with a golden, silver or silk thread, then place a broken mandible splint on it, and put one double cloth on top; and place on the cloth a large well-made stud or equal piece of leather, long and wide according to the mandible, and secure it as you can, and command the patient to rest, and encourage them to eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en .iij. semainnes.	If you see the figure change, dislocate it again on the third day, and then reset to its original position; put a plaster over it, made from milled powder with egg or meal of comfrey, after removing the splint; place a light linen plaster over the plaster, and if the plaster swells, remove it, and leave the dislocation until it heals; it often heals in four weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	If an abscess comes to the surface, bring what we have said before.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, be careful not to remove any piece of the bone with the tools suitable for such.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	If the wound is narrow, enlarge it as needed with fire.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus .i. des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all the pieces and there is no remaining part, close the wound, if it is wide, and apply one or more suitable bandages to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	of the forearm
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc .iij. manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en .ij., et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The force breaks often in front of the shoulder, and the fracture is according to 3 types: either it is broken and dislocated in two places, and it is in several fragments, and it is the easiest to restore; or there is a break with an injury.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies .ij. ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedures are when the fracture is with an injury, that you have two assistants, one holds the shoulder where the force is broken; and the other extends the neck towards the part; then align the fracture to your fingers, so that the form should be as it should be, and not have any appearance or protrusion.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round cushion of cloth or linen under the patient's shoulder, and make it as large as necessary; stretch and lift the fracture, and pull the cushion towards your hand, so that you align the fracture as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule .i. oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder out by force because it comes in fully, then the patient should lie on his affected side, and place one small pillow under the shoulder; and push the ministers (assistants) downward on the shoulder until the bone of the socket is raised.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	Then direct the fracture to your fingers, and if you find debris, then it is necessary that you cut above; and draw out the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any obstruction, strike one of the incisions you have made; but place this instrument under the socket to prevent dislocation.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	 It seems like a spoon, and is not pointed, and should be as large as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work; it has two prongs, as you see, and one should be wide, and the other narrow, like the opening of the wound that you have made when setting the bones; and when you are certain of the abscess being hot, if the wound is deep, you should cut it, but if you doubt the abscess being hot, you should use linen and bandages to dress the wound, according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille .i. drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses are cold, moisten a linen cloth in rose oil and asafoetida and wine, and place it on top.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	 The setting of the bone with open wounds and cuts is as follows: you place a plaster made from milled powder and goose fat on the bone, then put light packing on top, and place a spike under it if needed; next take a very broad bandage, one palm wide, then cover the packing with two layers of linen and the plaster; then take a subtle splint three feet long and wide, and wrap it around the bandage so that its ends hang out; and place the splint over the break, and turn the bandage over the neck, and under the armpit, and under the sick person's arm; and pull each end from both sides, and when you see that the splint holds the break properly, and you clearly see that the splint does not move on the broken bone, you should check it every day, and when the ligaments weaken, you should tighten it; place the patient on his back, and put a small pillow under the armpit to raise the shoulder; this will align the break in the shoulder joint by the healing of the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it unless a bad accident occurs, until twenty days have passed; then resume applying plaster if necessary, tighten it and leave it as is, until it has healed; and it will be healed in no more than twenty-eight days, and sometimes faster in some men.
de la brisure de l’espaule	The break of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	 It happens that the shoulder breaks or is dislocated and only heals through touch; if it appears according to the shape of the break, and you reset it according to its natural form in all possible ways; then put powder from a mill with plenty of egg white, light feathers, and place it on a double cloth; then place a wide and delicate stick, slightly larger than the shoulder, and if hair grows anywhere around the shoulder, use linen feathers to cover it so that the stick heals evenly; and then tightly bind it all in one strong bandage so that the stick does not move from its place, and watch the ligament each day; and every time it softens, tighten it, and adjust the stick if it is out of its place, and make the patient lie on his side; and the shoulder will be restored within 20 or 25 days. When this number is achieved, unbind it, and be careful, for it is not easy for the bone to move lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a bone fragment protrudes in front and not beneath the skin, raise it up, remove it, and do as we have said in the treatment for abscess alleviation by hot cautery.
de la brisure dou pis	of the fracture with a splint
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	 The limb is sometimes broken in the middle, but it happens rarely; however, it often breaks at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	 When it is broken at the end, it slips downward, causing great pain to the patient, without help, immediately, and blood may come out, and the wound opens in the fractured bone, and he feels it all.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met .i. cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des .ij. costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en .i. drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies down with his face on his back, and one cushion is placed between the shoulders, then the shoulders are pressed and the ribs of the two sides are assembled to your hands, and subtly put it all together in every way that you can, until the shape of the bone is as required; then lay on plasters and poultices of salt or another light substance, wrap it in one bandage, and place it on the broken bone so that it does not move; turn the limb roundabout, stretch it gradually, and every hour check the bandage, and if it becomes soft, tighten it; and if it requires dislocation due to corrosion or inflammation that comes to the place, or pain or abscess, hurry and dislocate it, remove the plaster, and address those who have come in methods of treatment; then reset the plaster, stretch it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the rib fracture
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	Know that the fracture of the ribs only comes from large falls on the back and in the chest, and they do not break except when they are slippery; and it is felt well at the investigation with hands.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	 And the healing is that you align the fracture as needed.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	 Then put plaster, and bind with a stick if necessary.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the fracture of the ribs is concave inwards, the patient feels very great pain and shortness of breath, like with pleurisy, because the bone pierces through; and points at the end, and immediately vomits a large quantity of blood, which is a grave illness, and the ancients have made great efforts.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if those who say it is necessary to administer foods that swell the belly, to push the fracture outwards.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not let hot irons come unless they have come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	If they have come, we heal them.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And someone said that we put leeches on the joint, to draw out pus, which seems reasonable; however, there is doubt whether the leeches will attract the superfluidities to the joint due to its weak composition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And someone said that one should cover the joint with damp linen soaked in hot oil and place a splint between the ribs to make the joint equal on all sides, then it should be cured with the cure of pleurisy, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear due to the fractured bone not touching the cloth, and doubt is in the patient, then it is necessary to make an incision on the side of the broken rib, and it is necessary to put something under the instrument to prevent it from slipping; then you must split the bone, extract it gently, and then sew the two edges of the wound together if it is large, and treat it with plaster until it heals.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 And when abscesses swell up, lay oiled linen cloth on it and place the heated iron; and treat the affected area as needed for the abscess, and let it lie on the side where it should be, until it is drained.
de la brisure dou col	of the broken neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Occasionally there is a break of the neck bones, and sometimes it bends; and similarly with the spine in the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	 And if it happens to anyone, and you want to know whether it will heal or not, take care if you see his hands becoming softened, swollen, and dead, and he cannot move or stretch them, and when you prick with a needle, he does not feel anything.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	 Know that it is mortal in various ways, and if it does not move or feel when pulled or pricked, know that the joint of the bone is saved, and the patient should be healed if treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	 And if a similar thing happens in the spine of the back, and you wish to know if it is healthy or not, take care if the feet are numb, and if there is an accident that is within hands, and sudden movement occurs along the back without control; and when it has been brought above the stomach, it jumps without control.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	 And when it is brought above the back and wished to be stilled, it cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	 Know that it is deadly: do not labor at its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	If this event does not happen to him, it will be an easier situation.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the cure is that you apply warm oil (either rosin or egg yolk oil) if there is an abscess, then place a comforting and drying ointment on top of it, bind it with a thread, and instruct the patient to rest; and let him not sleep on the part where he feels pain until it heals.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les .ij. levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If any bone is dislocated, cover it with oil; remove the bone, then bring together the two edges of the wound, if it is large, by sewing them, and apply a healing ointment made of charred material until it heals; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called "the head of the cow", press your left thumb against it and align it with your right hand as far as you can, then place the ointment and dressing on top, if necessary; then tie it, and if there is dislocated bone, push it back, remove it, and heal the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the break in the shinbone (tibia)
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	It happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there is only a little lessening at the head; it extends long and breaks apart at the ends, causing pain to the patient at the place, and pierces and inflames what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand over it, as long as you are above the breakage; and learn which is the breakage and its shape; and if the breakage is only at the head, then equalize the breakage, while it is in its natural shape.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the breakage is long or it declines inside, then lay the patient on their belly, until the restoration of the breakage comes to you.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, place the splint upon it, then put a stick or a key on top, and hold the break steady so that it does not move; and keep the limb under the ribs until the break is healed.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	Instruct the patient to sleep on his healthy side or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	If an abscess has burst, do not touch it until the abscess has healed, and place what we have previously mentioned on top of it; then return to treatment, hold it as needed, unless there is any bad incident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	Of the shoulder break
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des .ij. manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren .i. fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The shoulder is that which is between the neck and the upper arm, and if it is broken, it should be restored according to one of the two ways: one of which is that you take a splint made of large thread, in this shape:
Et lie as .ij. chiés .ij. liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus .i. siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two ends of the splint with two cords, and raise them upwards, and position the patient supine on one couch; then lay his broken arm on the splint, until it reaches its place, and have a hump of splint in the middle, then raise something heavy above or the assistants stretch it downstream; then place the mirrors the break equal to their hands together, until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a .ij. ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout .i. liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is to lay the patient on his bed, and tie his hand to his neck, then command two assistants that one holds what is above the break with both hands, and the other holds beneath all the cord, and stretch each side separately.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	 And if you think the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament beneath the break, and above the break, and extend each of the ministers to its part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	 And if the break is close to the neck of the shoulder, you should place the splint beneath the joint, and on the other side towards the coste, beneath the break; and in the same way if the break is towards the coste, you should gently place the splint without labor, so that the break is equal to the joint, and to the coste; then make the fracture equal, as it should be, and hold it, provided that no abscess comes.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a .vij. jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	If abscesses come, do not hold it for more than 7 days, and place soft linen with rose oil on top of the abscess to calm it; then you can hold it, and the method of holding is that you put a clamp on the break, then assemble the arm onto the shoulder, and place your hand on the shoulder or the chest; and put a cloth on it, and hold it on the shoulder and on the arm so that the arm remains in place, if nothing prevents it, or if the bone is not moving.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele .i. doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure .iij. dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	If you doubt that the bone is moving, use wedges, and place a larger and stronger one on the break than the others, and have at least two inches of space between each wedge, and make each wedge so large that it passes over the break by four inches from each side; then hold them with wedges, as I said at the beginning of the chapter regarding the break, more firmly and less in alignment.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	 And if you see the alignment of the bones and the ligature, as we have said, during the time that you are restoring the broken member, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it to bind until the seventh day, as we have said; then look at the binding every three days, so that swelling does not arise or inflammation comes to the place where the ligature is too tight.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	 If the direction, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	 And if no such accident occurs, do not remove the bandage for more than three days or longer, let the patient lie on their back and have their hands on their stomach; place a plain linen cushion under the shoulder, and observe every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move or becomes softened; if the direction remains by the power of medicine, and give them the meat as we have previously mentioned, in such a way that the meat is first finely ground; and when it begins to heal, let it become thick.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	 And it is custom that the shoulder and leg should be repositioned in 40 days; then remove the bandage and administer baths and ointments to guide the direction.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	 And if the structure is deformed and swollen, it remains to dissolve for days or two months.
de la brisure du bras	on the break of the arm
Li bras est compos de .ij. os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "dui" ("two"); one is small, and it is the one that forms the elbow; and the other is large, and it is the one located towards the little finger near the wrist; by accident, only the large bone may break, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	 When the small sores are broken, the restoration is easy, and the healing; but when the large ones are broken, the healing is bad, and more painful than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	 If it is only the small sore that is broken, it should be lightly stretched out and made even.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	 And if it is the large sore, it should be pulled harder; and stretch it on the pillow, and the thumb of the hand should be higher than the others, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient should cross himself on it, and the pillow should be raised before him, so that the patient does not suffer any pain; then the assistants extend their arms to the part below his hand or his foot, and another assistant to the other above.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	 Then, make the mirror equal, according to its best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if it is broken in pieces, place each piece back in its proper place, and if there is any dislocated part that refuses to return, set the bone as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the breakage in wounds, I have spoken about it in a separate chapter; take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	 And if at the beginning of restoration pusules occur, glue a cloth made of rosin and white wax on it, neither too hard nor too soft; and stick the cloth gently over it, until the pusules are soothed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	 Then remove the wax, and apply a plaster of flour from the mill with plenty of egg, then put on splints, and let the one at the breakage be more prominent, and slightly larger than the others; and know that it should have six splints or more in different positions: whether the breakage is in one bone or two; and tighten more above the breakage than elsewhere, and less in lining, as I said at the beginning of the chapter; and let the cloths that are above the breakage be soft and damp, but not hard nor rough; and let the threads, which hold it, be of flax, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	 And keep the member and the limb afterwards for some days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	 And if any bad accidents happen to the member, such as prurit that happens to the member, then it is necessary that you irrigate the member with hot water until the prurit is soothed; and let the member not rest at all.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	 Then begin re-strapping, and if the ligaments are damaged and the bones separated, and similar things, advise accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses .i. poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if the narrowing of the anus cannot reach the limb because it is too narrow, you should soften it a little and leave for some days until the narrowing comes, then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	 And if none of these things that we have said come to the patient, do not undo it until twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	 Or if around it, then the hands are placed on his neck, and let his necks be even, and guard against movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; know that this break will be restored in thirty or thirty-five days, and perhaps in twenty days, according to the compositions and complexions of the qualities.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	The fracture at the back of the hand and fingers occurs rarely, but it bends repeatedly.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin.	And when the palm of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient must cross his arms and sit straight in front of him equally; then he should place his hand on a cloth stretched out, and extend the broken bones, align them with mirrors as they are, until they are well joined; then apply the plaster and bandages, if an abscess does not occur, then place a splint according to the severity of the fracture, and wrap it in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the broken bone is at the groin area around the lower abdomen of the leg, make a splint from cloths, and instruct the patient to bind it to their broken leg; then bind it with a long cloth, and make sure the wooden splint is as thick as the hand, and bind it, as required.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	If the fracture is at the elbow, it is necessary that you place a splint above and another below in the hand, so that the fingers are covered and straight; then bind it all around the hand, and stop the flow between the two bones.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en .i. tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	If the fracture occurs in any of the fingers, if it is the thumb, make it straight, as required; bind it with the palm, and if you see that it moves, place a small straight splint to hold the fracture steady; and if the fracture is in other fingers like the index or another one, make it straight, and bind it with the adjacent healthy finger; or tie them all together in one bundle, as appropriate, or place a splint on top of it, as with the thumb; take care in the healing and positioning of the abscess, and treat it as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	Of the broken leg
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie .i. liien desus la briseure, et .i. autre desoz.	The bones of the leg are often broken and one sees it when it turns forward and backward; and the restoration is such that one tie a splint above the break, and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on his face, then each minister extends his splint equally to their respective parts; and this is when the break is within the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	 And if the break is near the root of the leg, it is one of the ligaments towards the knee, and the other ligaments on the side of the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	 And if it is near the knee joint, then it is the ligaments below the knee and the extension distally; then place the hand on the bone equal to its two hands, as natural, and then apply the splint and tie, until the abscess does not come out.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is an abscess that is hot, let it cool down first, then return to your work and your treatment; the process is done in this manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	 You must wrap above the break and bind firmly doubled in two or three layers, and remove any excess, then turn the leg so that the heels are at the root of the ankle, and put a long thread between the leg and thigh, below the knee, and bring the ends of the thread to the top; then turn the leg upward and the bandage upward, then tie a splint above the break, and place a splint on the bone of the leg; then fold the levy (linen) between the leg and thigh for even tension, then begin to bind firmly three or four times above the break; and as you go up above the break, loosen the binding; then take the two threads that you have placed between the leg and thigh, and tie three stitches above, then return to below the thread's head, so that you are below the foot; tighten it, so that it does not move from its place, then leave it in this state, until neither abscess, swelling, nor any similar thing comes.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	If it happens (that the broken bone pierces the skin), you should separate them, directing where they are coming from, as we have said many times; and if there are pieces of the bone that are protruding, they must be cut off, if possible; and if not, the limb must be cut open, and the flesh removed; and treat it as we have said before, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thighbone is broken so that splints are set in it, as in the shoulder and arm; however, when restored in this manner, it does not cause discomfort to the patient.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en .l. jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thighbone is restored within a day, or slightly less or more, according to the variations of complexions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groin of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	 Know that in the knee joint occurs little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	 And if it breaks, it is not really a break but rather a fracture or injury, causing all pain and swelling, which causes great discomfort.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is when one equalizes the limb that is dislocated to its joints, as long as it can be assembled; then put the splint on, and place a round piece of iron, if you have need of it, and tighten it as needed; then check all the positions that we have said in other breaks, like an abscess and others; place at each accident whatever is needed, until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	Of the break in the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	 Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is rightly called "malleolus", and the other is called "fibula"; and it breaks in the same way as the arm, and for this reason, its treatment is the same as that of the arm, and the operations are all the same. And if the two bones are broken together, then the leg turns in all directions.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	If the slender bone is broken, it bends forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	 And if the large bone is broken, it causes great pain and can be seen; it twists underneath.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	 Then apply extension, make it even and tie the bones equally; however, if the fracture is misshapen and there are several pieces, then the extension should be smaller and lighter; align according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren .ij. faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en .ij. leus .i. bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent .i. bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed your work, take two fusts that hold the leg from one side and the other, and be as long as the leg from the knee to underneath; then wrap them in two layers, one above and one below, and secure it in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is good; and no one should provide a splint of the length of the leg, and it be made from fust, and place the leg for prevention of movement, and properly make it at the break where there is pain; and move the leg every day, to see if there is abscess or another accident; cure it until it is healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	Of the break of the bones from the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle, there is no break, but the bones of the foot sometimes have a break and the toes also, and it does not happen often except in various positions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a .ij. chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a break in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, place the patient's foot on the ground, as if they were walking, and then place your foot on their foot where the bones are raised, press it until they return to their places; then apply a splint and muffler, and place a small table with two flat cushions under the sole of the foot, then tighten the strap towards the affected foot, after you have wrapped cloths around it, and other things that you need.
Et quant .iij. jors ou .iiij. seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when four or six days have passed, undo the strap, because you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a .ij. ou .iij., ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en .i. drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two bones are broken, restore them as we have said for the bones of the hand; then set a splint on the broken bone according to the length of the bone, and let it be slightly larger; then place the padding mentioned under the splint and tighten it; and if there are 2 or more, or more, break each bone with a splint, wrapped in one linen cloth, and tighten the padding beneath the splint; and let them remain above the belly of the bone, so that they cover it well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breaks, after we have said them; and treat each injury as necessary.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the finger bone break
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 When the natural bone of a woman is broken, make her sit with her back inclined and hold her from behind; then fill the hollow of the wound with linen cloth as large as possible; then turn the woman on her side, lift the hip little by little, and pull out the linen when it reaches the entrance of the wound, and the bone returns with the stick; when she wants to urinate, remove the linen, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for 7 days or more: the fracture will be healed, and if you see, take a bladder from a sheep, fill its neck with straw, and push the entire bladder into the wound; then blow strongly through the straw until the bladder is inflated inside: the bone will return to its place; then fill it with linen, and leave it for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	 And when the bone at the elbow of man or woman is broken, restore it as we have said in the hinge-bone; and these nearby breaks are not concealed from him who puts his study and skill to it and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	 The break indicates various conditions of the proper way of restoration; therefore, consider this.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse .iij. jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the penis (verge), when it is broken, take a goose's throat and insert the penis into it; then wrap cloth around it, and leave it for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	With break (or fracture) with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For the one who has a break (or fracture) with wound, especially if it is large such as the bone of the leg or shoulder or similar, it should be cleaned now, as the cleansings that we have said testify.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is clean, anoint it with vinegar (or other solution), then proceed to restore the break in that same hour or on that day, unless abscesses appear.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	If abscesses appear, wait until the ninth day for restoration, allowing the abscess to calm down, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, because you would bring about a bad outcome.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the bone breaks and appears under the skin, it should be set gently with light pressure and small extension.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a .vij. dois ou .viij. de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne .iii. ou iiij., selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the fractured bone cannot be set equal to your hands, it should be set with this tool which is of iron, about 7 or 8 inches long, and the width according to the size of the wound; therefore, it is necessary for the mirror that he takes 3 or 4 depending on what is needed in each treatment of fracture; it should be round and slightly large, so it does not bend during the setting process of the member in your work, and it should be sharp at the tip and thick from the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	 It is called "hinge-bone", so the curved shoulders must be placed on top of the visible bone and pushed once until it returns to its original position and is equal on both sides.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	 And if the break is subtle and the instrument cannot grasp the bone well, you must cut the top of the bone to allow the instrument to have power.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, if you have an appropriate instrument such as a chisel or saw, at your power; then strike that part of the bone which remains in the bone with sharpness and small chips.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	 And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural position.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	 Keep it in its place, then wet the cloth with black styptic wine, and apply it properly if it is hot; do not put any oiled bandage or other substance on the wound that could cause rot and corruption; administer stitches when you have restored the bone, leave the wound open, cover it completely according to the size of the wound, taking care not to strain the wound with the fracture; many times this has been done by foolish surgeons, causing harm to the patient or even death, and be aware that the bindings should be softer and more flexible than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	 And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a bad accident will come, as we have said, and you feel pain at its place, do not put any splints on it; but wrap around, instead of splints, hard bandages and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	 And if the following day or two you see a swelling at the wound, remove whatever you have put on it and apply healing ointment for wounds, such as theriac or similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre .ij. fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	You should loosen the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is healed and sound.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	The limbs should be arranged in such a way that the bone moves downwards gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if it remains for many days and cannot heal but continues to boil, know that there are small bone fragments, which is why you must be careful with the wound and remove all the loose fragments that cause the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	 And if a fistula appears in the place or any kind of corruption, it is necessary that you treat it, according to what it says in the chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	 And if the bone is broken and opens on the limb, such as the hip or shoulder bones, and similar in large limbs, do not draw it out, for many times death comes from this, but leave it until it can be pulled; perhaps a chance will come after twenty days or thirty, then treat the wound if you can; otherwise, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	broken bones that come upon a suture
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	We often encounter [the condition] after health following the break, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a disfigured sight to see the form of the limb; and unfortunately, the limb cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, take care of the fracture: administer medicines such as aloes, incense, myrrh, saracolle, acacia, and similar others, taking any one of these things or all together, and grind them with a stifling wine or with a lot of egg white or ashes; and put it on the knot in bandages, and tighten it well, and do not loosen it for many days; and then dislocate it, and start another, until the swelling is removed; or you hold above a piece of plank well made; for the properties of the plank are such that it removes all inflammations from the limbs; and if the nodulation has turned into hardness like stone, it must be removed, if the head is exposed, and make the excess apparent; or you shave it with any rasp, until it is removed, and cure it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	the limb that is weak after treatment
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is set and remains afterwards, the limbs are weak and delicate, this happens for various reasons: one reason being that it was tied too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been; or because there were too many ligaments, and the nourishment could not reach the member; or due to an abundance of swelling; or because of excessive movements, not within its hour; or because it has little blood in its body, making it weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat, and to make his body lean, until the blood is multiplied in him; then provide baths, and give joy and sweetness; afterwards apply ointment on the member, so that the ointment attracts great nourishment, and reduce the swelling often with cold water, until the nourishment goes to the member; and return it to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	the twisted limb after healing
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai .i. emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When members are twisted after restoration and the bones are broken open, and the shape of the limb is ugly, nevertheless it does not lose its natural function: do not believe the foolish who say that a member must be broken anew, and many fools have done this in our land; this practice is condemned, and it brings great harm, and perhaps death. However, if the nodulations and tortures are fresh, it is necessary that they should be softened with hot water or with softening herbs such as violet leaves, roots, medicks, and similar things; and you make a soothing poultice, like daqquilon well made. You also take the musk of violets, and mix it with ginger oil or linseed oil, and apply the poultice on it. Or you take figs oiled, grind them with colon flour, and similar medicines that reduce inflammation.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	 And sometimes the dislocation is removed by rubbing it continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	 Bring movement to the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortures are old and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to cut it with iron, it should be covered up to the bone, at the incision made gently with a sharp instrument; and put cushions and soft fabrics in the care.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	Here begins the book of dislocations
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs in anyone, now it must be returned with care.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	 For if one delays (the treatment), the limb swells, and in case it is put back into place with difficulty; therefore, it should not be moved when the limb is swollen: many times this causes spasms and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, let the patient purge, then let him rest until the abscesses have all subsided; then wash the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset the dislocation, and treat each limb according to its location.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the head from the neck to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc .ij. manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	1. It often happens that the lower jaws are dislocated, and the dislocations of both sides are in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their place and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the lower part, and the saliva drops out of the mouth that it cannot hold, nor can it close its mouth, and envelops its tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it returns in more ways.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	 If it is whole and complete, you must reset it quickly without delay, and hold the patient's head with one hand while pushing a small pad of one of your hands into the root of the dislocation of the jaw within the mouth, if the dislocation is on two parts; and the other hand should be turned aside to make it equal; and instruct the patient to soften his jaws and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And the fingers are equalized, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les .ij. mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if it is difficult to reset, then immerse them in hot water and oil, until they are gently reset, do not force it, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	 And when they are reset evenly, the patient's mouth should be closed well with soft fabric made of rose oil and wax, then tied lightly with several strings; and the patient should sleep on his back, with his arms between two cushions so that it does not move neither to the right nor to the left, nor make any effort to improve, but takes light food until the pains are removed, and the jaws are healed; then eat whatever you want lightly, and do not strain to open the mouth for eating and drinking, until the jaws are well healed and healthy.
Et se les .ij. mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two jawbones cannot be set right within an hour and are not converted to their proper place, fevers and accustomed sweating come, and possibly rupture of the stomach, and possibly vomiting clear bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en .viiij. jors.	And when you see this, then know that it is ruin; and many times he who experiences this dies within eight days.
de la forcelle	of the noose   (specifically a noose used in executions)
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The splint cannot dislocate within the ribcage and along the spine, and it is dislocated once to the side, and this is felt.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	 Then press the joint firmly with your palm, and it will return to its place; then put the splint and bandage on, and tie it; the arm that is towards the shoulder cannot dislocate again; if it does, reset it to its place as we have said; then put the splint and bandage on, tie it, and tell the patient to rest until he is healed; in the same way, the shoulders are also reset when they are dislocated from their place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	When the shoulder joint is dislocated.
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	 Know that the shoulder is dislocated in only three ways: one of which is when it dislocates at the neck area below; and the second is at the hip area; and it may also dislocate above, but this rarely happens; it does not dislocate behind the shoulder, nor inside the nerves; and it often dislocates below towards the neck, especially in those with little flesh, as it can easily spring out; in those with enough flesh, it leaps out a little, and returns a little.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And sometimes happens to some men, percussion or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think that it is dislocated by this.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you should verify [the shoulder], until you are sure; and then start the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	 Also, recognize that the dislocation is downwards towards the neck, and make a distinction between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow at the top of the shoulder, and below the neck touching the top of the shoulder, just as there is an eye socket; and the sick cannot return their hand to its place, nor make any movements; and in the same way, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you can clearly feel it; and this type of dislocation is not only difficult to correct when it is new, but also when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the method is that the minister lifts the patient's hand up high, then places his thumbs underneath the joint, and forces the joint upward to its place; the minister lifts the hand, and stretches it up, puts it back down; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	 And if it does not come as we have said in a few days, the patient should be bathed in hot water; and bring soothing, softening and calming ingredients such as a decotion of althea, fenugreek and melilot in water, and apply it; then have the patient lie on his back, and place a piece of linen equal in size, neither too soft nor too hard, under the affected shoulder; then place a stone on the patient's heel, and carefully lift the patient's head towards the affected shoulder, pulling the hand of the patient; and another minister should hold the patient's head still so it does not move backwards; this shoulder will immediately return to its place, and if you see that it dislocates again in this way: it is necessary for a person larger than the patient to be present; and be straight towards the side, and push the affected shoulder under the patient's shoulder blade, lifting the patient's shoulder upward so the patient hangs on the arm; and another minister pulls the patient's hand downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	 And if the patient is too lightweight, they cannot bear any heavy thing with them, and the dislocation returns immediately.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	 And it can also be done in another way: and it is that one pushes the long needle into the ground so that the head is like the pistil, and neither too thick nor too thin; then it should be placed beneath the patient, but with cloth soft above, and the patient should be lying on his long side; then stretch your hand below on the other side forming a shape, and the joint will return to its place quickly; and if it does not want to return due to everything that we have said, then do this cure: take a needle from both hands, four inches long and wide, with a head rounded for insertion full depth into the anus, according to this shape:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus .i. eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	Then lay the rod, wrapped in cloth, on top of the patient's head, so that it does not prick the patient, then place him under the cushion of the patient; extend his arm above the long rod, and tie the shoulder to the rod, and the forearm at the end of the upper arm, then lift the arm onto one iron hook of a scale with a large hole, and spread out the hands below, and leave the body hanging from the other side: the joint will be relocated in this manner.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is in place, whichever way that may be, you must put an equal piece of wool under the cushion, then apply the plaster made of mill powder, along with incense and egg whites, over the entire shoulder and around, then tie it under the cushion with a thread, turn the thread around the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and keep the hands in this manner.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés .v. jors ou .vij., et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it is necessary to give food, as long as the limbs are comfortable, because it will heal faster; and then give more after 5 or 7 days, and move it; and if it becomes hard and does not soften, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	 And if the joint is displaced due to moisture or for another reason, then you must apply cauteries at three places, as it is stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés .vij. jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	If you do all of this and it still dislocates again after 7 days, and the joint cannot hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the top of the shoulder is either cut or stretched or weakened; and know that the joint can never be pushed back into place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is towards the thighs or hips, and the backside, is caused by forceful pushing and stretching with hands, and another method of treatment is applied; and it is cured when it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And after the healing comes swelling to the member, and it moves slowly; have the patient use baths many times until the swelling subsides, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	Of the dislocation, the cost is great.
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the jointure of cost is dislocated at points, and at points it returns; and if it is dislocated in all parts, both front and back, and the dislocation is not repaired, for it can be seen well and felt well; and it dislocates according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	 When joining the wound with healthy flesh, make sure you can see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	 For the joint is bound, and the arm cannot bend or touch the shoulder completely.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	Then you must reset the dislocation as soon as an abscess opens up, for if an abscess opens up, it is harmful to reset; and perhaps it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the back; it is worse than other dislocations, and causes more pain, and in many cases death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes .ij. mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is when it can be reset that you extend your hand to its two hands; and his arms should be spread out, and the hands of the mirror according to the shoulder around it, above and below, and push the joint back to its sockets together, or to the root of the palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when it doubles its hand to its hand, and pierces the root of the palm that has been dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	 If it does not return to its place, apply strong extension; and two people must extend the arm and hold it still during extension; then turn the arm in each direction, after you have wrapped a double-length and wide cloth around it; when the healer joins the joint with his hand, oil it for softening the joint, then press the joint firmly until it returns; and when it is at its place, apply dry plaster with egg, hold it still and let the arm rest on the neck of the patient for some days, then unbind it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	If the joint is firmly held in place, remove the bandage and leave it alone; if you see that the joint does not hold properly, repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it like this for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	 And if it feels pain after the repositioning of the joint, and it becomes stiff, bathe and rub it well, and press until it is soothed; or you place a sheep's fat pad on the jointure, leave it for a day and a night, then remove it, and let him enter the bath; and when it sweats, rub the jointure gently, then replace the fat pad, and then enter the bath again; and do this two or three times until it heals; and if you see, place warm moistened hay stack on it and hold it in place; it will return to its position.
li dislocation de la main	swelling of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is quick to dislocate more than other joints; it must be returned to its place quickly as soon as it is dislocated, unless the lews are swollen or there is hot abscess.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	 And the repositioning of the hand, you put the sick hand on a table, and extend the assistant's hand, and the assistant places the hand in equal position, so that he puts his palm over the appearance of the jointure, and pushes it back until it returns completely; it is necessary for you to check if it is in its proper place; then put the patient's back of the hand on a table for extension and repositioning.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	 And if the dislocation is at the back of the hand, have the patient place the back of his hand on the table, and have the attendant place his hand above that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	 If it recurs now, it is good; if not, hold down plasters or soothing poultices on the abscess and let it start again with sensation.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	 And if he cannot endure it and you cannot put it back after some days, the dislocated joint remains out of place; and it does no harm to the patient as long as the hand is paralyzed and cannot tighten anything; then know that the nerves or arteries are cut, or there is no other means but to tighten it with a cautery in this case, and by chance nothing else helps.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse .v. jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the poultice we have mentioned on it, then compress and leave it for 5 days, then release and let it be as it is.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is no grating, moist warm water, and rub it until it becomes clean.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	Of the dislocations of the fingers of the hand.
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	 In some cases the fingers of the hand are dislocated on both sides, in some cases on the back of the palm or the belly; then you push the dislocation into the pockets as much as it will go back, then hold the head of the finger and turn it towards the side where it is disjointed; and leave it for two days, and then make it straight that day; and bind it, as we have said, and unbind it from day to day, and make it move, and bind it again; and do this often, until it becomes narrow, and similarly do, if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand, and do as you have done before, until it heals; and similarly do, when it is dislocated from another side.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	the dislocation of the vertebra in the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the vertebra in the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no cure, as death quickly approaches the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	 And the signs are that the exits jump uncontrollably, and cannot be held, and many times some member is softened, or the two legs or the two arms or the spine; and many times the spinal cord becomes paralyzed at four parts; this which becomes paralyzed at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you observe whether the gilbositez has come from childhood: if it has not, there is no cure or healing from then on.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	 And the one that falls or from blows or similar things, the ancient methods of cures spoke in great words, but there is no real benefit in all; but I have shortened it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	 I say that in the hernia that comes before, there is no trick or healthiness; and similarly the one that comes straight into two places, and cannot be cured except by him who comes from behind, as I said; and it is that the patient should be laid out on his back in an equal position, and have a support underneath him, so he does not bleed; then insert a needle in the head of the hernia in the earth, and another at the feet, and tie a rope over the patient's testicles, and another at the thighs, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers should know the ropes, one at the head and the others at the feet, among the two needles; and they should be well tied, the needles as we have said, and the mirrors place their palms on the spine formed, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	 And if the dislocation does not return through this treatment, take a board that is three feet long, hollow it out underneath, and position the patient on their side. Push the upper part of the board beneath the hollow, then place the middle of the board on the spine; place your hands on the other end of the board and press firmly until it returns to its place. And if you see, do it with a turner who turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	 And take two thorns of a great length, one on the head of the patient and the other at their feet, with a palm's distance between each thorn; in each thorn, place the turner's iron rod, and make sure the thorns are firmly fixed to the ground so they do not move. Between the two thorns place another thorn for turning, as rope twines, and have two small thorns of a palm's length for each turning rod; then tie the ropes that are around the shoulders to both turners, and one rope to the head and another to the feet, so each minister turns their turner all along the rope. The master aligns the spine as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	 And when it is aligned, place a drying plaster with plenty of egg on top, then bandage it, and then put the patient on a table three feet long, which presses the affected area and the healthy part of the spine, then tie it with a rope as we have said, and make the patient rest until he is well; and if any thing comes at the end of recovery, administer softening and calming medicines, along with the tool mentioned above; sometimes a piece of wood is also administered, and sometimes the appearance is in the back spondyle, and it is thought to be dislocations; and this is the bone that opens up, which should not be assumed: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	Of the dislocations of the shoulder
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc .iiij. parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	Note that the dislocations of the shoulder and the shoulder joint occur only due to dislocations and not like other joints; and the shoulder joint is dislocated according to four parts: inside and outside, front and back; and more on the inside, and less so in front and back.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	 And the recognition of his dislocation within is that when joining the sick leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the sick genitals are wider than the healthy ones, and the sick person cannot bend his knee in fire; and it is the joint which is dislocated swollen with abscess that heats up, because the head of the thigh comes there.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of that whose it comes to dislocation, is that this event is opposite to those mentioned before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of that whose it happens before, are that his leg is well set according to the completion; however, do not double the knee pain, and if you wish to make him walk, he cannot move forward, and he retains his urine, and swells the ankle, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of that whose it happens after, are that he cannot extend his knee, nor double it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is in the place beneath the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The re-alignments of this kind of dislocation are such that you observe whether the dislocations are old and remain according to their position without any treatment; and it is not necessary that there should be any assumption made about it.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des .iiij. manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	In the case where the dislocation is fresh, and it is of the four kinds of dislocations, you hurry up to turn the joint, and push it inwards and outwards, and move it left and right; by chance if it returns, no further treatment is required.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	 And if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong man as the assistant, and hold the leg firmly with his hands, or tie him up at the knee; and another assistant extends his hand above in such a manner that he puts his hands under the buttocks, then tightens a rope around the thigh; and another holds the head of the rope; and all extend upward and downward simultaneously, until the sick person rises from the ground once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as .iiij. semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This manner of extension is common for the four similar cases, and if the dislocation returns, as we have said, it is good.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	 If it isn't so (dislocated), you must apply treatment to its appearance. When there is dislocation at the joint, you must have the patient lie on his healthy side, then tie a rope around the thigh's root and the protruding part below the angle; next, raise the rope towards the angle and toward the joint; then take another assistant, grasp the large part of the affected thigh, extend it outward in a stretching motion: it will return to its place now; and this method of dislocation is easier than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	 If you cannot fix it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the two feet of the patient firmly with a soft rope above both ankles and knees, and the affected leg should be extended two inches more than the other; next, hang him by the head from a pole, and his hands should be suspended for length; then command the assistant to seize the thigh's head, while another assistant holds onto the patient, who grasps the thigh, as the joint will return quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	 And when the dislocation is at the shoulder, if the patient lies down, as we have said in the case of shoulder pain, and pulls the ligament above the affected leg properly, and above the pelvis likewise; then place two needles, one at the head and another at the feet, then thrust the needle between the knees toward the patient; and wrap damp cloths around it to prevent burning the patient, then extend each minister (helper) toward him, and the mirror place equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	 If it returns, that's good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	 If not, place it on a table and press as we have said in the case of shoulder pain, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it should be extended immediately, as I have said; and place the mirror on the opposite side of the diseased angle, then press with the other hand, and draw it downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And if the dislocation is to the side, it should not be extended below, nor raised above ground; rather, the patient should remain as he was when dislocated, as we have said in the lying-down position on two pillows; and above his face, and the limb extended as we have said before, and must press on the joint at the table; and will be right when the patient extends his legs and they are even; then adjust the thighs, and apply a splint, and bind with a bandage so that the hip does not move; and rest for three or four days, then release, and apply the splint again; and if you see that they are even, bind as before, and leave for three days; then release, and let him walk gently until the limbs are comfortable.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc .iij. manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: inside, outside, and backside; do not dislocate it forward.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	 And the signs are that you command the patient to bend his leg at the knee, and if it does not bend at the knee, know that it is dislocated; and the restoration of all such cases is that you make the patient sit straight, extend his leg if he can, and place your back on its face, and place his foot on your feet; then take his thigh with your hands, pull it apart between your hands, then bend both sides of the thigh inwardly forming a figure like a "V"; another servant extends his foot until the thigh returns to its place, and the signs are that it should bend his leg lightly at the knee; apply ointment, and bind the leg to the knee tightly for about three or four days, then release it; and do not let the patient walk, until the limbs are comforted.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	 And if the limb is not dislocated, provide strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the dislocation, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	Of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heels are sometimes smashed, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	 And the signs are that the ankle is sprained, and it tends towards the part where it is dislocated; the repositioning should be easy, and it must be extended slightly with hands when it is only swollen.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	 And when it is completely dislocated, you should make the patient sit straight, and hold the leg with one hand above the ankle; then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then towards the left hand twice, then lift it up, and push the foot up forcefully; and do this twice, as we have said, pushing and pulling the foot; if it returns, that's good; if not, repeat the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return, place the patient on their back on the ground, and drive the splint firmly into the ground between their knees, and wrap cloths around to prevent bleeding the patient; then hold the leg with one hand and another holds the healthy leg below, so that they hold the foot above the knee; then each helper should extend equally, and the splint should be close between the patient's knees to keep the patient when lifting; then place the mirrors equal to the dislocation on their hands, and another holds the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will quickly return.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	 And when it is ready, place the plaster and wool on top, press firmly, and tie the leg to the foot, watching that the ligature is not too tight; then leave it for two or three days, and if the ligature softens, press again; then untie it on the third or fourth day, and let the patient walk for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not certain that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If an abscess comes to the surface, you must drain it, as we have said before, until it is healed.
des dois	The two [hands]
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two hands are dislocated, they must be carefully extended without exertion, and it is an easy thing to do.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	 If the dislocation is in any way on the back of the foot, you must make the patient sit flat on a level surface or table straight, put your foot on the opening of these jointures, press firmly until it returns; and when it is even and there is no gap, place a two-fingered table under the foot's heel, then tie it firmly, and leave it for three days, then untie it; let him rest until he is healthy.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	About wounds and dislocations together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	 When a wound comes with dislocation and it is seen to be restored, many times the patient dies: do not be presumptuous in treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it for a long time, and if you are not compassionate and merciful and slow, nor hasty; and begin first with soothing abscesses, and leave the patient in the hand of God, if you see no hope of health; and when you see hope, then reset the limb to its place, as soon as the abscesses heal; and when the limb is in place, administer soothing abscesses, and treat the wound, as necessary, with dry ointments; and if there is a break with dislocation and small bones are crushed, then set the bones, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and beware of entering into fear, as I have said, for this will bring about your fate according to your Creator, and for the sake of your weaponry and body.
Amen	 Amen (This word is from the Latin language, used as a concluding formula in Christian prayers and rituals.)
