Oh sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion, and because of its explanations, and because of its declarations, I see that you have completed this work that is part of surgery.
The operation of amputation has been completely forgotten in our region and time, until the science of it was discovered, and its proof is now established; and no one knows about it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been destroyed and led to many errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was closed and its length was extended.
And I see that you should live by this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
When the cause for which one is not immediately skilled in anatomy in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently rediscovered by Gualia before she knew the junctures of the members and their forms, and their conjunctions and separations; and also knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their size; and also the pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their exits.
For which reason Hippocrates says that a name is not necessary, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
We have already mentioned him in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will not be able to avoid errors by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor saw a woman who had been infected with an abscess of the neck, and had incised some arteries in the neck so that a great deal of blood flowed into her, causing her to die between the hands of her companions.
And another doctor saw that the dragon had swallowed a stone from a man who had died and had processed it in his state, and the stone was very large, and came to him and passed it through a small intestine, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already called for a tool to extract it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And another doctor took the wages of a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was also injured; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture, above the wound, with pliers and strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then remove the dressing according to his desires, and remove the bandage, and remove the bandage for several days and command that it be removed; and if the wound and foot become infected, and reach a critical stage.
And I was called to him, and I removed the bandage, and he felt relief and no more pain from his wounds.
However, the decay was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be stopped and it continued to spread the decay in the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a carbuncle, and it became ulcerated after several days, until the wound was completely healed.
The reason is that the wound is purged of melancholic humor, and it does not happen that it reaches the bone in one limb, but rather that the entire limb that suffers should be kept.
Therefore, my children, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two steps: one in which the limb is associated with health, and another in which the work is done in the best possible conditions.
And I have already existed in this place where the operation is performed, which is an error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay hands on him, so that the people do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
And take up your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with facility and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God for the salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay hands on those terrible patients of difficult healing, and hold your weapons against that which makes you fear, so that your patience in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and less in the world and after in your sanctity.
In some cases, it is necessary to dissect: Do not treat a bad patient, because evil doctors are not recognized.
And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
Begins the division of the free, and first of the first section. The first chapter is ordered for the entry of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of the cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The second section division. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of sharp objects and similar ones, all chapter and ordered from the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of torsion and similar ones; chapter ordered for the entry of the foot, and from the forms of the instruments.
That you say the quality of those tips of that cautery and of its handles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use the cautery.
Therefore, it is said that the speech about the quality of the cauterizing needle and its handle is long and elaborate, subtle for those who know, and secretly hidden; and from there, many people have spoken about it, and they have disagreed, and I will give you a small part of their speeches, fearing prolongation.
And therefore it is said that the cauterizing needle corresponds to the whole complexion universally, which is good material or its materials, except for two complexions, which are tail complexions of six materials.
In the tail complexion and dry material, they disagree; because some said that the cauterizing needle is suitable for that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in illness that is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient for illness to have that which is caut and dry be healed.
And they said that those who said the opposite of that, which is suitable for cauterizing in all illness of tail complexion and dry material that exists in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men and their humidity to the complexion of fire, you often find the bodies of men wet.
And I hear by the word of that one, who has experimented this himself several times.
But may not come upon that one who has already been extracted and exercised in the capital of cauterization by previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their maladies in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time for those.
May not come upon you in other compositions, and especially in moist and humid maladies, for all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the use of cauterization in those.
And know, children, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is above cauterization with medicine, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not affect the other member without a slight harm.
May the action of medicine burn reach that in the members which has already been there, and often it brings in the member with the disease of difficult cure and often it causes harm.
During the day, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, it does not cause anything but excess. And we already know this from experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason I am excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place, it would be hidden from you in secret, and the quality of its operation in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels diseases, according to the philosophical demonstrative discourse, would be sharpened in your minds.
Know, children, that they should not forget the time when it is most appropriate to perform cauterization and place the best time in the morning.
And I say that cauterization is appropriate at all times, because the harm from the time accident is submerged in the joy of which the cauterization is thrown, and especially if the cauterization is for pain or necessary painful ones, forcefully and quickly, the ones that do not suffer delay because they fear the evil that comes from those who are malicious, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
And do not catch in your feet, or, sons, that is not considered by the general public and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not as it is said above, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine that alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of the pain.
However, cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his malady returns at some time in the future, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in his body from the aggregation of excess in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few excesses and moisture, as with the cautery of teeth for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
And according to common speech, cautery is the last remedy in medicine, and it is true that I do not understand what they mean by that, because they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other cause before using cautery.
And the cause is in contrast to that; and they understand that cautery is the last remedy in medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause they administer such cautery, and it is effective for that. And from here it is understood that cautery is the last remedy in medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from common speech and from the opinions of many doctors.
And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say that only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I already have some that are good and some that are bad, and cauterization with that is better than iron cautery, but however when you do cauterization with fire of gold, it is not your decision, since it is made according to the quantity that you want for the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some pieces are left for the artisan to use for that purpose.
And for that reason, a pointed cautery of iron is made, which should be lighter and more directly in line with the operation's direction.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery in the second chapters, and I have ordered those who are between the feet, so that they may ask him what he wants for himself.
The first chapter.
This cauterization is caused by moisture and coldness, which are the main causes of various accidents, called corrosion, from the head to the parts of the limbs and the joints, and many sleep problems, and tooth and jaw pain, and generally all kinds of illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, suddenness, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, command the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's age and custom.
And then command the one who shaves his own head to do so between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his chest.
And then place the blade of your palm against the nose between his fingers. However, if the location you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then use the pointed cautery made of olive oil in this form:
And then place that on the spot you marked and apply it in a way that drips down, so that the one who is being treated does not feel it being applied gradually, and you rotate it.
And then slightly raise your hand and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as a handful of grains, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, bring your hand back to that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small piece of salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place your hand on the flat part of the shoulder and hold that one over the entrance where the shield of the fire is to be destroyed. And then apply the four-drug ointment into the location until it is healed.
And they say that as long as the plague is open, the more the arm is stretched out, the better and more beneficial it is.
And they say that the tail should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until some part of the bone is attached.
And then wipe away that which is attached to the bone, and then heal it.
And they say that others prefer the cauterizer to reach the back, until it reaches the strong part of the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make a small puncture: And they estimate that from that location, the vapors of the head are released.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it is consolidated.
It is not clear to me whether these two types of cautery are used in all men, but rather on the second type due to fear; and if that one is better for health when it is used, as the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which there is evidence in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that one, and the other work is also beneficial for health.
Chapter two.
Of the head cautery.
When in the head, chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the patient, and it is prolonged, and it uses herbs and worms and capipurges and plasters and ointments and galls and cadels and gualinas and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have and do not use again for any of those causes, then consider that the head of the patient is naturally very strong; and it is not free and often a great burden, then that cauterizer uses another cautery instead of that one. And then, approach with the pointed cautery on the surface of his head to cauterize where the vein is broken. Cut the vein and expose it from the bone as much as we have found, and cauterize that with a cautery in the location behind the head where they place the pad - and that is the location where the pad is placed. And let your hand remain still, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will experience great pain different from all other head cauterizations.
And I will direct you to this location, because that cautery is the one that cauterizes the veins of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle location of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter Third.
Of the cauterization of the old non-antique.
When pain is felt in the part of the head or extends into the neck, remove medicines that relieve the headache, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the rules for illnesses; and if all this does not help, then cauterization in that location is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as a medical instrument to remove a splinter from an arm, and then clean that area and apply ointment to its extremities with cotton. Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a blade that is thin enough to reach the correct location without being visible.
Then apply a strong bandage to the wound to prevent further constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the bandage, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area where the wound is located.
Then care for that area until it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some medical instruments that I have written about in the other treatise on medical instruments.
May the cauterization be done in this way: light the cautery with this method:
and it is called a "claw-like" cautery, where the head of it has the form of a clover with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small notch.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and remove it – so that the wound is not stuck with the scab that has been left – and turn the small iron at speed.
And if the amount of it that is stuck by the length of the needle is such that it covers the entire area, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck with the scab that has been left, so that no blood flow occurs.
And then apply a poultice of salt water on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a moist poultice around it, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this area properly.
Chapter four.
Of cauterization of the ancient emigration area.
When you treat the emigration area with the cure we have mentioned in the previous chapter, and with the cure we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not find the cure, and if you see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization of medicine or the cauterization of fire, then be careful to ignite the lancet within it until it is completely burned, so that it covers the location of the pain with a long line that covers the entire area, or that one; and place your hand firmly inside it as you pierce the scab and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is bruised from chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerves that cause it, and that it does not become spasms.
And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of sand from the artery that is abscessed, which in the abscission of it there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studious or careful; and leave the operation in its beginning.
And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of sand accidents from the artery according to its method, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not abate with this cautery and the patient's condition becomes tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head where we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Chapter 5.
Of the cautery for the pain of gout.
When pain in the big toe is caused by friction and is cured by laxative causes and the other cure as mentioned in the division, and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
And then apply the point to the cautery, and it should be moved around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. Along with the cautery, carefully apply it to the tip of the big toe, as if you were testing the location.
And if the cautery for that point in the entire big toe, and it is not, and then cure the locations before they are healed.
Chapter 6.
Of the cautery for torture.
Torture that is cured and is not healed by any other cautery except the ones that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cautery of the specific part that is affected by dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that part of torture that is caused by jealousy and capriciousness and guards, and you do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below it, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cautery at the right edge of the ear, a little above it on the top of the head, and in the temple another, as long as the second part, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the main part of the codeine is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special for the cutters, the shape of which is given in the table. May be, however, it is more subtle to have one fewer than that; and cover with a cloth in the place of excessive filthiness, one.
Then care for the place with what is given as the process until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with what we have said and does not compare your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the corners of his head; and with the cauterie and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with the cauterie in the back. And the method of the cauterie is done as it is said above.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and more back; and then care for the place with what processes.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a blow.
Give the patient large amounts of grease and the servant's hand to rub it in.
Then wipe the entire head of the patient and place your hand over their eyes, using the ointment described in the treatise on ointments.
Place some cotton wool on that, which is a handle for the cautery. Do this second, as you have already described.
And if that does not heal well; then make three points in the back part of their head, which should be placed in the part of the head closest to the neck, entering from the part farthest from the neck. Place the largest amount of the ointment between each point, and then care for the cautery with what is proceeding.
But if you are adding more and the patient can bear it, then make the point in the middle location; and if you are adding too much, then cauterize that over both toes.
Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be made according to the form given.
Chapter 9
Of cautery for varicose veins and of softening the entire body.
That you proceed as in the softening of the head and that you have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then apply that cautery in the middle of the head, and apply the cautery over all the joints of the head, and apply it over the back part of it, and three cauteries over the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening the body of too many and the patients are suffering greatly, then apply that cautery with four cauteries over the spines of the back, and afterwards apply it inside where the sound of the neck of the patient comes from, and raise the tieua hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this cautery should be olive oil.
Chapter 10
Of cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized but that epilepsy is by reflex.
And therefore, when the patient first begins to have symptoms and the other cure has been mentioned in the previous division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if the patient is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer garlic and mustard to the one who is modifying, giving it for several days, good digestion of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery at the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the back of the head, and over each hair on the head, cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with cautery as I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And use olive oil as it has been prescribed.
But if the patient is a child, then pause the fine cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and become thin and pale, then cauterize those parts with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the place where they have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and declines to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which purifies his brain according to the same which has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and make a tortoise-like incision well on his scalp, and place a cushion in the middle of his head.
And the patient should be lying down, and held from all sides.
Then place a liniment; and it is worthy of an ancient sheep's belly. And scald that over the fire for heating, which is measured to suit him, the same which he has suffered when it is most in him. Then apply that in the middle of his head on his scalp, and let it be softened before it is scattered.
And give the patient this medicine every week for the entire week, along with other treatment until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most affected area, but always hold the hand with a sterile glove: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen area, either in a position of rest or in grayish-white spots.
Chapter XII.
Of the descent of water in the belly.
When you are told that the beginning of water in the belly is indicated by symptoms that I mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient a drink that will cause them to vomit, and keep that one from all moisture.
And make that person sweat in a bath for several days.
And command that person to raise their head, and make points with a pointed cautery in the middle of the head; and if it is the beginning of water in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly, then make points with two cauteries on two temples.
Incise all the veins and tendons that are behind the knee; and place the cautery in that long area on the side of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And you should have knowledge of the skill in extracting tendons and making incisions in those areas, and cauterizing blood flow.
And some tendons are cauterized behind two bones and two cautery instruments produced.
Chapter 13.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When ancient tears from the eyes are persistent and through the veins and arteries that are in the area manifestly before the cap and it is verified that this is an excessive fluid, then cauterize that with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulations in the eyes, and with the cautery in the middle of the cap and with two cautery instruments in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery instruments in the neck behind two bones. And if it is necessary to make an incision, then cauterize that part of the flank on the outer side of the temple with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
On the cauterization of bad breath.
When you treat that person who has been mentioned in the division and have not yet advanced your treatment, first prepare and give to the patient three nuts; then remove their head, and cauterize with a small cautery or an olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that part of the flank with two cauteries on the two temples, just under the hair.
And be careful not to burn that one.
And this is the shape of the cautery of cloves.
Chapter 15.
On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery like this one; and this is its shape:
If you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on the two upper eyelids in every part, and they lengthen from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the eyelid.
Do not press your hand too much against the cautery, but according to the amount that the sticky part of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
About the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs become converted into the parts and prick the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into the parts and prick the eye, cautery is made in those places in two ways: either by burning or by medical means.
If cautery is made by fire, command the patient to lie down with his eyes closed, while those who remove his hairs are present, and they are prolonged and equalized; and if he pricks himself in that place, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that it is not injured until the hairs have grown.
When they are born and grow up, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and place your hand over their eyelid, using a secondhand tent, which should be according to the shape of a flea's back, and close to their ears.
And then place a warm compress on the eyelid in albumen of egg or in mucilage of pulli over their eye.
And then use the cautery that has this shape.
And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in turns, until the surface of the eyelid is burned, which should be like a flea's back, entirely.
And to prevent infection of the work, you should close the eyelid already, and raise the eyelids of the patient, and the points of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave that for three days, and then place it over the compress until the scar is healed. And then carefully cure that wound until it is healed.
But if it returns through the eyelids due to some cause, and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another point with the cautery on that spot as you had done previously.
But if the eyelids are in the eyelid, then cautery that spot where it is lifted to its natural place and equalized, so that the eyelids do not pinch it.
But if the cautery does not burn this, then command the patient to lift the eyelids while they are being stretched and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a spoon.
And then take some fresh, warm honey and mix it with those causes, and make it into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and then spread that poultice on the paper or cloth that is made like a spoon, and place it on one of the eyelids; and place the other eyelid on a soft cloth in albumen of egg, and let the head of the patient be in the upright position.
And press the medicine on the wound and make sure that the patient does not bite the medicine until they feel the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
And so, when the patient persistently bites the medicine, remove the medicine and say to them, "when the burning sensation stops, then put the medicine back on the wound and wash it with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was during the surgery, because it is good; and if not, return the medicine to the place where it did not stick and did not become discolored before the operation is completed and is closed.
And then press on the wound with your finger until the pus of the infection is removed, and then cure it with a poultice of vinegar or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep close watch during the operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft after some days and there is any cause for the hairs in the wound, then repeat the medicine on the place where the eyelid becomes soft, as it was done at the beginning, and remove it when it is healed.
And this is the form of the mirror.
And you know that the bones of men are differentiated according to their size and shape, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
And do not hide the right way to that one who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal bone of the jaw.
When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not confuse your treatment, but rather cauterize it in this way: order the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too close nor too agitated.
And then place a piece of cloth soaked in alcohol or in mucilage of poppy on the bone of their jaw.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be concave, like the form of a cane or a pen of the Voltors, at one end of which is made the cautery.
If you see, enter deeply into the other end. And if you want to come out, use the tent.
But those who are concave are better suited for the work of the tieua.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain the pus from it and dry it. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning, and hold the tieua's hand or the patient's hand with a small force to prevent your hand or the patient from being burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter of the skin and corrupt that.
And if the beginning of the tieua cautery penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that for three days, and then place your hand on that side to protect and surround it with an external drying agent until it is healed.
If they have passed several days without healing, then pause the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then rub it according to what is suitable in its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was first described as follows: go to the location of the fistula and make a hole in it, then place a small amount of lead in it; and hold your hand over it with good retention, so that the lead does not reach the bottom of the fistula; and cover the surface of the fistula with album of honey or water, where the lead sticks to the location of the fistula and heals it for wonderful healing.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nasal spray and reduce the fistula to the nose's own location when it comes back to its proper place.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the wound in the foot.
Herpes occurs in the lips, and more frequently in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in divisions and do not expand your cure, then use the small cautery as follows:
And place it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the edge of the fissures.
And then cure it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of fistulas in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the edges of the teeth, an abscess occurs and a pimple forms, and it breaks, and it becomes old, and blood flows and a fistula is formed, and you cure it without expanding your cure, then use the cautery according to the amount that has been received in the fistula, and place that ignited cautery in the mouth of the fistula, and your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and on the other side make a pimple or two; and then cure it with the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the infected bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the extraction of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat them with those medicines and do not confuse them, then place your hand on the patient's head and hold the cautery in the shape that will come up, without letting go of the tongs over the tooth and inserting it into that space, heating it quickly, so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the same time as the tooth is loosened.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient opens their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can stop that, because when the tooth is loose and the jaw is softened and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Chapter 21.
On the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is ice or worms in it, and medicine does not cure it, then cauterization is performed in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
The cautery made of cow's horn is that you take the horn and blow it until it becomes hot, then take a needle and wrap it in cloth, and place it on the tip of the tent, and quickly insert the heated cautery into the tooth that hurts.
And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak some wool or cloth in the horn below, and place it on the tooth that hurts, and place another over that iron as it ignites until the iron reaches the front of the cavity of the tooth.
But the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the moment when the ember or iron is in its place, and if there is some smoke or the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then approach the cautery in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside as the cautery is being heated; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
And so that the patient does not bite their own tongue and holds it for an hour, and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize the part that you wish to extend according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22
Of cauterization of protrusions.
When protrusions are caused by swelling and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest them slightly, then approach the cautery with the shape that is this following, having two extremities prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can escape through the other extremity, and place that ignited on that abscess a maneuver, and another if necessary of that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cautery according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in an ointment between when it has been completely burned by the fire.
And then cure that wound with bandages and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
On the cauterization of warts on the feet and on their contraction.
When the moisture comes over the throat of the lung, and especially when it is caused by coldness of the body, then make sure that the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the gullet in the affected area.
And be careful not to reach the cautery to the gullet or burn the windpipe of the patient, but a little.
And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower vertebrae of the spine. And the pointed cautery should be used in the same way as before.
And then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
About the cauterization of a sick person's lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tonicity, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that part with two pointed cauteries on the sternum in the places where the ribs meet each other; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
And if you want, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cauteri called puncta, whose form is described in the punctacio of lumbago.
And let the points enter into those places; and then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
And now the pointed cautery has three parts for this cauterization: you can make three cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is a helpful remedy.
When the remedy is dislocated due to slippery humors and not stopped at its return time, it must be returned before it returns to that place, and with a slight movement, it can be moved as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and raise the cloth which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the ones mentioned in your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
And then light the cautery, which has two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the cloth until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come from four ends of the cautery.
Some of these methods are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery. viii.
And then place salt on the cautery and make the patient comfortable, and do not allow any part of the body to be in pain for a while until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the parts above and below, then make that, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
About the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is moisture and excess humidity in the stomach that is not part of its composition and multiplies inside, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is likely that the patient will be on their back, and extend your hands and your things, and then cauterize that with three cautery: one cautery under the chest per the quantity of a pointed cautery, and two cautery under the ribs of the cautery, until the figure of cautery triangular; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will cause harm.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two fingers of the pig's tail.
And if the shape of the cautery is in this form, then it is added. And if you want to, burn with a large cautery at the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle in this form:
And the stomach is burned at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should put your hand over the stomach puncture according to the quantity that you want to test, and then burn with a cautery at the points; and then cure with the remedy that is preceded before it is healed.
Chapter 27
Of the burning of the foot.
When the foot is painful due to cold or humidity or thick air before its normal composition is disrupted by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not compared, then it is necessary that the patient be lying on their back, and then test three burns in this form and this quantity on the foot behind the ribs, which is the position of a man.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the greatest length of the aforementioned, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body stretched out.
And do not understand the meaning of the word "cauteri" in this context.
And if the amount of water that is attached to the thickness of the flesh of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet, then they should be seated, which has already extended its limbs and raised its arms.
And it is possible for you to use these cauteries as pointed cautery, when you have skill and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and let the thickness of the whole codex be attached so that the entire body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, as this codex is delicate; and you should know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing abscess of the thigh with a pointed cautery.
When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh is ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the meat of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the meat of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often fatigues the doctors with its cure.
Therefore, let the patient lie on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page. And cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery until all the cord is carbonized, until it reaches the bone, until it escapes into the sinus.
And then treat that by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization except that which is prolonged in the art of medicine and in which most patients have known good results; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, however it leaves to us a better result.
Chapter 29.
Of the cautery for foot pain.
The ancient cauteries of the feet according to astrology were done in this manner, and this is what you should take from the longest dry reed that can be found, and it should be as thick as possible.
And then immerse that one in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the connection of the scapula and the collar; and two small cauteries behind, one declining slightly to the part where the beard is left, and two small cauteries in that location which decline between the fifth rib and the spine, declining slightly to the back parts; and another cautery in the middle of the chest; and three cauteries on the back parts; and another cautery in that location which is between the two scapulae, and two cauteries on the sides of the chest, behind the one that is between the two scapulae.
And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the open palm of your work.
And it has been said by ancient authors that those who use pointed cautery of iron similar to rays and ignite them, then place them in the location between the ribs, until they reach the apostema and remove the bad blood, just as we have said in the apostema of the throat.
In this puncture, the pointed cautery does not cause fear, because it often happens in the location of the fistula that is not healed.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When you cure the patient's mouth, do not compare your treatment with what we have said in the division, but rather cauterize it in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cautery of the throat, whose figure has been given.
And each cautery should have the thickness of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord that is at the end of the bed where the patient's left side is.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points are made at the appropriate latitude.
And then insert both flames, light one, in the moment that those penetrate the cord of the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause the arm to swell for too many days, which is more harmful than the other causes of treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of the cautery for hydrophobia.
A pointed cautery should not be used in hydrophobia, but rather a specific one.
When you treat the hydrophobic patient, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, but rather place four cauteries around the navel, and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the throat, and another cautery on the chest, and two cauteries between the ribs of the back, and one cautery on the right side of the chest, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be determined by the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cauterization in place so that the arm does not swell for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from the healing area too soon, as they need to be accompanied by those who understand their condition, and their recovery should be monitored closely.
The shape of the cautery that is used to cauterize the abdomen should be similar to that described above, and the one used for cauterizing the back should be according to its own shape.
Chapter thirty-two.
Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with water and filled with hydrostatics, cautiously cauterize the feet over the back of the foot, in the area between the ear and the ring, and elevate your hand above the cauterizer and do not turn it; then elevate your hand and do not return to that position until the hydrostatics have subsided.
The cautery should be shaped like this: And then make two cautery needles on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery needle at the end of the cautery blade. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place the other end of the cautery underneath, and the other at the lower part of the cushion; and above each cushion, two cautery points.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can drain from it.
And then treat those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
Of cautery for belly ulcers.
When belly ulcers are caused by cold and humidity entering the intestines, which is the digestive and retentive power in the stomach and intestines, and is treated with the methods of cure and not with incisions, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cautery, then apply a large cautery on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, and also apply the circular cautery and four cautery points around the abdomen, and the clavilh cautery; and also apply a cautery on the alcatin over alozis large, or two cautery points.
If you see the excessive moisture and the patient is tolerating it, then burn that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries above the stomach and near the groin, which cures the condition greatly without error.
Chapter 34:
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in their natural state of ancient hemorrhoids or if they are caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not differ from the true cure, then burn with three cauteries above the small and small triangular sacrum, and with a cauterized needle puncturing the abdomen twice.
And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then burn that above the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cauterized needle puncturing the side, and with another cauterized needle puncturing the soft part of the patient's abdomen, and leave the cauterized needle in place for some time, and cure the patient before they are healed.
Chapter 35.
Of cauterization of the thighs near their abscissions.
When you remove the thighs, then you ignite the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Then place that ignited in the removed thigh, and finally insert the mouth through which the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes out.
And make one or two wounds, if the wounds are too large, then cauterize each of them after you have removed them, and then care for those that you apply to them from the ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to use a smaller one.
Chapter 36.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between the parts of it.
When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal it with cauterization.
When someone has an abscess in the natural gluteal region, and it is old and infected, remove the pus and corrupted humors from it, and then apply a subtle probe to the depth of the abscess, and then determine the amount of its depth.
Then use a cautery that resembles a needle. And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which the probe enters.
And repeat this process with the cautery every few days or three, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the abscess goes to the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then care for the wound until it heals.
And if the wound is sealed, and all the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it has healed completely.
And if the matters are not staying in their place, then know that they are penetrating into the bone and corrupting it, or that is one of those causes from which they will remember and return to that location.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of the hernias.
When pain occurs in the hernias due to friction or excessive wind, and when the patient's breath is obstructed, then apply a pointed cautery on each hernia, using a claw-like instrument to hold it in place.
And if the cauterization is too strong, then delay it by a small amount, so that three lines of cauterization can be applied, and they will be more effective in reducing pain.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weak and soft due to friction or moisture, and the patient cannot hold their urine, then apply a pointed cautery on the lower part of the bladder, using a pen-like instrument to hold it in place. Also, use another pointed cautery on the right side and another on the left side of the bladder.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
And the nails should be clipped according to what is appropriate.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the mouth.
When there is a wound and moisture in the mouth, and it is forbidden to press it, and the tissues of the mouth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and there are pains due to their presence, then it is recommended that this location be cauterized with three cautery in the circumference of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cautery, and let the cautery be clipped.
Chapter 40.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When the moisture of the soft tissues is infiltrated into the part of the elbow, and they are causes of the inflammation of its location, and it is recommended that the cushion be prolonged over the other when they are compared to each other. The location of the dislocation is often in the shoulder joint.
Then cut the patient's clothing at the same part of the body as the incision is being made, in order that you may have a clear view of the area around the incision as it is being turned over, and so that the incision will fall in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery should be in the shape of the one used for stomach surgery.
If this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries or an olive branch.
And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire skin; and then care for that which has been healed.
Chapter 41
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the part of the body, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned, and this method is ancient, so that you may remove the patient from heavy humors such as bad-smelling or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a medical cautery with a burning flame, or a fire cautery.
Second, there are two types of cauteries known, one of which cauterizes that over the part of the ankle of the patient with three triangular cautery in this form; and do those well deep. And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the skin and if the cautery is made of olive oil or large.
Sometimes several wounds are made on the neck over the head of the ankle so that there are four cautery.
And if you want, cautery with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, it and that the circle contains and burns the entire skin.
And this is the way of cautery in case when pain is adherent to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that over the space on the location where the patient is located; and with one cautery on the calf for four called a few of the left side.
And if the cautery for the elbow, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient complains that the pain extends into the area of the feet, then cauterize this spot with three or four points or more if necessary.
And if the patient complains that the pain is behind the knee and under the cushion, then cauterize this spot with an elbow cautery.
And be careful during all cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or cause great scarring, and that for this reason it may cause harm to the patient.
And I have seen others who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is inflamed before the tumor is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one in this manner.
And the wise men said in the cauterization of any cautery, like this one: make it similar to a circle of iron that encircles the width of one palm; and its orifice according to the thickness of an date pit or a little more.
And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a thumb; and those circles are placed in two pieces; and let the length of those chains be a thumb or two, and make them in those iron edges well covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it begins to glow and sparkle, and then let it be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that point with three cautery points in a row.
And then leave that for three days; and then apply ointment to that point and cover the wound with a bandage for several days; and then cure that point with salves until it is healed.
Oh sons, of this kind of cautery we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the patient, and because we have found some that look upon it as dangerous.
From among those who suffer from it, and find the place where it hurts.
From those medicines that adhere to the cautery, you make two circles with an armula perforated in which you thrust the point of the iron door; its length should be equal to the width of their chest, and the size of two nuts or walnuts.
And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said cautery; and they are placed above and below, and they contain something between them in this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the patient that is on the left side, and cover the part of the patient with your hand; and take a hot iron and put it between two circles, and the quality of which should be like fire gradually, and let it remain for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and adhere to it — because that biting is like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the bowl of water.
And then leave it for three days and pause over that border where the black of the dust remains, and leave it for another day, and wipe it off; this is a remedy.
And then cure it with the ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or chest, make it in the state that contains water according to what is made in the bowl equally.
And this is the method of water bowl, and I have already written it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and undissolved lye from one part, and grind it in a new bowl of the kind that the parted one has been perforated by a small hole, according to the amount that enters into it.
And place it in another bowl covered with water, and pour over the alkali and live lye of two parts water that takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those through good compression, and wipe the bowl that remains from the sharp water in the parted one to the covered bowl.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is a strong acid now, the same as used in certain medical operations and in cauterizing other members, because this operation is like fire.
Some of the medicines are applied widely, such as teazels and unfermented mead, which is a cause that is mixed with other things.
Guillaume recounted from an ancient man the operation and cure of which he was cured of gout and sciatica pain, and magnified that it should be of that one, and said that no other cure was necessary, and because it is healed with a remedy like this, which is strong enough to enter and have already known about that.
And it should be near certain fresh vinegar, and if there is no fresh vinegar, then take recent figs; and the cause should be crushed with a small amount of gray salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and tied.
And let it be left for the quantity of three hours or until the patient feels relieved from the attack of the disease.
And then place that in the bath and when the body of the patient is wrapped, put that in the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use this cautery for these medications, but rather the evacuation of the body.
It is said that when the goat's wound is made, the stricture vein should be cauterized with it; and the cautery should be made in this way: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the patient's toes and on the sole.
And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it there until it is stretched out. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
And this method of cauterizing is called a cattle cautery.
Chapter 42:
Of the cauterization of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in both feet due to various causes, such as gout or blows or excessive excretion, and due to similar causes, by the infusion of wet matter.
And cauterization is not used in this single case that is made by the infusion of wet matter.
Therefore, before evacuating the patient, give them bitter and similar pills to their condition, which are made on both feet in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying to cauterize each line, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 43.
On the use of cautery at the beginning of a fracture.
Deformities occur in this disease in small children; and from the beginning of it, they occur on their structure in the ankle, elevation, and movement.
And it becomes thin in the lower back and in the hips of the patient, which begins to overcome the other vertebrae.
Therefore, when you see this and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: which holds the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with the pointed cautery in two or three lines. And let the points be placed between them.
And care for the area until it is healed by what we have said.
Remember that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of cautery for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not return, then it should be treated again with cautery.
And you should apply the pointed cautery to the area around the joint of the foot with a movable motion.
And the pointed cautery should be made of this shape:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the other joints or to the ankles, and it does not subside, then treat each toe with three or four points of this cautery on all sides.
And if you need other cautery tools, then use that one and do not place your hand too close to the point of the cautery, only around the area where the incision was made.
And if the pain extends to the spine and the two sides, then administer the cautery mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the chest and it is called pleurisy, then make points around the ribs as they revolve, make points on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then make points around each rib and on the edge of the chest.
And if the pain extends to the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the helper.
And do not discharge the patient without proper care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and flatulence is expelled, then this cautery will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45
On the Cauterization of Wounds.
When the wound is located in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then you should order the patient to lie on their side and use mild remedies so that the wound from their stomach does not increase.
And then place the patient between your hands on their side, and command them to hold their breath until the wound or intestines are exposed or appear through the abdomen.
And then return that thing to its place and try to repair the rupture on the edge of the penis, and hold the end of it so that it is similar to the base of the penis at the top of the thighs.
And then apply the cautery in this form:
until it is red and then apply bandages. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place your hand with the cautery over that part, and you will enter through that opening that you have obtained in the inner thigh; and if you do not succeed in entering through that opening in the first attempt, then repeat the other procedure.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out over the patient in case of death or other great harm.
Know that when you have the cautery, do not press on the bones, and do not force your operation.
And know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
Then care for the place of the cautery for three days until the scar of the fire is healed.
And then cure those other wounds before they become infected.
The patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the infection has subsided.
And cover the patient's nutrition according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be placed on their abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer a decent amount of food, and keep that for another 40 days.
And be moderate in work and food intake, and drinking, because when following this healing regimen, the entire body will be healed.
And you should direct the treatment of the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and you want that they do not move, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is as clean as the other part of it; and then cure that wound which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
And then the first doctors said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular pointed instrument according to this form, rather than with a sharp one.
And then a line is placed above the latitude of the rupture, and another line below; and your hand should be placed with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Chapter 46.
About the cauterization of a twist.
When pain arises in the limbs due to a blow or percussion, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then it is customary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, strength, and development, and the location of the twist and the pain of it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; for according to the custom of those punctures of the member that approach the other member, so that you can achieve those with the cautery within the patient's body.
Chapter 47
About the cautery for leprosy.
Some leprous people are cured by cauterization for a great benefit, and if the type of leprosy caused by putrefaction of scales and melancholy.
And so when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and if it has been cured with what we have said in the division and does not exist, and do not give up, but be careful over the patient that the corruption comprehends all his body and all his appearance, then cauterize that one on the forehead: with one in the middle of the forehead, and with the second behind him, turning the face to the end of the hair; and also on two ears; and with another behind, on the back or nape.
And finally your hand on the cauterization a little inside where there is a slight indentation in the bone, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize over the melon according to what is prescribed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then apply the cautery mentioned in the chapter; apply a cautery on the tip of the nose, two cauteries on both cheeks, two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, two cauteries on the spine of the back, one large cautery near the tailbone, one on the shoulder, two on the elbows, one on each arm, two on the hands, two on the fingers, two on the knees, two on the thighs, and two on the buttocks, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints mentioned in the chapter, as well as each sole of their feet, and the soles of their hands.
And be careful not to burn those nerves that are on the ankle.
Some incisions are cauterized with one cautery on the teeth of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with its surroundings, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
And you should know that the size of the cautery is large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
And you should take care of the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of the cautery of stupor.
When a limb is swollen or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that swollen limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its position.
And if it is too large, then insert the pointed cautery into the spine a little. And you should take care of that wound until it is healed.
And sometimes, the veins in the arms and feet, and the spine of the back and the skin of the abdomen, which move that member, and the swelling of the nerves, are also cauterized.
Do not put anything on it, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of the nerves throughout the body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize with a pointed cautery on a small amount according to the quantity of the species of the codex within which it is remained white and the color of it is changed.
And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with roasted oil and leaves of arnago, and with the white or yellow sulfur, each part is one piece and all are mixed, and then place a cloth and over the location it is placed until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the Cautery of the Cranium.
When a tumor begins to form and you wish to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
And it is said that the cauterized area should be cauterized with the rear cauterizer in the middle; but I have not seen that, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen that sometimes.
It is more correct to cauterize around it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cauterizer.
Chapter 10.
On the Cautery of Adulterers.
When an adulterer is late in maturity, and this happens because of excess or due to the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you wish to hasten in the maturity of adulterers; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cauterizer; and afterwards remove that which hastens its maturity.
If you want to make a perforation with this cautery, then place it in the following way: pause it at the midpoint between the two thighs until the needle penetrates the skin.
And if the cautery is placed in that location where it was previously removed, so that the arm is relieved; then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 52
Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
A corroding agent is a substance that corrupts the body and moves within it, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with, like fire consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that the corroding agent is in the location where the cautery was made with fire, then place small and large clavils according to what is appropriate in that location where the corroding agent is.
And then cauterize it from all parts until you remove all the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then apply a poultice to it for three days, and place oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
And then carefully remove those meat fragments generating infection.
However, if three days have passed and the flesh has grown healthy in the place where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, then repeatedly use the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
And sometimes, some sharp medicine is applied to the wound, which is midway between the cautery and the medication. However, using a pointed cautery on the pus is more harmful.
And you have already said that the cure for it is with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from there.
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization of the claws and other similar things.
The toenails are often affected by the parts of the foot that are called claws, which is a great cause of the foot; and they are cauterized in those places in two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
May the pointed cautery be heated like a pen with a similar shape, which should be made of iron according to the quantity it contains, and also of fine metal.
And then place that heated point on the key, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key. And leave it there for three days until it begins to burn. And then apply that poultice made of wild mallow leaves, crushed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a while until it is completely eradicated from its roots.
And then cure the area with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and wounds occur on the surface of the body, especially in the breasts and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a quill of iron or steel or pen of ink, and place that quill on the key; and then draw out some water from the quill through the tip of the quill into the bottom of the key, and move your hand, and turn the quill around your hand in compression, and press the edge of the quill on the root of the key, and find the water dripping from the tip of the key into the bottom of the key; and wait for the patient for a short while until the water is absorbed by the root of the key, and then remove that, because the key has its roots eradicated.
And they would do that to those who have pain in all parts of their body.
And they would cure those who have pain in the joints by removing those things from the gums that the flesh swells with.
Chapter 40.
Of cautery for tremors.
When someone has tremors due to cold, fever, or other similar causes, it is customary to cauterize them with four cautery irons or with one above the spines of their back, between each spine there is a cautery; and on their chest, a cautery olive.
And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick is quickly achieved.
Chapter 50.
Of cautery for accidents to the body.
When there are abscesses in the body, and they are caused by materials that have been corrupted; therefore, at the beginning, it is customary to cauterize all over the head of the fistula with a thin cautery iron made of myrtle wood; or with a long needle of iron; or with a lenticular cautery.
And some veins are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not all believe in it, but those who do say that it breaks up the excess fluid causing those, and heals from those.
However, one should first perform that with phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of the cauterization of fluids from a sudden accident by incision of the archer.
Veins are clogged with fluid from an arrow wound that should be incised due to the swelling causing it, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Therefore, when such an accident happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the wound of the arrow, and press over that place until the veins are no longer clogged with the fluid from the sudden accident.
And then place hot oil drops and large ones, by the number of words, and blow on those until they are no longer ignited.
And then approach the second location where the pain is, over the vein that has been recently broken, and quickly apply the cautery to the wound before it becomes inflamed and restricted.
And if the wound is pushed out of the opening of the artery when you remove the cautery and stretch it, then take another cautery prepared alongside the others in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restrained.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that another misfortune comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to stop the wound in those places where it is restricted, and especially when the artery is large, it must be done in one of four ways: either with a cautery applied where the bleeding is, or with extraction when it is not being extracted, because when the extremities are burned, the wound is restricted and the blood flow is stopped, or it should be tied with a bandage or a piece of cloth for strong structure, or it should be placed on medicines that have the virtue of stopping the bleeding; and they should be strongly compressed with a pillow or a compress.
May the one who administers a decent restriction of the patient's arm and a strict bandage or by positioning of causes that burn and similar ones, does not compare but rather burns.
If that one is not a doctor or does not have any medical knowledge, then open the bandage of the indicated place over the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that the wound should not remain open on the side of the patient's body, and above the rib cage it should not remain; and above the rib cage, sprinkle the cold water dew of great coldness until the wound is congealed and swollen; and cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incisions and punctures and blows and of bleeding and of wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization by fire is convenient and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauterizations; and we have ordered the chapters of the subirantata of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that it may be helpful to those who seek such knowledge, about what has been asked.
And as I begin this, son, you should know that in this chapter is contained what was explained in the first chapter of cauterization.
And as I said, son, you should be very careful in this operation, because in the one that is mentioned in this chapter, which involves evacuation of the pus, it is essential to aspirate the vein or make an incision on the abscess or remove the exit or purify the plague or extract the stone or make an incision on the periosteum. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you, because some of these operations require the manipulation of instruments that are used by men for medical purposes. And among them are those who will contract the disease and die from it, and they suffer greatly because of the severity of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and because the fear of the disease means death.
And of those who give you that which is good and said, you hope for their health, and their illness is dangerous.
And therefore do not trust that which you see in that person of this manner; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your greed; and do not presume any cause about that unless you have certain knowledge which confirms it to you, and to which successful succession praiseworthy.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prognosis and indication to which it is converted to salvation, because in that one you are helpful above acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God inspires you with his own understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in his hand.
And you should distinguish this chapter by chapters that precede in the chapter of cautery, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is to you rejoicing that demands of that and of which you have necessity.
First Chapter.
About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of infants.
This disease is caused by worms in infants during infancy and when the newborn's head is first shaved.
And some worms are caused by an unknown reason.
I have not seen this disease except in infants; and to all those I have seen it is accompanied by death, and for this reason it is considered an incurable work in them.
I have seen that a child's head, which was full of water, and the head of which was always magnificently shining until it could not be touched by the greatness of its own head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died.
And this humidity is added between the bone and the marrow, or it is added behind the bone on the spine.
If the humidity is between the bone and the marrow and the abscess is small, then cut at the middle of the head into a slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
If the moisture is increased more and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the moisture is pushed away from the bone, then you should open all the incisions of the cap and pour water into it when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your touch. Because you should make three incisions in the middle of the cap according to this method:
And then remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with drapes and feathers; and apply hot water and oil every day for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and medications, and strengthen the cap with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some are more in the occipital region, or in the part of the neck, or in the right, or in the left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do this as best as possible.
And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage it in flow, as this may cause the patient to lose blood and die due to the outflow of humidity.
Chapter II.
When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the throat or chest, and this is recognized as such, and it is not treated with medicine, then this treatment would be in that incision of those two arteries.
And thus, when you want to incise those that the patient has on his head, and you should wipe the location with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each on the locations that are close to the earlobes, and they are hidden in some people.
And thus, when you place your finger on the artery, and then incise each one at the tip of each part until it reaches inside the bone, and this is done through the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula behind the artery and scrape it off at the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is two fingers wide, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out and pulsates, which is usually due to frequent bleeding.
But if the arch does not appear at the skin, then measure the thickness of the gold leaf and insert three fingers' worth of space, and then push in and enter into the bone.
And that which is drawn from the blood is about an ounce of it, and it does not draw more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the bone.
And then consider the wound, and if there is some cause of gout remaining on the bone, then incise it so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and with strips of cloth, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
Of the extraction of the shin bones that are in the temples.
When an old injury or wound has become inflamed and painful in the temples, and is similar to those, and cannot be treated with medical methods, we have shown in these illnesses the extraction of the shin bones in the temples, or cauterization of them.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient removes the hair from the temples; and then understands the shin bone that is in the temple, which is shown by its pole, and it is hidden only to a few people due to its severity.
And if it is hidden, then the patient's head should be covered with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or with warm water until the shin bone appears clearly to you. And then take the tool that has this shape: And then you approach the patient's head with a cloth to facilitate your entry into the room; and then remove it from the high parts before you exit the codex and discover the parts of the tunics that were left there, of all parts.
And if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a cloth at the end of the finger, and then cut off one part according to the amount by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not cut, the blood will not be able to flow out of it.
And then evacuate the blood from the vein in one or two units.
And if the wound is large, then cover it with two cloths at two places with strong double gauze or with ropes long enough, and do not let it become putrid during the consolidation of the wound and let the blood flow out.
And then cut off the excess that is between two ligaments, and do so at that hour or at another time.
If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make points into the bone of the cautery hammer until the edges of it are incised, and then place it in the location of that metatarsal work.
It is better to do this if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; because cautery is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in cases of fainting.
And cover the extraction of the arches that weaken the location of the old cot, and place them on clean powder made properly, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and moisten it until it is healed.
And if while you are working another event, the blood from the archer's wound flows out, then you must press that blood, or the pointed cautery, or what fills the location of the old cot, and strengthen your hand until the blood is stopped. And if for any reason of those you are not present, then place your hand over the location where the wound is congealed, and drench the location with very cold water until the sharpness returns, and then strengthen it as appropriate.
And that which is more commonly used in the extraction of arrows is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations where it enters, and pause as needed, mot ignitz, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two parts, so that that which is between its extremities is not completely solidified by this cauterization.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows. However, if the sharpness of two points is not sufficient, it is better to use one point, because if you approach each part with two sharp points, and do not incise the flesh at high speed.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be incised more carefully.
And this work is better in all works and more useful.
And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the said.
Chapter Four
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the wounds.
When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the head of the patient, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if it were the path of worms, and the wounds of those are exhausted, humidified in such a way that their fur is already known, and their feathers are scraped by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods in the cure of those of this operation, and they call that cure am spassa.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two times: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle part of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the beginning of the arches that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws. And if the space of each beginning is three times the amount of that adjusted.
And if you have a cloth sponge or dry cloths, moisten them with the ones that dry the wound.
And then place the sponge between two sharp extremities, of which this is the form of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples entering the second incision. Excise all the connective tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and then do that from the first incision towards the second incision. And then place a sharp instrument called a scalpel on one side and another not sharp on the other.
And place your hand on the side of that sharp one against the flesh attached to the connective tissue, and on the other side inside the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and excise all those veins that descend from the head to the hips.
While continuing to inspect this appearance of the codex, and then perform that action in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And when an equal amount of blood has flowed, express the places of the feet's veins that are compressed.
And then place your hand in each of the hollows of old age, and place it on those wounds that are open and oozing and inflamed, and make sure they do not become abscesses.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that wound with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
About the treatment of splinters by cauterization and the wounds that descend from the parts divided from the head.
When a vein is cauterized and continues, and sometimes the wounds of the patient are small, and their appearance has been weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they pull out their hair, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extremity, then know for these accidents that the materials and cauterization do not come from any other veins than those from the parts divided from the head.
The best cure for these is as follows: order the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead (starting from the left temporal bone and going into the right temporal bone; and the incision should go through the bone), until it is revealed.
Dry out the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry gauze, and then fill it between the two lips of the incision on the old man's cheek or with the gauze. Then sprinkle some powder that is usually used to prevent abscess formation.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then make a small incision into the bone where it begins in the flesh, and then apply the drying regimen that is used to dry out the flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and from this make a paste and administer it to these wounds on the raw flesh.
Chapter VI.
About the treatment of that which is in the armpits.
All the causes that are in the armpits are of four species, one being a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and rust, another being a plant such as thistle or fava bean, another being a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and their likes, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone is in the armpit or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and press the armpit to the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some cause of violent oil or vinegar into that place, and administer the extraction of it, and make the nose sniffing in condition, and open the nostrils for the coming of sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because moisture is forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not obtained, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epithetic epicaridian subtle of which this is the form:
And if the instrument fails, then it is good; otherwise, administer extraction with the subtle needle of double use.
And if it is not obtained by that, then make a needle of aram and introduce the end of the needle into the auditory canal and close the environment of the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed in but the needle. And then extract the teeth with great force, as many teeth as we have found.
But if it is not obtained in this way, then take some alum or old-fashioned material and place the amount of alum or old-fashioned material that is used for extracting teeth on the end of a needle, and wrap it decently over that placed area. And then introduce that into the auditory canal with ease, and dry the ear from the moisture.
And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to lance the abscess or treat the spasm.
The method to lance that is to first disinfect the patient's vein septic and extract the second from the first, and then make that incision between your fingers and convert the wound to the parts above, and perform a small cut on the edge of the wound where the pus is located. And if the incision is of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and the bone found, then lance that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then make the incision in that hour at speed, and cure that before it is healed.
And if the cause is one of the gases that I believe and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your assistance, then you take a thin spatula according to this form: and apply that remedy to that abscess which has fallen into the ear canal.
and do not do that when you think that that has already been moistened by the steam from the ear canal, and pause that in small movements, and protrude those with pincers or forceps, or at the beginning there is a hole like this, which is praised for the extraction of it.
In the water that is introduced into the ear canal, which the patient uses for sneezing conditioned at the beginning, and fills the ear with an old cloth, and place a towel over that ear in which the water is, and if by that it is forced out, good; and if not, take many small stones according to the length of the said, and bake those in the fire for a short time, and the patient inserts one of those into the opening of his ear canal and strikes another stone over the stone that is inside the ear. Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is drained.
Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is drained. And once the water is drained, you take paper or rags, and place one end in the wound and extend the other end over the fire until it is burned completely.
And then put another rag and make so many wounds until all the water is drained, and remove that which was under the cannula as mentioned above of the extraordinary stone.
In the extraction of beasts entering that wound, if it is a small one, as mentioned above in the division; but if it is a large one that causes pain to the side of the abdomen, then administer the extraction of it with gentle and circular movements, and the cause of it is the least of all other causes that occur in the wound.
In the extraction of worms that generate in the wound, when you treat that which we have mentioned above in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the wound with sunlight.
And if here appears any cause of worms, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form: And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then pull out strongly with that, and do this movement repeatedly until all the worms are expelled.
But if they do not obey you, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following cream that we have mentioned; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that you use to apply the medical oils into the earhole with this instrument of which the following is its form: And make it of silver or iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and put it on top.
And so it should be done as if they are in the cavity of the catheter for containment here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the earpick —, and then insert the ray above and express your hand on that, applying a warm compression to the area until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And that which is in the earpick should already be heated slightly by the fire. And be careful that the cause of what you will distill in the earpick is not too hot, because the medicines of the earpick cannot bear it.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of opacification of earwax.
Some people have wax in their ear canals from birth, and this has happened to some men, opacification in the meat of the earpick due to plaque or no wax at all in that area; and this opacification is sometimes made in the prepuce of the tragus of the earpick which does not allow the evacuation, and sometimes in the parts before.
And in that part of the patient where they do not understand the diagnosis, it is in the major difficulties for healing.
And in that part where you have achieved the diagnosis, place the patient's ear to the sun and look at that. And if you see an abscess appearing, open it with this thin needle of which the following is its shape:
If the tip of it in which the width is small has one part sharp and the other not; and the needle is two lions wide so that it does not pierce the ear.
And if the abscess is made of flesh in the ear or in its meat, then open it with those small and pointed needles and pierce it with great force until all the flesh is out.
And if the abscess is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and burn it with fire for a short time, and then put it into the meat of the ear.
And so if the patient has felt an oppression that facilitates that which they have, due to the weight of the effort, the pressure of it facilitates; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
And so place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the trachea that you have wrapped in the groin; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any and push it into the abscess and powder it over it according to three, and use it; and if you see that the ear is already infected, then cover it with a cloth and replace it with another that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled rosin, until the abscess is safely drained; and cure it within that time when it is healed.
If there is an outflow of pus, then submerge a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it over the ear, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of azoth, which occurs in the eyelids.
Azoth that sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes, some are wet, and others are dry.
Therefore, you should hold those eyelashes or eyelids, and cut those eyelashes from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the following.
If pain is caused by blood flow from a vein, then you should cauterize those eyelashes with a thin cautery.
The best cauterization is to remove the incisions and dry areas when there is any cause of the eyelids; and when the fire is applied, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
On the treatment of granuloma that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Some dry areas occur in the eyelids of the eyes, which are similar to granuloma in their strength and hardness, and by growing it is called.
And there is an accumulation of thick humidity under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider if the large ones come from that which appears on the eyelid and is moistened to all parts; and the cause of it is unclear.
Therefore, make an incision through that which is on the eyelid and remove all parts that facilitate its escape, and then suspend it with sutures and cut off that part.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures and cure that part until it is healed.
And if it is small, then it will not be a problem for that part which the oil of it restores to that and encases.
And if the large ones are declining to the parts inside of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the large one with sutures, another that you indicate for incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it is not known in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and cure the area with that which is inside that will heal it.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray, which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly in the children, aggravating the wounds of those and causing their catarrh to the most; and they cannot see the light of the sun because of that which tears are caused to them.
And so you see them talking all the time on their faces, and on their faces when they sleep; and they have their eyelids closed with humid tears, which have already covered inflammation, and imminent danger appears in the eye; and when you press the area with the fingers, you can feel the inflammation inside them.
And some operation is performed on that which the patient places on their head and on the cloth that covers them, and they make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and they place that over the other and press with the fingers of all in order that inflammation be added in the middle of the circle, and they make an opening in the middle of that humidity which is incident in the incision through the latitude, and the incision is not greater than the incision that is made in flap surgery.
May you cut the vein completely until you reach the arch, where in the most dispositions, processes, and arch, archernach is used for healing through a white, grayish slit.
Then extract those bandages that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the foramen, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
And be careful not to adjust in the slit so that the space does not reach the bone and causes those.
May you not adjust in the arch at the beginning of the slit, but rather adjust a small bandage in the slit before proceeding with archernach; and then extract those that we have mentioned; and moisten cloths in water and vinegar, place them over the area, and strengthen those bandages.
And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the slit to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
And then care for it until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a healing ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
About the methods of touching the heart.
When the lids of the heart are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then those methods are applied to the heart and made to become ways of maladies such as frequent tears and softening of the lids and a cloth until that cause of destruction of the heart which is called tactinir of the heart, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
And therefore cover that the head of the patient is in your left hand; then convert the lid of the heart to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in the part that is closest to the lid behind the lid, and make the needle penetrate the part above, and that is — near the margin of the lid where the hairs are — near the hairs, and pull the part above to the lid, and convert it to the right.
And approach the part behind the edge of the eyelid, between the hairs, with a blunt instrument that is inserted into the lacrimal canal; and then remove the hair and place it behind the eyelid, covering it with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then place your finger over the eyelid to hold it in place.
However, it is important to note that the figure should be adjusted according to the amount of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and some may require a greater incision into the eyelid depending on the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then approach the blunt instrument over the two lines that you have placed, and begin at the lacrimal canal and insert it into the lacrimal duct. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape off all of it, and adjust the stitch on both lips with some thin thread or wool, and wipe away any excess, and if you wish to do so, you can also apply some ointment to the eyelids.
And then loosen the stitches of the wounds in three or four days, and care for that.
And if you want, leave the stitches of the wound open, and treat that with a drying and constricting agent, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its swelling; but open stitches are better, and therefore apply this remedy for two or three days.
But it is also important to be careful with the patient, and this operation is good, and not in fear.
And there is another method in taxingir, and it is that with a hook-like instrument, and lift the eyelid at three finger widths, separating and gathering according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do that, then take one needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal major, and the second into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the threads so that the needles are equal, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, and lift the entire eyelid over the area where it should be placed as recommended.
And then adjust the two sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside to be healed.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning or end of your finger, cover that abscess with a cerate and the same ointment, and apply it.
And some wounds near the eyelid that are turned inside out, then cover that with the same ointment as we mentioned at the beginning; but stitching is more artificial in that place.
Stitching the cannula follows this form: and you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is given according to what I have said; and then, by art, make two cannulas or two thin needles of which the length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs should be slightly less than the width of the suture. You have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each subtilitat under that which superfluously extends from the eyelid of the hole, and tighten the needles of each part with a strong tension, and leave it for several days until the thread for the tension dies and is denied and will rot within that which does not fit.
If it is too late, then break the mass in the arm, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is closed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
About the elevation of sharp hairs in the arm when the hair is hard.
When they are not natural, hard, sharp, and prickly hairs, then the operation is to take a thin needle and place it in a soft and smooth leather, and then adjust the extremities of it and do not nail them in a way that is too rough. And the length of the leathers should be the quantity of one palm.
And then you can make another thin leather under it in short, and use the extremities of that if you want to.
And then place the patient's head on your knee, and position it near the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that needs to be sutured, and make it penetrate quickly before it goes beyond the natural edge of the eyelid.
And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelids, and take one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand out through the opening in the eyelid that is not sutured, and pull it out through the eyelids and back to its natural position.
But if it is not sutured and the eyelid does not close, pull it out through the parts that you have composed on that one, until it closes again.
And let that heal with the vision of the eye, as you will pull it out and close it, and groan and clutch the eye, and leave it closed for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals well.
And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural ones, and lift it up to where it should be long enough to cover the area, and then lift it up.
Chapter 13.
Of the cure for ehracatir, which occurs in the eyelid above.
When there is ehracatir in the eye, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs above, on the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it on that area where there is a piece of cloth between them, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use treatment for this from the causes that dry and constrict; because if you do that it will return worse than ever, as it has never been treated before.
Use in those cases where a softening exists as it does with fenugreek, and rub the liquid on the area that is high and sown with it, or use dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
The treasure of your cure is that you pierce all the way through what is not consolidated according to the form that fire makes at the beginning.
And this operation, which we have said, is nothing but a certain correction of the misalignment that does not return the form of the area according to what fire gives.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of misalignment that is made in the eyelid.
This misalignment that is made in the eyelid, which is not properly called a misalignment; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Accidental misalignments are made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar methods.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then stretch the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the needle, and incise through the wide space. And if the shape of the eyelid returns to its normal position, then it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid behind.
And the ends of the two incisions should be made at two angles of the incision, which you have made when they meet, and make the angle from both ends when they come together to form their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then place the flesh at that length on the side of the eyelid behind it, which is the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool yarn; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices within which it is healed.
And if it is necessary to repair by a fissure or suture or cauterization, then cover that you cut the flat fissure on the eyelids according to what is preceded. And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of laceration when it is raised or lowered, that the blood should flow in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various modifications.
And the artisans always prepare everything in each possible way that it is possible to do within which he makes return the figure to its natural form, or near to that, and that patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid glued to the upper part of the eyeball, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, therefore you must insert the extramattar ray behind the eyelid, and elevate it above that, or extend it to the eyelid.
And then you insert the adherence into a fine space, which should not be sharp to avoid pain, having a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remains the space that does not descend the eyeball from its sharpness.
And your incision should excoriate that adherence with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put saltwater in the eye, which you wash; or you pour it in with a solution of cinnamon dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the eye socket, place over the eye a piece of cloth soaked in white wine, and use the third day's urine from a healthy person as a consolidative remedy until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
About the beginning of a finger and the height of flesh of the lacrimal sac.
You know that the finger has two types, one nervous, which is like a thin, hard bone; or non-nervous, like white, congealed matter, which when touched, often becomes infected and does not heal in it.
And these types do not begin until the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
If the type of work is in the beginning of it, then the patient places his head on the table, and then raises the eyelids, and with your hand, lifts the eyelid, and collects the finger from a little duplication and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into a piece of horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or similar, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle small by small and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and tie the nail firmly; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the piece of hair on the side of the nail which is the pupilla. And then continue with that into the back of the patient.
And then you insert the thin needle into the space between the patient's eyebrows or with small forceps, and cut the flesh of the lacrimal bone so that it does not become a continuous flow of tears due to this insertion.
And sometimes the nail is extended or firmly tied as we have said, and then it is scraped with the lion's tooth of which this is the shape of it:
And be careful that you do not touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or some powder made from sinapis, and leave that between the toes; and care for that which enters inside so that it becomes healed.
If the nail is not painful and you cannot insert the needle, nor is it stuck in that place, then this type of nail can be cured with certain medicines, and it can be healed as if it were an eye and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then first you open the thigh of the patient and take a thin lancet of sharpness according to this form: with thin sharpness. And if you see that it is rarefied and contracted and enters into that place, then first distill from your eye in the space of the powder made from sinapis or some rose oil or some salt, and apply it to the thigh on the other side.
And then repeat the operation within which everything that is of it has remained, unless that contrary abscess is in the thigh, because then you leave that, and cure the abscess as soon as it becomes healed.
And repeat your operation until she is healed within that reason.
If the nasal cavity is blocked by a large amount of mucus, it should be removed with forceps; and incise one part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to let out tears.
And then instill in the nasal cavity with saline solution and wait until she is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the incision of a small amount of flesh and about that which is born from meat adjusted in the nose.
Some flesh is born in the nose and is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly holds the eyelids to the parts of the eye and is assembled at the edge of the balustrade.
While the operation is being performed on her, the patient should pause his head in the chin; and then open her nostrils and collect all that flesh with forceps or in a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the nose that you do not let out that which is your operation.
And place your index finger, or the pointed spatula that we recommended in the beginning of the chapter on the nail, or small forceps that are used to collect the form of the nail as it approaches this chapter's end.
Then, when your incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt-crusted powder, or distilled in the powder roga and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place a piece of albumen inside to prevent infection.
And if there is any cause of alarm and it is necessary to be careful, and you fear infection, then empty the wound and treat that infection with whatever remedy is appropriate for that infection, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has been affected in this way.
However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is done naturally or by accidental means, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of blood in the wound.
Blood vessels that are turgid over the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing his operation, and they develop the wound for a long time.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the wound in which there is blood is strong and in which there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
And if you command the patient to put his head back on the bed, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that elastic band should be of double thickness according to this form:
or two elastic bands gradually in one place according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with fineness, and wipe away the blood frequently as they become re-absorbed into the wound and are turned back.
And be careful not to injure the wound with the ends of the spatula; and if your operation at the most is in the morning, and you are making a firm grip in your operation, do not insert only those veins.
When you have finished, then pour warm water or rose oil into the affected area to soothe the remaining pain from the scalpel.
But if it is not possible to do so at that time, then gather all the available herbs and apply them to the affected area to relieve the pain, and leave them on for several days until the pain is reduced and an abscess is prevented.
And then repeat the process until the patient is healed.
This is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX:
Of reducing hernias to their proper place.
When you treat hernias with a scalpel or sharp medicine after the previous description and it is not healed, then do not insert into it, but incise over the abscess to mature its contents and remove all the moisture inside and on the outside until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument with the following shape to clean it:
And if it is known that the head is hard, and made of iron, and the cap is redone as if it were a helmet that has been punctured by a sword or a halberd for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone that is corrupted, and gradually revolves it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and hemostatic causes.
Therefore, if the location is consolidated and is in good flesh and is free from the body and has been for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in the bone but to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a probe made of iron or sharp medicine, and when you have exposed the bone, then you take a tribe of this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as if it were so.
And place that over the bone, and that near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little from the heat, and then turn your hand to the tribe where it penetrates all the bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were burning through them.
Therefore, restore the place with astringent medical dressings that you have seen.
Therefore, since the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that flowed to the parts returns to its source, so that is more painful for the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
When the bone protrudes from its totality and does not cause harm or reduction in the movement, then loosen the patient, and let it follow, and place several bandages on the neck after scarification and suction for good drainage; and place a liniment on the bone made of acacia, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and strengthen the plaster on the bone with powders.
And the method for cleaning the pores is to take pieces of lion's mane, and each piece should be doubled in four places; and make those threads.
And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose. And then apply strong pressure on those pieces with a durable, tightly wound thread; and repeat the incisions with successive stitching; and then remove the stitches and leave the wound straight during the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes soft in between, then make sure it is straight.
And then remove the ligament as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, good; otherwise, repeat the application of the ointment to the pores and the stitching and the stitches until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the beginning of the elevation of the choroid coat.
When the disruption in the choroid coat occurs, and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids as if by a thick brush, and it takes on the shape of a person, and you want to incise it, the operation is performed as follows: first, insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below, and then place another needle double the thickness of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate; and then remove the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled thread and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strong pressure on that thread.
And then remove the needle and place it on the soaked wool infused with honey and lime water until the thread is pulled through the eye of the needle.
And then care for that part where the pain is located until it is healed.
And some bandages are made from the entire piece of cloth and adjusted to a certain size, and then perforated with a thin needle that goes through the center of the wound, and let the moisture seep into the wound, and lower the bandage and place it immediately.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of gout.
This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the wound like falling water and is not that one.
The way to work in it is that you make the patient lie on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in both arms and that one through which you see the sickness coming to the parts behind, and then let it dry and do not let it descend, and let the light be, and the disease will have its causes as usual.
If it does not come down in the lower part, you will know that it is water.
However, if the descent is not prepared in a healthy way, then make the patient spit between your fingers and take a thin, sharp instrument and place it on the cornea near the conjunctiva at the edge of the eye (where the vision is), until the sickness is expelled.
Then, when the sickness is expelled, you will drop this water with honey in it into the wound where you have mixed melted honey or water with which you have made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
And then treat the other causes until they are cured.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the water descending from the wound.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
Then you should make the patient spit between your fingers over a cloth and place it on the wound, then tighten it with a string.
And place your hand near the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand straight, if the water is on the right side.
And place your hand with a cloth, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand straight, if the water is on the right side.
And place the cloth near the edge of the eye near the bridge of the nose on the side of the thickest ray in the album of the eye on the side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then fold the cloth and turn your hand to that one.
And penetrate into the eye and feel that the cloth has already reached its cause due to sight.
And cover that the measure of the cloth is the same as the distance between the pupil and the end of the black, which is the bridge of the eye; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And place the cloth in the place where the water is, and then throw it down a little way away, and if the water descends at first, then remove the patient's sight from that place, and place the cloth in their eye.
Then take a short rest; if the water is drained, then stop at that other position in front where it is not yet cleaned.
And when it is dry and not drained, then you extract the mud easily with facilitated hands, and revolve them one by one in your clean hand, and dissolve them in the water; and then put a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the wound with that; and then place a cloth soaked in rose oil, almond oil, and egg white on it.
And those who are from our time have placed this on that wound with egg white.
And if you do not obey your hand to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of the men whose wound is hard -, then take that spatula which is called the elbow of which this is the form:
And then pierce it at that joint, and do not put your hand in the rough, and do not say that you are doing a delicate place.
And then enter the second medicine that we have mentioned.
And prepare the patient for their bed, which is made with a dissenting sleeping arrangement on which they lie on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on the patient's body to keep their nature calm and not cause any harm to their head or any other part.
And let the bandage be according to their position by the third day.
And remove that in the same dark room and exhale the foul smell, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not do that at the time of treatments or soon after the infusion. Having said that, you should do that so that the water can pass more easily and quickly through great and vehement excretion.
But if an abscess occurs, then remove the pus within the seventh day, and correct that with the same water that causes the abscess.
Then you should examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which exists in the darkest part of the body.
And then gradually remove that matter and talk about its causes.
And you should know that in some cases, the student of vision is not exempt from certain operations, and then you should be careful with the operation.
And we have already reached some of those things that are in the Arabic, and some say that fire is made in the air by piercing it with a needle, which is successful.
However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land or in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of fire by which one can be above those who do not know them.
And they are made of copper or iron properly, and their external parts are like this triangle, the sharp end is like that form.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment of flesh wounds in the nose.
When the flesh in the nose is injured by various causes, such as a sting from an insect or a polyp, and this disease is called a polypus, which resembles that pea represented. And from there the flesh is cancerous, black, of dark color; and from there the flesh is lion's skin, not of dark color.
Therefore, in those flesh wounds that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the wound with your hands and place it in the sunlight, and wash the nostrils of the patient, and pick out the pus from those wounds. And then extract that which you have understood from those parts of the wound, and then cut away that which you have comprehended from those parts with a sharp instrument, so that all the flesh is removed; because if there is any cause from which the abscission is possible, then you should remove that with one of the sharp instruments to facilitate it. If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has formed, then pause at that spot; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then apply a compress on the nose, near the entrance where the pus and blood or pus alone are found. If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has been healed.
If the moisture does not enter after the incision, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen from the bones of the nose to which it did not reach the abscess.
Therefore, after the incision, if there is any swelling in the area to which it belongs, and you blow into the mouth, and pause between each breath the amount of air that you normally breathe, and engage the patient and insert one end of the tube in the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
When that is done, draw the patient's scent towards them until it reaches the nostrils, and place it over their nose, as troops of children at school do when they perform this action, and it is the likely cause for that.
Then place one of the patient's limbs on their nose and the other under their nose, and administer a carrot remedy to the nostrils that are in the patient's mouth, and do this until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
Then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt and garlic, and do this for three days or more until the tongue corrodes all that is left of the meat.
And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plum catheter to cure them until they are healed.
But if you cannot cure them, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled olive oil and medicines in the nose:
And do that with silver or amber, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small container, and the same method.
And if you want, make a closed canula like that with a cane, and the canula of the instrument at the end of it is to purge and is flat, uncovered; to which the handle is on the back of it, and hold it when you insert it into the oil or the liquid that you want from the sucs and the causes suctiblas.
Chapter 25
Of the nostrils in the external parts of the nose.
When veins are swollen and painful outside the nose, and they are magnificent and ominous in other days when they are bent in a certain way.
And for that reason you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the patient, and extract all of it. Then place your hand or cautery or medicine that is burning in the place of the patient.
If the insertion is late until it becomes magnificent, then consider if it is calcified, hard, black color and little sensation, do not touch that iron which is a crusty abscess; because those swollen veins that insert this abscess end with that great malice on that one which the patient had.
And if the abscess is of yellow color and not black, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the place with that which dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
When the continuity of the nose, lips, and earlobe is dissolved by a wound or similar injuries.
You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is lost, it is not recommended to perform surgery on that person.
Therefore, if someone has any cause of those wounds, which you consider to be fresh and free from infection, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches and cure that wound as soon as possible.
And if the lips of the wound with lost continuity are already separated and each one is healing well, then make sure to remove any infected part of their skin as soon as possible. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and on top of that sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and apply trissat oil, and place a layer of diachylon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, leave it for two days or three, then remove that and replace the plaster and leave it until the wounds are completely healed.
May the surgeon add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread that you have made.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower abdomen in the parts below.
Sometimes boils are found in the lower abdomen of men, similar to hard pus-filled cysts, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should cut the abdomen and each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with three-stranded thread as soon as the wound is strengthened, and then clean it with warm water and heal the area with what has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the beginning of the flesh attached to the gums.
A lot of boils are found on the attached flesh to the gums, which the ancients called albulae, so you should suspend that with an onion or what you have with forceps and incise it at its root, and let the blood flow or the wound.
And place your hand over the affected area, or apply some hemostatic or styptic powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery does not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When sharp, rough, and sometimes blackened tartar is adjusted on the surface of the teeth, between the gums, and some veins are blackened and turn yellow or green due to that corruption, and the teeth become blackened.
And therefore you should scrape the patient between their teeth and place the cap of your instrument in their mouth, and remove those sharp tartar and similar sand that causes blackening and yellowing or other changes due to no cause, and this is how the blackening and yellowing and other changes are removed.
If that is still present at the beginning of the reasoning, it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and the third until it disappears in what you want.
And you should know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you can know which file is best for the part of the tooth that is to be filed and another file that is used between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
That you cure the tooth of all its pain and delay in the entire extraction of it, as there is no cause that exceeds the weight of it when it is extracted, as it is a sublimated substance within which the extraction occurs.
May it be that when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, that you must be certain which tooth is painful, as different weights deceive the patient and make them think that it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the sick and painful tooth is extracted, as we have already seen this in the operation of the teeth.
Then, since you must determine which tooth is causing the pain and what you know about it, first cover the area around the tooth with a spacer that contains some benefit, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum in all parts, and then remove that, or use sharp forceps at the beginning, bit by bit, until that concavity is formed.
And then place a large tongue depressor in the patient's strong teeth for good conversation or to prevent him from swallowing, and then pause the patient's head between your two thumbs that he does not bite, and then remove the tooth straightly in a way that does not cause more pain to the patient or himself.
And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to the tooth in all parts to facilitate and reduce the effort of its removal at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, cover it with cloth to strengthen it and use sharp forceps at its end to prevent it from being broken during your construction on that tooth.
And make sure that you perform the incision very carefully around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not tear away from there and remain separated, and return over the patient for the major pain that is the first pain of the patient.
And be careful that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for such women bring great harm to people, which are more difficult than those that are quadrupeds, and all of their reasons remain, or some of those, or that they extract from there with ignorant barbers have testified.
And the eradication of it is washed with water or with vinegar and salt.
And if there is an outflow of pus through the wound, as has been done by such women, then cut off some amount of sege and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not compare that sege, cauterize.
The form of the forceps is designed to be subtle and has handles that are not easily bent, so that they do not bend when applying force during an extended extraction process using a long, narrow, and thick manubrium and a large, broad handle.
And there should be times when the forceps are used with a large manubrium, so that when applying force, they do not bend, and the extraction process is long and narrow.
And the forceps should be made of Indian steel and have straight extraction handles, with the handles of which one is inserted into the other and applied with great force, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong and has great strength.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from impacted jaws.
When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted and causing pain, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is embedded for a day or two until the area becomes soft; then insert the forceps with handles shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird or a strong, sturdy shape, the form of which is similar to the beak of a ciconia bird.
The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth and hold these forceps or let you use them, then place a restraint on their head and cut through all the flesh and insert the instrument that is called the atali, which is a small hook with this shape:
And if it has a short thick end, make it small, and do not make it too thick so that it does not break.
Therefore, if the mouth is opened, proceed; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which the first one has this shape: a triangular-shaped extra-miter with some roughness.
The second instrument should have a triangular and more subtle end.
And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps, which has the following shape: And you will need other instruments that I will describe for the removal of teeth; because it is important to do this with this instrument which resembles an onion, and this is the shape:
from the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not thinly covered so that it is not three-cornered.
And another wise thing is that the instruments of the teeth are also similar to the other instruments.
May the craftsmen be wise and skilled in the art, atroba by such that they follow what it means for them to perform the operation and the various diseases; for some of these diseases are to those for which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, because of the different forms of various species.
May it be three-cornered if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are twisted or broken, then be careful to cover that in its place with what is convenient for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with how to do this:
And be in it some swelling little by little, and be stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is completely removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then lance that one and its surrounding area, and cure it before it becomes infected.
Chapter 32.
On the care of the most prominent teeth among the others.
When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, especially when they lean towards the lips or front teeth, you should consider: if a tooth is very close to another and cannot be removed without damaging it or its gum, then remove that one. However, if it is not closely connected to another tooth, use this instrument to extract it. It resembles a pig's tongue and is made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
And if you have inserted this instrument for several days due to the hardness of the tooth and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then use this instrument made of Indian iron with a similar shape to file it down.
And it should be all made of iron from India and the marguerite; and it should be pointed with a few, thin needles, like those that are made into hooks, and that the tooth should be sharpened slowly over several days for convenience, so that no other tooth becomes crooked and rotten. And then draw lines on the skin, and shave it with a razor.
And if there is a tooth that has been splintered and the tongue is injured, then make sure to scrape out that part where the roughness of that fragment is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
On the repair of crooked teeth with gold or silver.
When injuries occur to the teeth due to blows or falls, and the patient cannot bear that which is there, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold wire in those that are strong, because silver turns green and soon becomes porous, but gold never changes.
And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the thread is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two crookedness of the needle between two unhealthy ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And approach the incision again to the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not unhealthy.
And your stitch should be the one that strengthens the needle with the points of the teeth that do not slip.
And approach the excess of the needle on the outside with forceps or pliers, and add those in each place where you have done, and convert them to those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the unhealthy one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And leave that which is as tight as Roman.
If it is dislocated or torn, strengthen it with those or those other things in such a way that it remains in its place at all times.
This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
And when a tooth or two returns to its own cavity in such places, and is rebuilt as we have recommended, and remains straight.
This is not done by anyone but skilled craftsmen and wise ones.
Some devices are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they are made into teeth in such a way as to fit the place where the tooth is missing, and are strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the nerve that goes into the tongue and prevents speech.
This nerve that goes from the tongue to some devices or is natural to the one who was born with it, or accidental and has been consolidated by now.
And the operation involves opening the patient's mouth, exposing their tongue; and elevating it, then incising the second nerve ligament according to its latitude until the tongue is released from its recumbent position.
If there is any difficulty or resistance, and that is due to consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut it along the latitude until it is dissolved.
Be careful not to make a hole in the skin of the meat and that you cut here through the bone and allow the flow of pus.
And then wash the traces of the incision with water, vinegar, or water and flour; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out again while it is not consolidated.
If there is a flow of pus, place your hand over the abdomen to prevent it from falling out again; but if the wound is bleeding, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then approach those other causes that may be cured.
Chapter 35.
About the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, due to an abscess on the tongue, the tongue is prevented from performing its natural operation, and it becomes very swollen before filling the mouth.
And the operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth and examine the abscess.
And if you see that the abscess is of a dark or black color, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch that part.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you should put the onion in it, and insert a thin probe into it, and incise it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the wound with a triple cloth, so that it does not come out.
And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure that other cause according to the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and the other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble softness, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and is not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron because of the discharge of pus; instead, let it remain inside until it is ripe, and then either you will break it or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess of it has recovered completely or if it has diminished somewhat; and then make a serer on the patient, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it left with the instrument, which is a very noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
So when you press against that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then cut over that lesion, and take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull it apart as much as possible. Another thing you should pull out from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of this form:
Another thing you should pull out from the tunics, and then cut it with an instrument of this form: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, because they are sharp, and should be made of iron and thin.
But if this instrument is not at your disposal, then cut it with a knife of this form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have cut one vein, cut the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from any further wetting.
If there is bleeding from the wound, apply a solution of tannic acid or walnut shells and similar to the causes that stop the flow of blood, and then cure it within that time.
Some wounds in the groin may become other abscesses or those two boils, and incise those that I said at the beginning of two honey equalments.
You have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a brown color, with little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and had reached death if more time passed for one day or two.
The abscess had already become so large that it had half a dozen holes between two ribs.
Therefore, you should carefully puncture and insert it into one of its openings, and remove that, and then pour out a large portion from there, and then carefully incise the other wound, and close the mouth of the abscess, and cover its tongue, and then carefully insert the bone into that abscess.
And then remove a large piece of it, not all of it but a few small pieces. And then apply the appropriate remedy to that wound, and immediately start applying warm water, and soon after apply ointment, and do not stop incising into that abscess with a sharp instrument for a long time, and another abscess will appear in its place, which should be incised as soon as it appears.
And then apply a bandage and cauterize the wound with a pointed instrument, and thus stop the bleeding; and then walk around and do not ask what God has done to that person.
Chapter 37.
Of incising an abscess when it is formed.
When catarrh is formed in the abscess, and it is long, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the thick and round part, then it is called a bubble.
When it is cured with the remedy that we mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your treatment, and if after the abscess has been cauterized and becomes thin, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and not at the center, then cover the incision of it, because in that place there is fear for the patient.
And when you see that second hand which I have mentioned as white and long, you should make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that shapes it and place the nail on the new one, and pull that one down and insert it into one of the two instruments which are called in the introduction of two needles.
And do not insert it unless it is adjusted to the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it more, you will cause him to lose his speech.
And when you have inserted it, use that which we have recommended in the introduction of two needles, and cure it while it is still unhealed.
But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, use an engine in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cautery in his hand should not be anything but sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient's head on your own, and take the tongue with the instrument that we have mentioned, and take some of the water which we have mentioned in the title of cauterization, and comfort it as a living cause, and do not make it too thin or subtle, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument which is in this form:
The patient's abdomen is supported with a cushion like the cavity of a mortar, and the medical instrument is placed on the wound, and the patient leans on their side to prevent saliva or drool from falling from their mouth due to the intrinsic medicine, so that no such cause falls on the patient's clothing and that the patient does not suffer from it.
And place your hand on the medical instrument and press it against the uvula for a certain time until it becomes discolored and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that [the uvula] and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray through a tube into which the cloth adheres, and do this as many times as you want until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization, wipe around the uvula with a cloth dampened in the medicine, and change that which is in the circle of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it with warm compresses until it is healed.
And this kind of treatment is considered more dangerous at the beginning and longer in duration.
Some wounds are cured with this method that is more subtle than cauterization, which is cured by means of sublimation in this manner: take chamomile, yarrow, origanum, rue, scudaded Arabic gum, camomile, borage, and similar herbs to those of the plants, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of copper according to this method is placed; it can be made of silver or copper.
And the tip should be inserted into the patient's mouth until the steam reaches the uvula on the back of the throat, until the uvula is slightly obscured.
And repeat this treatment on those wounds until they dry, and be careful not to do this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would too much adjust in the abscess, and do not let you do that, but leave the declaration of the abscess to the doctor.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a rod and place a piece of wood on the outside of it, to prevent the patient's mouth from being smoked, because the wooden plug prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which sticks to the sole and other causes.
Thorns or other objects stick to the sole of the foot.
Then cover that which you are about to remove, with the gaze, so that you do not touch it with your tongue or any other instrument, so that it is declared what is in the sole.
And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the sole, cover it with the gaze, so that you make the patient vomit, so that the food is removed from the stomach, because often the cause attached to the sole is removed by vomit; or that the patient swallows a small piece of bread or a rag of linen or a bowl of dry bread; or take a sponge and soak it with salt water, and place it firmly on the patient's mouth, because as the sponge absorbs in the place where thorns and are removed, they are also removed. And then take an eel and boil it with bread, and remove the bones and skin; or take a pig and boil it with bread, and remove the bones and skin.
If you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
And it should be as thick as a small one, and in its removal, place the cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
And the aga is lifted up in sus, and guard yourself that the touch of his jawbone of the neck, so that it does not occur to him this and that which he puts into the bone or the spine, or that which the doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient enters the instrument himself, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause annexed and puts it into the bottom, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity that is prepared in him before he forgets.
Chapter 39.
Of extraction of blood attached to the gallbladder.
When the gallbladder blood is treated as we mentioned in the division of the cure of medicines and not with comforts, consider in the gallbladder of the patient at noon, since you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gallbladder blood, extract it with a small or precisely handled instrument.
And if it is not possible to remove that, take a concave canula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the canula, with a lighted iron, and do this as many times (until the gallbladder blood is dead and stays out of the gallbladder) and keep the patient away from all water for the whole day.
And then take a full bucket of water and wash the mouth of the patient with that, and do not let any of that water enter the patient's mouth for an hour, then bring another with their hand, because the gallbladder blood is already like the water cools.
If the recommended remedy has not been forgotten, then smoke the patient with camomile or assafetida using the instrument we have recommended for smoking in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do that, in four ways.
Another way of operation in suffumigation of that is to take an open container with burning charcoal and cover it with a cloth in the middle of which there is a tube, and place the end of the instrument in that tube; then remove the smoke; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the lungs, which are the most important.
And if not, then repeat the suffumigation more often, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be forgotten.
This is the form of the instrument used to treat hernia when it is visible; and it is similar to forceps with sometimes, except that it has some curvature in it. which is placed on the hernia, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is rubbed with a file, so that when it grasps any cause, it does not leave it.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the detection and cutting of abscesses.
Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the remembrance of them, of each one in this book.
And they are different in puncturing and cutting of them according to various methods, one of which is for the special type of abscess that is filled with pus; and because of this, they can understand about the moisture.
And the second method is for the places where the abscess occurs on the body, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess in the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific operation.
And more about abscesses, some of which are such that they should not be pierced until their maturation is near or complete.
And other abscesses, which are such that they should be pierced when they are ready, and not before their maturation is complete, just like abscesses that are near joints, an abscess that approaches a joint should be pierced before it reaches the area around it, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will cause damage to the principal member; or it is near the anus, therefore pierce that unmatured one; and do not pierce it while it is not fully ready for digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the surrounding area and is extended to the parts of the anus, and it should be made a fistula, or it should be done in the term of the abscess that is not healed. When you know the right time for the puncture of the abscess, that is when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the swelling of the pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in headache and pulse, and the increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other symptoms.
And you know that the puncture should be made in the place where the abscess is closest to the surface and where the pus comes from the highest part.
The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the trunk, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the locations of the tendons of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal locations where reflection does not occur; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until after the digestion of the abscess according to the following complement; because if you puncture it at that time, the duration of the disease of the poor man is prolonged, and very badly affects his mouth, and the depth of the abscess.
When abscesses are perforated according to the size of the flesh or the need, or according to what the member requires.
And when you administer small punctures, and in large abscesses, a large and wide section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where you should know that the incision should be made in the cavity and incised, when it is done as if you are cutting bread and making a slice, as in the case of those that occur in the armpits and groin.
And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are made as if you are cutting a sword blade, as in the case of the abscesses of the armpits.
And of those that are administered round and crescent-shaped incisions, and similar to those.
When the one who does not have any such thing as superficial abscesses, you should make that shallow puncture, or just flat.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, as it may cause the entire body to burst in that hour; having removed a part of it, and the next day introduce another part, and remove a larger part, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, or pregnant, or a small child, or elderly and in decline, as the animal spirit becomes more vulnerable at the exit of the pus, and the patient may die, and you should perform these operations.
Be very careful with this chapter and your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses, as it should remove the infection and consider whether the infection of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer the appropriate medicines for it or against it; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are deep, then you should wait to move them until they meet.
And if a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure the same with the juice that comes from the wound until it is healed.
And if blood flow occurs during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location where the bleeding is occurring.
And if the blood flow persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure as has been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
And if it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powders made of vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those on the locations.
And if it is in summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then make sure to apply powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be done before the next clean day, as we have said, and then remove the abscess and clean that area and administer in the care of it whatever is appropriate for it within the time it becomes healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the method of distinction that has already been said about all types of abscess and their treatment specifically by chapters.
Chapter 41
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck
Small abscesses in the neck, and especially those that contain tunic-like substances that are their own; and their species are as follows.
And some of them are sharp, and those that contain moisture similar to honey. And some of them contain moisture similar to honey and pollen, and those that are like their own; and some of them are stone-like, hard.
In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one does not fear, as it should not create resistance during the extraction of those.
In the operation in the section of those, you should use an instrument in the shape of which you can approach it, which is called a hook, as long as you know that it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then cut that section according to its length, and on the surface in this form:
And begin at the section of the line B until the line G. Then, as moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many returned, if there is any cause of it.
And then submerge it in Egyptian gum, if present, and otherwise, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that which is of that layer is corroded by that.
And then repeat the second application of the Egyptian remedy thoroughly and cleanly if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the remedy until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it in this way: with a sharp cut, in the shape of a crochet, and then insert between two lips of the incision and scrape that from all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
But if your surgical instruments cause resistance, then do what I have told you first of all.
Similarly, apply the remedy for healing and treatment as we have told you; incision over the pus-filled abscess is less painful, because it is of few scars and little moisture.
And some people have such abscesses in the head that they are never moist; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze it like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
In other head abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the gold, but the section of all these is a superficial section.
And pause the incision of those from the lowest part of them so that the health of the body is not affected by the lowest parts.
And then treat them with what is appropriate for that of treatment.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of those is within their own tunic, and as in the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
The specific types of these scrophulas are boils, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you have seen in good position in the Tumor, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the coda, and is mauve throughout, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not pronged, so that you incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that one throughout, and extend two tongues of the coda to the nipple, or to the motz nipples if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small one by one.
It is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And let the space not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you had incised a vein or ribs and prohibited your operation, then pause in the wound with three-pronged forceps or other powders which remain fluid of sanc, and clean the wound, and leave that inside which has paused the acuity of the abscess and is softening the wound and is beginning to be poyrida. When the tumor is removed.
Then return to your operation before you complete it.
And if there is any cause for other small abscesses, then open those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large abscess, do not open that abscess from its root. Before you close it with a strong and durable stitch, let it fall out by itself if it is not causing harm.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already submerged in Egyptian oil, and then care for that.
And if you open the entire abscess, then close the two lips of the wound and apply a poultice as soon as possible so that there is no remaining excess.
But if you see that there is still excess because of the size of the abscess, then open its root and drain it, and administer sutures and that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial puncture here where it appears to be maturing on your hand, and pause the puncture of that which is at the bottom of the chest, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, using a similar instrument and remedies, to eradicate that which has been removed from the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then cure that wound with a generated piece of flesh before it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess within the thigh.
The ancients called this section in the hip, and I have not seen any man in our land who has made that incision.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have a bent knee, the incision should be avoided in order to extract the hip joint, as it would not be done properly for fear of all the veins and the main parts of the body being affected.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the patient is not in a coma, use the section of the epiploon to prevent death, which is done by puncturing.
Therefore, when you want to do this, cut the epiploon into three or four small sections of the epiploon, depending on the size between two circles for quantity, which is in the cavity, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for sectioning, which is private from flesh and the vessels of sinew of which are soft.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat outward, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if possible from those causes.
And then cut the lip second, as recommended; and it is indicated over the section of the canal through the flap which is of that eye which is from there and for the disruption of the lip and for the abscess of the mouth.
Let the wound be left open for some time.
Since the hour has come when this puncture is feared, add two strips of bandage to the wound, and leave it alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that do not harm the flesh until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the sermon we have recommended is nothing more than that the physician should open the abscess as soon as possible, and the patient dies from this, and the physician opens his mouth, and they incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, the wound should remain open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and this evil lasts for three days; and therefore, in that case, the physician should leave the wound like this, and cure it within the time it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a spoon in the patient's mouth and punctured a part of the lung canal, and he was called to its cure, and immediately the breath returned as it does in the breath of the dying, and the wound was discovered and the blood that was in the wound was removed.
Therefore, it was found that there was no incision of the vein or guide, and the wind was from the wound, and the wound was healed with fire.
And if the servant does not recover in the foot, and then return to the better position of his arrangements.
And now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the section over the abscess that occurs in the groin, and it is called groin hernia.
This abscess called groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no cure.
And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar to an abscess that is caused by the rupture of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not allow him to make pressure on it with iron unless it is small. And you should examine that part and investigate whether it resembles a hard knot, and if it is not suspended from any of the veins, then insert that which is there like a node, and extract that which contains the bone and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire condition, and apply treatment with what will cure it before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 45
Of the separation of the kinds of nodes.
Of the different kinds of nodes that I have already mentioned in their division.
And do not allow him to make a doubt between a node and an abscess when you count it as such.
So you say that an abscess is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the superfluous substance is calmed; and it is a complete putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
But a node does not have heat or fever or pain, and it contains that which is called the lion's tail, which is in the swollen sac itself.
And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a swelling and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and it belongs to two species, because it contains fat and moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Then, when you reach the cure of the node, remove that and inquire about that which begins to protrude at the beginning of the instrument called the intrames, according to its form, which is as follows.
And it is necessary to inquire about the abscesses and all the nodes, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate the tips of this instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the codena.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and remove the intrames and consider what is found in its traces.
And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert it into the dry section according to what I said in the other abscesses.
If there is no moisture on the footprints of the entrance, then it is dry.
And if it is dry on the surface, it has the shape of a crocodile according to this form: As you were taught, suspend that arm, and exorcise the vein from all parts to facilitate, and keep the cloth or bag over that and remove the blood from the wound.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that blood, and you should wait for that until it stops flowing without any cause.
If it continues to flow too much or too little, the wound returns to its original state.
And if you see that some small part of it is still flowing, then apply a layer of some corrosive powders and strengthen the layer, and place your hand over the area where the abscess is, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
And if the wound is large, then you should cut the two lips of it and cure that from that which contains.
If the pulse is opposite or not, then you should cover and fill the place with a bandage that is made of vinegar and linen, leaving it for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation of the sinus stops; and then return to incising that which remains of the swelling.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one being large, one medium, and one small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They are made of iron, of awl, and of the rounded ends of the instruments, in order that the instrument may not be injured by the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the puncturing instruments, and they are named albed and one of them is called bers.
And of three spices, one of which is great, pepper and salt.
The shape of the great spice, the shape of it:
The shape of the pepper, the shape of it:
The shape of the salt, the shape of it:
It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils that between them are of the bones and other causes.
And they make needles, large, lions, such as great golden needles with which the shuttles are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best when they are made of copper.
And they make the spices of black pitch, which are like those that for them are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, that are reflected by their levity on those reflections.
And of three spices, one of which is long, and the others are pepper, and the others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of it.
The shape of a large swelling:
The shape of a small swelling:
The shape of a tiny swelling:
The shapes of the fingers are of special types, which are simple joints, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
And there are also knuckles, and there are three kinds.
And among those, there are joints with two curves, and there are three kinds.
And among those, there are joints with three curves, and there are three kinds.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a medium-sized simple joint, the form of which is:
Shape of a great oak tree with two curves: Shape of a great oak tree with two bends: Shape of a great oak tree with two curves:
Shape of a great oak tree with three curves:
Shape of a great oak tree with three bends:
And these are the shapes of the sharp and sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds, one of which is large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
Shape of a small scalpel:
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but rather so that it can be done well in the excoriation of nodes, to avoid injury to the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it is cured for the patient and also quietness a little for the adjustment of which is the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of amulets, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
These are made of wax and are similar to the rays of the sun, which is made into an alcohol.
And it is on the outside where the pointed star is hidden and in that place, when you want, as you see.
The forms of stars, which are hidden among the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the wounds, and there are three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of those which are cut off from the flow of blood, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
These are made of wax and are round with a certain length, and they are subtle.
And you should have large, thin, and few of these special types of bandages, because in order to remove those abscesses with speed in necessity, and when the first and primary medicine is not enough.
However, do not use these to lance abscesses in all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the thighs, arms, breasts, belly, and testicles, and similar to their fleshy abscesses.
And some bandages are made from those other tools, similar to small scissors, according to this form; by which the abscess is lanced when it is done by lithotomy, or when you need to enter a vein or an artery.
And some bandages are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
About the treatment of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Some women inflate their breasts to compliment the fact that they are losing weight, and then they inflate their breasts, assemble their breasts like those of women, and they are far from being men.
And to those who have that, cut those areas in the shape of a crescent moon, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the entire scab, and place the plaster of flesh-colored medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with cotton, and cure that before it is healed.
But if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as if it were a woman's, then cut it in two at the most elevated part, into two sections similar to crescent moon shapes, each of which should contain the other, within the line that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and G. And then excoriate the cord that is between two lips of the plaster, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the healing before it is healed.
If you do not complete the initial step of inserting a needle into the patient's skin due to their unease or due to blood flow, then cover the affected area with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it in place until it begins to fester, and then cure that area which is infected.
Chapter 48.
On the puncturing of abscesses that come from the breasts.
These abscesses that come from the breasts are of the species of scrofula, hard lumps, which contain a pus pocket.
And of those that contain moisture, some are to be punctured with a dry moon-shaped needle: from the line G to the line B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess have been evacuated, then you should complete the wound and leave it open until the next day.
And as soon as the wound has healed, it should be treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the lymph nodes, and of the scrofulous glands, is present, then you should incise it as we have mentioned in the section on scrofulous glands equally.
And if the plague has spread to an area that cannot be reached, then apply the cautery as we have mentioned in the previous section.
Chapter 49.
Section on the incision of abscesses that occur due to injury or vein.
When an injury occurs and the wound is healing over it, then abscesses and signs such as inflammation and abscess occur due to the artery or vein: because when an abscess occurs due to injury, it is longer attached to the chest; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a crackling sound.
And those that occur due to vein are located at the back of the body.
And incision of this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are behind the shoulders, and in the angles, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore avoid incising it, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
May you place above the one that is theirs due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the arch, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
And approach that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the arch with a sharp double edge in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
And approach the place between two ligaments with a space in which it is entirely in, and dissolve the abscess.
And approach the administration of treatment in which pus is generated before the ligaments fall; and cure that with suitable remedies to that before it is healed.
And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have your hand above that which is at your possible from the abscess to the section, and approach the needle after the place you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread before you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess according to what I have told you in the vein of grape4 of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the needle at the beginning of the abscess and strengthen the threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess at its lowest point before the pus inside is removed, and then insert the needle into the excess of the thread, leaving what is left in place.
And then place a compress soaked in vinegar and oil over the area, and then administer the cure that is made with cloths and tinctures until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, an abscess occurs in the arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is done in the places of assistants or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are painful.
When the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient's body, and when it is stretched with great force, the patient feels a sudden shock.
And the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is bruised at all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be pricked with iron, because it could cause a contraction.
But those who are in the head or forehead, let the needle be left alone. But if the abscess is small, then use those tools and cut that from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a ligature, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage on it, and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Chapter 51
Of the lancing of an abscess that occurs in the cheek and also in the belly.
When some men have moles in their abdomen and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that function as mushrooms, and the reason for this is subtle, and the head of these is large; and already their lips are converted, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts which were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those that are white, of less reason.
And already their lips were inverted and they opened, and moisture was running from there all the time.
Therefore I inserted these and again in one foot 18 lines and the other 6 lines.
And the operation in the beginning of their insertion is that you consider if the patient is wet, and the color of the skin is white, wet, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a thin needle, and keep it in your presence, and heat the cautery in the fire, because the moles that cause section of these must be expelled by burning; and if you find the burnt part, cauterize it.
If the patient is feeling pain and fear, keep a sharp sword away from them; instead, take a recent splinter, strengthen that arm, which we have mentioned, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the stricture of the splinter; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large wound in the arm until it is abscised and falls off by itself.
However, if the arm is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and pain, especially in that which is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you incise the wound of the arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, of little sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
And if you find any memory of cancer, remove it immediately.
Chapter 42
Of the cure of an elevation of the navel.
An elevation of the navel is caused by various causes; either by fissures in the umbilicus, which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia can come out; or by a swelling that flows with blood or serum, as it is called; or by constricted ventosity.
If it is by fissure of the umbilicus and through protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in different positions. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned before, with greater diversity, and as you press on that part, which is called the abdomen, it becomes hidden, and return; and frequently it is accompanied by severe pain, and a great deal of effort is required to introduce it back.
If it is by moisture, then the pain is severe and does not disappear when you press on the abdomen, nor is it constricted or inflamed.
And if it is for pus, then apply these signs to the swollen part of the wound.
But if it is for meat, then the pus is heavy, large and hard, and it forms a second quantity.
But if it is for moisture, then the touch of it is like lion's skin.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the elevation of the navel is due to pus from an abscess or vein, or due to moisture; then you should avoid its treatment, because in that case there is fear and dread as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from an abscess and a vein.
And if the elevation of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their own belly and stand still; and then carefully examine the entire navel circumference, and command that it be held between your hands on the belly, and carefully circle the spatula wide around the navel over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the main part of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then carefully apply the fleam or the lancet and the method of cutting.
And then take the lubricant that has been extended over the bandage and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have not done so previously or guarded it through the bandage, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the abdomen.
And if you have taken off the bandage, then take that needle and remove the excess of it.
But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and place them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh is extended and falls out; or insert that when it becomes thin and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the mouth with water until it is healed.
If the abdominal eminence is made of flesh and nothing else, or due to wetness, then cover the abscess with what we have said and break the pus or the wetness that is in it, and then cure that wound with a suitable remedy that covers and heals it.
Chapter 44.
Of the cure of the neck.
We have already said, in the division, of special cases of the neck and how to treat it with medicines, and that it is advisable to use iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the greatest and most careful treatment of it.
And the ancients said that some neck tumors are in places where eradication is possible, such as the neck that is in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of it, and especially when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not try to remove it yourself, because you cannot heal from that or I have not seen any other, nor that it has reached that.
When the operation is performed as we have said, you precede and leave the patient and purge them of black bile for some time, and then sign that, if it is found to be evident replacement.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they should be located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause complications; and then examine all parts of the body thoroughly before starting the operation. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in the same way, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
But if you have difficulty stopping the flow of blood from a vein or an artery, then cauterize that area while the bleeding is still flowing, and then care for that wound until it heals.
Chapter 44
Of the cure of hydrocephalus.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy with water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure by medical treatments.
And the one that is cured by iron is only the species of altitudes alone, and it is not approximated to iron for the species of temporists or the species of hypophysis, because it is deadly.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy temporists with medical treatments and do not compare your treatment, consider whether the patient has been weakened, or if it is another illness of the same kind, such as coughs or stomach ailments and similar to those, then keep in mind that you should not treat it with iron, because fear is over it.
But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another illness but only hydropathy, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give them water to drink from the specific part behind the pecten, and then take a sponge in this form:
It should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a needle; but rather it should be in some shortness little by little, so that in the operation it does not pierce into the intestine, and that it does not harm that one.
And then consider if the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, because it is customarily said that you should make the incision along the belly for the length of three fingers behind, on the right side of it above the pubic bone.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to illness of the groin, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for the length of three fingers.
And if the generation of hydrocele is due to the testicles, then your incision should be on the right side.
And do not make your incision on the side on which you wish to place the patient, so that the excess does not flow to that place.
And then pierce the entire cavity with the instrument, and then insert it into that incision, and raise your hand between the cavity and the abdomen, and you scrape that one; and if the quantity of an inch or about.
And then approach the patient's mouth and insert the tube until it reaches the space where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: and is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine gold, or of lion's hair, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two on one side and one on the other; and it is sharpened at the tip according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
And at the upper end of which there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, you can hold it over the instrument and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or an accident could happen to him.
You should evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what means for the patient's health, the condition of his body, and his goodness.
And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes such pain, which is usually held by the catheter, which releases the tube that is on the tip of which you are advised to pierce that second in that way.
And then repeat the process with the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much water out.
However, if you are afraid of causing harm to the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that part with burial in sand, and moisture in bath, and under the sun for a long time; and cure that part with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the melon and the leg as soon as you have completed the extraction of water, according to what I have previously said.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated urinary tract.
Some of the children are born with their head outside of their mother's womb and the top of their skull is not perforated (or is straight or not in its place).
Then cover the head with a soft cloth as soon as it is born, according to this form:
And place a thin nail with a flat head on the misaligned skull and tie it for three days or fourteen days.
And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
If you do not place the flat head, the urine that passes over the area may not clean this cover.
Then the one who was misaligned should be treated with a flat nail, as we have said, for several days until it is straightened out.
Then those in which the misalignment is not in its place, the cause of this is that one who was born with his head outside of his mother's womb cannot urinate at the parts below, until the midwife raises the child to the parts above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother according to its straightness, and it is a malady due to the position.
The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the bone of the patient with your left hand during forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife of the location of the periosteum sharply, as if writing with a pen, or do not cut any part, so that the edge of the bone of the patient resembles the tip of the knife and the blood falls into the wound after extraction.
And be careful that in your operation of phlebotomy, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at that point where you cut the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66
About the white substance that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the bone and corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the bone.
Four things often go wrong with this white substance on the bone and its prominence of flesh.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not.
No-malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut open the one that contains all of those monsters; then place your hand over the area where the oil seeps in; and then apply the oil that is cured to heal the wound.
And if the malignant one is deep, cover it with a red cloth, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if the malignant one is on the prepuce of the penis that has not been circumcised, and one part of it is inside the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover the one that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and then heal the deformity, because when you heal it, the prepuce may not be safe from infection.
And if there have been accidents in the genitalia and the black and curly prepuce, then cover everything that has already been discolored and that is about to be corrupted or that is already corrupted; and apply linens over that with a mixture of honey, which is pounded with wheat flour, and sorrel, and thistles, and cress.
And then cure the other wound until it is healed.
However, if there is excessive bleeding, then administer the silver cautery in this manner:
where the pointed cautery is applied at two positions together, one to stop the bleeding and the other to the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then make sure to insert a catheter into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those cases where the foreskin is known, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to inflammation or abscess) make sure to excoriate with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to dislodge those exquisitely, then make sure to excoriate with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply some force when the foreskin is thin, as it is easily perforated by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already prepared in the water soaked to prevent other infections from occurring.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it becomes consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of those who have undergone circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as in other plagues: nevertheless, since it is our operation and our will, and the latter is properly in children, it is necessary to assign them to a better operation and make them less likely to be lost to salvation.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience that the majority of craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and a file; and they use a rope and a needle.
And I have already tried all these methods and none has brought better relief than the use of forceps, or a string that can be used to pull out the foreskin, which is under two tunics, and then remove the tonica, and often it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain. And the method used for circumcision, which is done by a pliers, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not safe for the incision of the end of the male member, because it often goes into its wound.
In the operation, a nail, if it is sharp and rusty, will ruin your operation. The foreskin of the child is naturally short, and if it is stretched in such a way that it does not require circumcision, I have seen such cases.
However, the best method of circumcision that I have seen, which is done with forceps, a string, and a needle, is to make an incision of equal size on both sides, so that the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and since your hand is proportioned to two sharpnesses, and the incision is made in one step; and it is a compression of the foreskin in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis, which does not make any mistake at all.
The first step of the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, so do not do anything else but hold him firmly in your arms until the next day.
Then make every effort to cheer him up as much as possible in that position where he receives your understanding. Then make sure he is between your arms, well prepared and not naked; hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
Then place your hand on his back and blow into the mouth, and pull out the one that is sitting at the top of his back, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
This is the shape of the forceps for extraction:
The one end of the forceps should not be sharp and the other end should be sharp, so that it does not damage the root of the tooth, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to lift the entire or part of the neck from the beginning.
Therefore, you should extend that of your hour from the beginning and insert it into the abscess at the same depth.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a hook and insert it.
If they have passed three days, and it is swollen more than the skin allows, then let that go into the apostema carefully, and scrape that area gently, and index that second which you have prepared.
And beware of the skin, so it does not touch that area.
And heal that area with the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is indexed too deeply, and you observe the parts above, that area does not need to be treated.
And heal that area until it is healed.
Chapter lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a narrowed urethra, or a tumor, or flesh, and similar to those that we have mentioned about the methods of cure in the division.
And if that water is not dissolved and is done forcefully, then make the cause over the patient, so that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which is in this form: It is made of silver and has a fine lion's head, like a pen needle, at the end of which is a thin needle.
And the way to extract the urine for that person is to take the thin end and tie it with wool or thread for good hold; then insert the tips of the thin end in the back part of the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the bladder.
And place the patient on a bed, rub their body with a warm cloth and oil it with olive oil and vinegar.
And gently insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the urethra; then bend the catheter over to the side of the belly; and gently push the catheter into that opening, and another one into the bladder, so that the patient can urinate, and if this order is not followed correctly, it may cause harm.
And gradually extend the catheter to the tip of the urethra, where the urine will collect on the thread.
And remove that catheter and perform the procedure to drain the urine, using a catheter, do not stop doing this until the bladder is empty and the patient is relieved.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of catheterization of the bladder using a cystoscope and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or it is congealed in that place, or it is constricted by inflammation, and you want to drain fluids and medications from that place, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
but its tip is blunt, so it is closed. And in that place there are three parts: two from one side, as often.
In the beginning is a cavity, in which that substance is placed, and as much as it holds, is added, until when any cause is drawn from that place, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, that substance is drawn out, and when it is pulled out long, according to what the clampcedra does in the battles of sea.
Therefore, when you want to drain fluids from the bladder, insert the tip of the clampcedra into the liquid, and draw out that substance which is placed in the parts above, because the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the catheter made of stone into the urethra as we recommended in the circle; and then apply moisture to that, which moisture will pass through to the bladder almost immediately, and the patient will feel it.
The shape of the thin needle that is used when the bladder is punctured, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or copper, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the canal is inserted into it.
And then take the bladder and place it in the moisture that you want to puncture in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
And then introduce the tip of the needle into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already reached the bladder.
If you do not see the bladder, then take a glass and make a circle from it; and perforate that completely through its thickness; and then insert a strong thread in those places, as if it were rolled up; and then add the circle where it is also attached, more than you pause in that water that you want to use for the moisture, and smell and taste.
And then bring that instrument near to him and do as you have done with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder into your hand.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed the different types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
And I will tell you about those that are exposed and shortened.
Therefore, it is said that stones formed in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among its symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower back, and they are treated with those remedies.
And it is the cure of children who have reached fourteen years old; and it is difficult to treat in the elderly. In young people, it is considered for that reason.
And of that one whose stone is larger and treatment is more difficult; And if it is less, it is opposed to that one.
Therefore, when we reach the treatment of that one, cut at the beginning of that which cripples the patient, who extracts all the wound which is in his intestines; because that wound sometimes prevents the entrance of the stone due to its inspection of him.
Then press the patient's feet and be steady and strong in order that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some other place.
Then make that incision between your fingers prepared, and the muscles of him should be left under the things of him, in order that the bladder is entirely made inclined to the parts below.
And then remove all of that wound.
If you feel a stone in the space, then immediately make a quick incision over it.
And if you cannot remove all of the matter, then apply oil to the affected area with your left hand, if the patient is a child, or with your right hand if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum. And then remove all of that stone. And gradually move it towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your hand, and expel it through the same incision where you made the cut.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the area above, and his left hand to remain on the cord that is under the thighs, in the part of the body where the incision was made.
And then insert a sound with this shape: And divide that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be over the stone, and let the section be made on the stone, and let there be a transverse section, so that the section is wide enough and narrow enough according to the quantity that the stone allows, and not too much, because the stone easily damages the part that is on the stone, and it is forgotten due to its difficulties.
And know that there is a stone from which the angle and margin are sharp, so that the insertion of it is difficult for that.
And from that which is like a lion's claw, and it is round, and it is made of the same material and insertion.
Therefore, if it is that which has sharp angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then carefully place it over that, or gently press it on that with a tool that has a sharp end, which is like a file, and does not slip from it; or insert a subtle instrument with a curved end behind it.
If you cannot do it on that one, then expand the wound slightly, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut into it strongly with a three-faced vitriol tripod.
If the stone is larger than one, then at first you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it over it; and then insert a little water; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you incise that great section, which causes the patient one of two causes: either they die or they develop a continuous stream of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
If you administer expulsion of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you use the forceps in the fracture of it, enter through the teeth until it is extracted.
Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and press that one. And place a cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water on it, to prevent the abscess from spreading.
Then gently lay the patient on their back, and do not pull the bandage until the third day.
And when those days have passed, warm the area with water and oil, and cure it with the ointment of finicon and the ointment of diabazilicon until it is healed.
However, if in the same place an abscess occurs that is hard and corrosive, and if it is similar to the one that is in the bladder frozen, and if it is prohibited by the urine (and that is known as the exit of the bladder with urine), then introduce the said thing into the bladder and extract that pus, because it can cause the corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the area with warm water and salt, and with whatever is appropriate, with the solution that is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And cover all the hours of the patient's care, approach their bed and adjust the medications placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is stuck there, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure that which you have recommended to reach the state of dryness, because too many troops are used for this treatment and it is known as dryness; and already I have extracted it, and it is your task to take a piercer made of iron with a sharp point, of which this is its form:
of triangular extraction, sharp, stuck in the handle.
And then take a thin thread, and tie that bladder behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, piercing it until the piercer reaches that stone. And then rotate the piercer with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce its opening until you make that from the other side penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then place your hand on that which is protruding from the stone of the part of the body where the verge is, which is soaked in water and is forced out by urine, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure is not applicable to you for some reason that prevents it from being done, then place two cloths on either side of the stone and two cloths above the stone. And then press on the stone in that part of the body between two ribs. And then remove it. And then remove the membrane and clean the wound, which is done in the place.
It is not necessary to place a cloth on the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other cloth above should not be placed there, because when the cloth is removed from the stone, the codex returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for that reason, when you have placed the cloth above, you must raise the codex to the parts above, or return it to its original place and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Extraction of a stone from the female bladder.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
However, if you see a stone in one of those, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many hands.
One of them is that the woman has strong sexual desires.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who knows how to describe if the doctor is chaste, or has had many marriages.
The third is that you do not have a woman who knows this art, especially the operation itself.
And the fourth is that the location for incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
However, if you need to do that, then make sure you get a wise and knowledgeable woman.
However, if you are not able to find that, then seek out a skilled and cunning woman, or present a wise and experienced matron who has been involved in this matter, or a woman who has already participated in this art.
Then do that presently, and command the patient to do everything that you will order, from the examination of the stone until its removal; the reason for this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case cover your finger with the cloth and examine her anus.
If you find it there, cut it off from that place, and then command the patient to scrape it off.
If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert your finger into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, placing your left hand on the bladder, and carefully feel for it.
If you find it there, gradually insert your finger into the opening of the bladder towards the parts below the symphysis pubis until it reaches the stone.
Then scrape it off from the upper part of the vagina at any point where it is stopped and cut the stone into that part, and do not leave any part of the stone behind.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then enter the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that you know how much the stone is from that.
And you know that the types of stones are round: one of those is small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and have hooks.
Therefore, you know how many types there are of that for what you mean about what you want.
And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that location for three hours and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure you prepare with the tools that are called for in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want to remove the sand, and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the urethra that is incised, then you place powder on that location and strengthen that with a pulp and structure, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because very likely the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Since the intensity of the pain decreases over several days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia.
A hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white gut, which is the sac of the testicles containing the vessel, and it is called the vas deferens.
And some veins are in the same membrane, which nature has prepared in the part of the vessel, before it becomes another vessel; and this is the sac of the testicles between the white gut, which we have said, and this is not other than a cord.
And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the testicles, so that this matter is accumulated in them, and sometimes it happens by a blow caused by the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it becomes yellowish or bloody, or red, or black, or white, or it is thin and watery, and this is the best one.
And the symptoms by which one knows that this collection of water is of this kind: if it is in the white swelling that we have called, then the abscess will gradually decline in length, like the figure of an egg, and appear as a genet, because the moisture is from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper pancreas, then the abscess will gradually decline in parts, like the figure of an egg, and it is estimated that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the crown of the genitals and the white swelling, then it is estimated to be a hundred times worse.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and measure it with a graduated glass; according to what is found in the footprints of the glass, judge of that which is contained in the glass.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of it with iron, then you command the patient that they be flebotomized if it is possible, and sometimes see the blood of the patient.
And if it is necessary to place the patient in a supine position on their back for some reason, then place something under their buttocks.
And then place yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on their right, who extends their arm at an angle of one and a half spans from the groin to the partition of the belly.
And then take a wide spatula and split open the groin from the middle towards the penis.
And then make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be made on the thighs, until it reaches the white cartilage, including it.
And then scrape that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not inscribe that; and your scraping should be the same as the one that is suspended above and subtly examined according to the amount possible.
And then puncture the white cartilage with a wide needle and extract all the water.
And then separate between two labia of the section under the unciform, and extend the hook to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the hook in that manner that is possible for you. And then incise that in its entirety or in parts, and more importantly its subtle layer, because if you do not examine the incision of it exquisitely, it is not secure that the water will not return.
If the wound process of that part of its cord during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the hook, return to that, and then adjust the two labia of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and then care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if the wound is corrupted by another illness, then cover it with what you have said that suspends it, and extract the wound, and then care for that as with what we have mentioned.
If water is added in two parts, equal amounts, then you know that two are hernias; if it is to your view that it is an operation, then do so.
And then you wipe the sweat, and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two genetius and the navel of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top, and tie them with a bandage according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fold them with wool according to this form; and make the ends like those that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the buckle of the boots, and the first one holds the buttocks inside the back, and the second one holds the part of the thigh, and two ends on top of two cushions and two other ends on top of two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the buckle of the boots.
And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with a cautery instead of a section made with iron; and you should take a thin-bladed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginatius, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be discovered before the white cipher containing the water, and then you take a cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cipher with your fingers, and scrape with your fingers, and scrape with a thin-bladed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible inside you so that you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
And you should know that this operation is safer and longer than a section of the flank, and better than an operation with a knife.
But if you have resistance to an abscess at the time of section or at the time of cauterization, or flow of pus, then cover what resistance it causes to you for that, according to the cure that is appropriate to it, as soon as it is said.
If the patient is too weak, and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is incarcerated.
Then make the patient lie on some elevated boards, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their back, and stop the incision according to its length.
And make the opening wide enough for all the pus to drain out.
Then place your hand over the area and hold it there, so that all the pus continues to drain out. And then care for them until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the drainage of the wound at that time, then you should not make an incision: because the white membrane in the orifice of the wound causes resistance and prevents the exit of the pus, then you should place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the pus is extracted, as shown; or adjust a small drainage tube on the pressure of the wound.
And you will know that the water returns, and it is applied close to the months or environment of those; and when it is applied, then it should be pierced according to that manual method, which the patient has passed through her days.
Chapter 63.
On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision of this hernia, there is great fear of losing the major dispositions; therefore, I see the dismissal of it and being saved by that better method.
And you should remember the operation in that and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are connected and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is poured into the muscles, or due to impact.
And its color is according to the color of the part, and it is not dark in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
When the abscess is highly inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not hurt much.
Some vaginal discharges are caused by the inflammation of the uterus, or by the inflammation of those parts that have already been pierced, or by the inflammation of veins.
This is known as the discharge of pus when it comes out with the thighs, and it does not hurt much.
This is not discharged from the vagina due to any cause of compression on the thighs.
It is possible to make incisions on this specific area and on other parts of the body; you should insert the needle of the genetius, and then lift up the skin above, and extract that white thread, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the veins, and tie them, and then insert the suspensory ligament where you have removed all the parts of the skin.
If the skin has already been attached to those parts, then you should remove it and insert that.
If there is adhesion due to some cause of the kidneys, or between those that are between the ribs, then you should remove all that adhesion and insert it at the beginning with a round incision.
However, if the flesh is native to the place of adhesion that is behind, then you should insert all of that which is there, and extract it as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a piece of wool soaked in rose oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the cure of a hernia that is in the thigh.
The thigh is an abscess involuted by some swelling similar to a blister in softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to move and walk on the patient.
And in the cure of this illness, there is fear for that which precedes it.
However, we must first perform the operation on that second part where they will make the first ones.
And say that you should place the patient on an elevated cushion; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles from their parts behind; and then remove the spermatic cord from its attachments to the abdomen, and extend it vigorously.
And then insert the sharp, narrow needle through the cross section of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
And then extract all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of archery, which are in the temples.
And then insert a double-bladed needle in those places where the accident occurred, and another one at the end of them. And then insert those needles in the middle of the section, and extract what has been added from the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then proceed to cure the pain with the remedies for other pains in which you wish to be able to generate healing by causing the vessels that would not otherwise be harmed by that.
If it happens that you have access to all the basins, then cover them so that the testicles are removed or that the testicles for that reason become damaged by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the vessels, and that they are supported, or that something happens so that it is not harmfully affected.
Chapter 65
Of the cure of internal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the sides of the miracle of the belly, so that some of the intestines can be pushed out through that rupture.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: by impact, or by shaking, or by shouting, or by lifting a heavy cause, or by similar things.
When the gout, due to its prolonged extension, occurs infrequently and not suddenly, it is as if the body is trying to contain the intestine within itself because the swelling of the joint compresses the intestine.
When the gout occurs due to the section of the joint, which causes sudden and intense pain; the abscess appears to be different from the usual one, and this is due to the intestine, and the condition of the patient is similar to the parts affected by the joint.
Sometimes the intestine is pushed out through the abdominal wall, and this condition is called an inguinal hernia.
Sometimes the intestine is pushed out due to gas, and sometimes it moves within the abdominal cavity, where it is held, and this is a great inconvenience for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
In the treatment of this disease, iron is used with caution, as it may cause harm to the stomach.
The method of the operation for that is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts near its cavity and obey his return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then tie the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two needles in the second section where it would be necessary to open the section with those.
And if the second section is as much as possible that from there it has been cut off.
And then scrape that white flesh which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is exposed from each part.
Then you insert your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white flesh, which is below the cord of the cut, and between the white flesh second, and remove that adherence which is in the part behind the cut.
And then bring the sheet under the testicles to the divided parts, and place the white cylinder on the left side of the sheet, and raise the hook on the right side to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hook and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And then wrap the sheet around the testicles so that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cylinder. If you find any cause, then place it on the abdomen behind.
And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, cutting through the section that contains the seminal vessels and blood vessels as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the tape that we have recommended (and some white tape of the scrotum is cauterized, which we have said to avoid bleeding from the seminal vessels, because sometimes those tapes fall off).
If the patient's breathing is delayed, then apply a cold water enema and place your hand on the area where the second one will fall.
And then treat the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflammatory hernia.
In this hernia, no one has seen anything that can be cured with iron.
And the first ones said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is alive; which is that you should tie the veins close to the section above the patient's bed; and then dry in the middle location around the pus that causes this, until the veins fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that is made in the elbows.
Some women have broken their elbows there as we have said, and indicate the location.
And do not give any cause for hernias in the groin; and if you do, it is rare; and return to it in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is adjusted in the groin before it is discovered in the groin; and this is done by the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and swells.
And the cure of it is with a pointed cautery as we have said before.
And some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and then the area of the abscess inflammation is cut through the width according to the amount of three fingers.
And then the white thread that is pulled through the opening before it is discovered.
And then take the rag and place it over the area of the groin inflammation, and press that on the belly button.
And then bring the two prominent spots on the outer part of the thigh bone and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
And then extract the end of the thigh bone, and do not insert the needle from the thigh bone completely, nor extend the wound, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you insert the needles, clean that and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the thigh bone contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
The ligaments of the testicles are softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the protection of it is lost.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is sought in the treatment of it that he makes the patient lie on his side, and inserts the entire ligament which is softened over the natural ligament; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, apply three or four stitches with softened thread at the beginning of the wound and make a firm suture.
Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows it when he is asked about it from someone who knows its cure; and the other reason is that we have had an ancient necessity for castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, and mules, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by incision through the section.
In that place where it is done for traction, the method of the operation is to make a cut on the animal's tail between its testicles, so that they soften and hang down. And then take those things with your hand inside before they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
In castration done by incision and division, hold the animal and take the scrotum of its testicles with your hand on the right side.
And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each side of the testicle through which two blood vessels pass.
And then incise those that will be extracted from each side. Do not leave any of them on the ones from the epididymis, but cut the thin one that is over the vessels.
This method of castration is better than the one done by traction, because traction leaves no cause of the testicles for the animal to want gout.
And then cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space is between the testicles, and the other is when it appears where two testicles are, with a bulge in that area.
And sometimes it contains urine, which is located between the testicles.
And in women, there is a special type: it is that the bulge of the hernia over the pelvis is like two testicles of a man, but with a small amount of tissue at the opening where the penis of a man and two testicles are.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one for women. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside so that the opening of that does not escape, and then cure those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second special case of men, where urine is found in the sac surrounding the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of lentils and meat that are prominent among the causes of women's illnesses.
Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until they become ripe and are cooked properly; and some women are magnified in certain ways before intercourse, as in men, and also during it.
Therefore, you should have the excess of lentils on your hand or in an urn and scraped off.
And do not end in the beginning, mainly at the edge of the wound, so that it does not become a source of pus.
And then cure with that which is used for the treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Meat that is not cooked is meat that has been in the intestines of the main animal until it is filled with it, and it is often used as a remedy for certain parts of the body (and because of this, first they called it "bad gut"); therefore, you should scrape off such meat, as you would lentils, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or if it is small. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and the cause is made by meat not well cooked or by sharp or rough food.
And it is made in the joint of the big toe, or in its sides, or in the most prominent part of it, or in the lowest part of it, and forbids movement, engagement, and standing up, and very strongly forbids menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual flow, if it is apparent, then do so; but if it is not apparent, then you should look for it in the thighs or in the vagina.
But if menstrual flow is due to sharp or rough food, and it is directed towards the two labia, then you should cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand on both lower lips, and then press the indicated points to relieve the pain.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently extend both lower lips until the thin phimosis is broken and the foreskin is exposed.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on the area to prevent the incision from healing.
However, if the phimosis is large and thick, then you should incise it with a wide or sharp knife.
However, if the foreskin is thick and fleshy, then you should suspend it with a hook and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of pus with biting, such as acetic acid, and pus from wounds, and snakes, adjusted to the size of the wound.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the clot from forming too quickly.
Hold them for several days and administer warm water.
And then let the other cure of consolidation take effect until it is healed.
Sometimes certain events occur during the main birth of other flesh, and then you should follow this method. But if it is for an abscess in the head, then do not make any incision against the abscess in any way.
Chapter 73.
About the cure of hernias, tail, and red swelling that occurs in the groin of women.
Hernias are appreciated by the opening of certain veins within which continuously flows blood from those places where hernias are formed and occur.
I have already described in the division the types of those and their symptoms, and I said that there are those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore, say that hernias and those that are in the front of the head and do not appear to the touch, then in those no incision should be made by cutting.
Those that are in the upper part of the mouth above which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
And when you put the blade in wet, and then extend it towards the forceps, or use dry cloth, and incise those that are in the teeth.
And then powder over those from the salt of one of the incising powders, such as asafetida and similar to those.
And then soak your feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the salt of the sauce persists, then make that into a decoction of sumac and scraps of almonds and walnuts and similar.
And then take flour of ordinary and mix that with honey and vinegar, and make a paste with that on the back of it.
And if the sauce is removed, good; and if not, apply two poultices, and at the nipples are incisions.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of colchicum or the juice of garlic or the juice of mustard, or vinegar with pepper, and apply it to the area; and then care for the area until it is healed.
And care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the eye socket due to an accident in the upper part.
Special methods for the treatment of accidental abscesses in the upper part, such as boils, abscess on the lung, ulcers, adherent and eruptive nodules, fistulas, emorrhoids, and other abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their particulars, and the symptoms of them, and their cures in this division.
And if you want to know in this treatise about the abscess that occurs in the upper part when it is one of the abscesses that collide with health, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain from the abscess in its initial stage is sharp due to percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and becomes hard over that area, then do not puncture it, and cure it with what helps to ripen it until the intensity of the symptoms ceases.
Then consider whether you should place the woman on a bed with two mattresses; and lean over her back and adjust her feet to the part of the bed furthest from the stomach, and spread out her legs, and place your hand on her chest, and apply what is appropriate to that condition.
Then the midwife should follow the right arm and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be described in those causes that will be mentioned.
And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you should stay on the right side of the woman's stomach, and that what enters into the major opening is not more than the width of the woman's stomach and does not harm her. If the tool is larger than the prong of the main, then it is necessary to place powder on the surface of the prong of the main in order to prevent the tool from entering the main prong.
And it is necessary to place the vertical part of the tool that comes out on top and for the assistant to hold the tool and rotate the vertical part until it is inserted into the main opening.
And when the exciter appears, and it is touched by hand and lion and moistened, then it is necessary to separate that from the head of the tool with space between the lion and the spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then it is necessary to place a cotton swab soaked in rose oil or clear oil in which there is some stinging; and place the calyx in the section of the main prong.
And place a clean cloth soaked in water in which there are some vinegar on the main opening and above the perpendicular.
And it should be cured in two days with the ointment that is suitable for that until it is healed.
Some wounds are washed with the major and minor parts of the body, which is crushed into water and honey, and then the water in which it is boiled is returned to the pot.
If the wound is soaked in the boiled major part, then cover it with a bandage that you should not use for its treatment, having care to use that which we have mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best medicated when they are not in a natural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by feeling it, and when you examine the woman to express the parts underneath and desire to smell the air, and over which is placed a cloth from the part, and quickly feel the position of the fetus, then know that this part is the second natural position, and its position on its head, and the second part is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Therefore, when you see those symptoms, then press the patient's belly so that the fetus gently sends out light, and when it comes out over its head, then the second stage begins, and this is called good delivery.
If that is another part of this that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus comes out over its feet and the body of the patient is facing the head of the patient and the feet of the patient, or the head of the patient is on the foot of the patient, or the hand of the patient is on the belly of the patient, or on the back of the patient, and it is greatly converted over its own neck, and similar to the figures of the unusable.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
And you should show all the figures of those, and what engine is in them for that and it is on that.
When it comes out over its own head naturally, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and the power of the patient has already been weakened, then do that maneuver, or what the women had for the patient, and evaporate the cold from the patient with fenugreek and warm oil.
And then insert the metronome between her legs and gently tear that second skin, or dry it with her finger until that wetness is gone. And press the belly of the woman until the fetus is expelled.
But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of mint and fenugreek leaves.
And then command her, approach the crib, that she be calm and make her sneeze with a condition; and give her mouth and nose for an hour, so that the fetus is expelled quickly.
And if the two arms of the fetus are expelled at the beginning, then gradually reduce them with forceps. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet off the ground, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the muscles are not stretched and the flesh is rotten, then incise those parts and extract the remaining flesh or tie the wound to the patient's side with a cloth and extract that also.
When the child lies on its own, then encourage it to move those parts, and then turn the child small, and then equalize it, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
When they are positioned inside the thighs, then command it to express itself, and do that by gently pressing, because if God wills, it will happen.
And if that does not happen as we have recommended, then gradually return the child little by little until it takes the second natural position, because if God wills, it will happen.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take a mixture of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply that to the woman's navel, at the lowest part of her belly. And then make that cushion in hot water, until you reach the hypochondriacs.
And when those parts that have been removed from him are softened, then apply mint and place it on him. And when the steam has been applied for an hour, then place it on a cloth, and then remove that and extend the mouth of him, and lift from there, and press the lowest part of his abdomen with firm compression, which will help to relieve him.
The head of the fetus hangs longitudinally from one of its hands. It should be engineered in the reduction of its abdomen, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let her expel it.
And if it cannot expel, then perform the Jaeger maneuver on the left side, and shake the patient's body vehemently, and administer medicines that you know and recommend for these cases.
And if the child is born, then perform the Skeeter maneuver on the chest, and study the reduction of its abdomen, and gradually push the fetus out, and command the woman to understand when it is forgotten.
When the child's head is expanded, his hands are on his chest and his foot is to the side of his greater toe. The mother held the child's hand and gradually turned him around, and that helped.
And when it is and how much it is equal, then pause over the child's head with that which we have recommended for oil and mud.
And then command the child to open his mouth little by little, and when you have done that, then make that mixture on a plate and command it to be tilted towards the left, and then command the child to be calm; and do that inhalation condition. The outcome of the prepared child is on the side.
When the second finger of the mother is inserted into the child's mouth in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger of your hand into the child's mouth until it is drained of moisture.
And if the child is suspended by his face and neck, then you insert that into the umbilical cord, so that it is not retained and dies.
And then apply pressure to the parts that are intact until the second one opens, and send the woman to bring some bandages, and the servant should prepare a ladder, if God wills.
The death of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins or many fetuses wrapped in bandages are not natural, and some say three or four, but that is strange and distressing; but it is the cause of nature, and not a living thing.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by a thread, distinguish those that enter the ligament in the navel of each of those and some bandages are removed as if it is a fetus naturally, and its place is covered with some bandages as we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to remove from their place and reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then cure those as we have recommended.
If the skilled midwife and does that which facilitates and simplifies, and delays, and is ingenious according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to salvation.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some virgins are formed in the mother's womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already verified that a woman aborts not before the sixth month, and another all of them, which cause is made for the glory of the holy saviors.
And all those who are in the science of the midwife that are very useful for that purpose, and therefore they should be used for that purpose.
Chapter 76.
About the extraction of the dead fetus.
When you care for the dead fetus, use that which we have said in the division of medicine and do not deface it, and you are therefore able to use operation with the hand, then consider whether the woman is of healthy virtue and not afflicted by any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
When the woman is lying on her back, her head should be slightly tilted to the side, and her arms raised.
The assistant should hold the patient's arms in two positions or lay them flat on their back to prevent the body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, you should moisten the mouth of the midwife with oil and a mixture of garlic, fennel, and sesame seeds from the husk.
Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enter her hand into the midwife to facilitate the delivery of the fetus, and then circle around the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
In such cases: Then, you consider whether the fetus is prepared to be delivered on its own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck, collarbone, mouth, palate, or beard, or behind the shoulder blades, or in the propitious places of the chest, or behind the hypochondriac regions.
If the patient's condition is on their feet, then in the penthouse, or in the middle of their ribs.
And hold that the hand is straight, and press the curve of the patient in that place which is between the said elbow, and insert your hand with ease and put the hand in any of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause of the pain.
And then place and press on another part of the patient, or the third if necessary, to make sure it is equally attached, and not stretched too much.
And it should be done throughout the entire body, so that the patient's condition is relieved as it is done in teeth to remove it.
And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held back, then hold that the mother unties those said hands and insert those experiments and rotate those which are held back.
So if the part of the child is forgotten, then the hands are moved to another place which is more comfortable; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
If the limb is extended towards the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; and then extract it through an incision in the joint or on the side.
And if you do so on the other limb and both feet.
If the head of the bone is large, or if it has been damaged by traction in the incision, or if it is too large to be adjusted in its place, then insert between these spines a sharp instrument called "alundat", which will come in various forms in the capitulum that is appropriate for this.
Similarly, if the bone is large by nature: and then insert it with a chisel, or take it out with the forceps that we have mentioned.
And if the head is exposed and pulled by the furcula, then cut through it to drain the liquid that is in the chest.
If not complicated or obese, then you can sometimes insert the finger second, as much as possible to you.
And if the belly is abscessed or filled with water, then you should puncture that part where the moisture is inside.
If the foot is on the ground, then the direction of the wound is towards the mouth of the jugular vein.
If it is bound with the belly and chest, then you should remove that cloth which has wrapped around your hand, and make an incision in the belly and chest where that moisture is inside.
If the other members are also stiff and the finger returns, then you should insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the jugular vein is open, then you should insert your left hand into the wound, and surround that part, and draw that part towards the mouth of the jugular vein, and then insert one or two fingers inside.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, and it causes her distress, then before that, make sure it is not too tight; in front of that, administer a wet, heavy draft. And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered as we have said for the live wound.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
And make sure there is no cause of vomiting from the second day onwards.
And when you have completed all your work, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
And if there is blood flow from the wound, then remove it with sternutatory water and administer the other treatment.
And you have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another woman approached that fire, and then the dead woman was made again. It happened to him that he had a long time ago an abscess in his belly; and when he approached the fire, he began to shake his arms.
And you were called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then you placed some strong attractive plaster on him for certain reasons, and then removed a bone from him, and after several days, removed another bone; and you were very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
And then you thought that they were the bones of the dead woman.
So you continued to drain the wound, and removed more bones from him, the woman being in her own miserable conditions, and had been like that for a long time, moving only a little bit of his arm.
And I do not affirm that it is strange, but rather that in this case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled physician uses to administer medicine for healing.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the tooth.
The form of a mirror used for extracting the upper tooth:
This is the form of a forceps in which the jaws are engaged, to which engagement there are two mirrors at the ends of two handles. But this mirror should be more delicate than restrictive, and it should be made of ivory or wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the width of the other end should be one finger wide; and the length of each is one palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measuring stick which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the maidservant so that she can take those when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Another form of this more subtle and more deceptive poison:
It should be made from a rod of iron or of wood according to the appearance of forceps. But at the end of this addition, there should be times, and the length of those additions is equal to one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to give those to the maidservant, then you make a cushion over her head while her feet hang down, and place that which is between her thighs. And then open your mouth with the instrument according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the maidservant's mouth until the mother makes her do what you want.
The form of the poison that the ancients said:
Form of an impeller which is pushed into the belly:
The shape of the arm is as follows: the large head
And it is shaped like a pair of forceps with teeth at the end, sometimes, and some forceps are made in this form, sometimes, with teeth like those of scissors, which are sharpened and shaped. The shape of the small arm:
The shape of the needle with a spike:
The shape of the needle with two spikes:
The shape of the staff with two ends, which has its head cut off:
The shape of two staffs bent:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more and more species of that and it is prepared by the craftsmen, as it is lighter for their operation and more suitable for women because of their quantity.
And you should always be prepared with those instruments, because the need for them is not excuseable.
Of the extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is held, order the patient to hold their breath, and then perform the following maneuver, strengthening your hand over their mouth and nose, and if they resist or cry out, it is good.
Otherwise, take an olive and perforate the roof of the mouth with it, and place it on the tongue, along with calamint, rude herbs, aneth, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia lignea, and santolurea. All these herbs or some of them are soaked in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cannula of cantharides in the mouth of the patient, and hold it until the vapor comes to the hollow of their cheek.
And then perform the following maneuver as we have said, and the second tooth will be extracted at high speed.
If this treatment is approaching and not yet applied, then command the matron to immerse her left hand in oil of spikenard or in a small amount of aloe, and then enter it into the wound and gently rub it on the second finger, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it slowly little by little if it is attached to the first, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second finger, gently pull it out little by little so that the first does not violently attract it. It is better to move the patient to the right and left sides for ease.
And if the mouth of the midwife is covered, we have already recommended the cure of sneezing and the medication of the oil with herbs.
And if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then be careful not to tire that one which is in contact with the mouth of the midwife, but rather cover it with a cloth and apply cristal and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause that one to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
When the patient is vomiting, elevate their head and stomach, and that relieves the patient; then give them appropriate sub-fumigations and necessary remedies for that.
In ancient times, they already used fumigation with natron and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated is for the retention of menstruation and childbirth.
It should be made of wood or iron.
And the narrow end should be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be done over the flames of the fire.
And keep that one until it is consumed, then repeat another one.
Of the cure of the child's unperforated anus.
When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, those that are thin and swollen. Then give the midwife that should pierce that swollen one; and if not, pierce that one with a sharp lancet, and make sure it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place your hand on that woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and oil; and then cure that burnt area with the appropriate medicine.
However, if you fear that it may be poisoned, then place a needle in the wound and leave it there until the child wants to relieve itself.
And if the rectum is obstructed due to the consolidation of a wound or an abscess; then cover that consolidation with a cloth, and then cure it with the same medicine and plaster that we have mentioned for curing wounds.
For the treatment of fistulas that develop later.
The fistulas that develop in the lower part of the abdomen and are the most numerous, which occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And if it is a fistula or a boil.
And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or fine pus, and some wounds penetrate into these fistulas.
And those who are able to penetrate them are known for that which is due to them from those who have exit and from their vexation; and some use the patient for exit, and often it is due to them from those worms.
And some of those fistulas are covered in the spaces that penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the wound; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the wound.
And in which fistulas are known to penetrate into the anus and not to penetrate, you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that one, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into that thin needle until you feel the rod or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed due to some cause of excretion or worms or inflammation, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then let the cure be done.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of this is urine from that place and prohibition of it so that the location may be healed by medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circumference, then it is necessary to perforate it here if there is not turbidity into the bone, and pain in the circumference of the part; and that from it there may be discharge soon; and that it does not heal with that medicine, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is not complete cure, and the cure of those is difficult and varies from the knowledge of the doctors on which it depends.
And in those that do not penetrate and are not ancient, healing is expected according to what you advise, and that which has already been and was successful.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his back, and raises his thighs up towards you, and the cushions should be inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then introduce a probe of plumb or iron if there is turbidity in the fistula, until you know where the probe goes.
And if the patient is around the belly, then you should insert your finger into the belly.
And if you feel the tent in your hand and it can be inserted to discover whether it penetrates or not, then you know for certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that area, as it is not healing, as we have said.
However, it should be noted that this method is used to treat certain men who are ill.
And the medication for which one hopes to be greatly helped is that you ignite a thin cauterizing tool according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that burning tool into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the affected tissues have been cauterized, which resemble a quill from a pen.
And then cure those wounds wrapped in a bandage until all the affected tissues have been healed, and then cure those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the tissue, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then at some time it will be healed by another treatment.
If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the probe there is a veil of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a quill pen and do not have any cause of those.
However, if pus flows between you and your operation when you have cleaned those parts, then milk that is and of the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those parts adjusted, and abscizes the pus from the excess of humidity.
Approach and care for those with swollen feet that are wrapped in cloth or covered with a three-pronged tool before the location gets too cold, and then care for the wound by removing the hard, congealed meat.
These medicines have both astringent and dehydrating properties; when the wound is restored, it heals and there is no risk of recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and extends to the surface of the body, then insert a finger into the anus and examine that area.
And if the tent is pulled and it enters you and it is covered with skin or flesh, and it is directed towards penetration, then this is not an operation but a second attempt of trust and hope.
This cause is to administer in that one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry out that which you can reach the cavity for so that it is possible for you to enter and treat those things and the proposed cure; and do not process because of sepsis for so that you do not insert the contents of the wound, and that accidents occur on the patient's will and not from the execution of the treatment; and then care for that which we have said that it is very strong and sirs are healed; or to lengthen that covering and remove that pus which dries out that entrance proposed to the anus, as we have said, or with another sharp instrument, and to treat those fistulated flesh which are in the section inside the wound where you can perform the crustation; and then to force yourself to restore the entire wound section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and it is more serious for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
And then insert the probe into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the anus nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you insert your finger into the anus; and then remove the extremity of the skin and adjust the two ends, and stretch each one, and let that remain for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, then stitch those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which can be joined.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but not too much so as not to injure the skin; and then apply a bandage to that area until it is healed.
The shape of the spiral probe that is used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one end and flat on the other end, so that it does not injure anything that is not necessary, such as sometimes.
Suturing of hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Hernias are of two types, either between the buttocks like this one, or they are like a lump on the groin. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its inside, and its outside, and in their extremities.
However, those that have their outside the buttocks according to the signs of little moisture, from which there is a yellowish swelling or a small lump with continuous skin, and its color is like this.
And the cure for that which is in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and expel what is inside before the morning sickness appears and the fetus is visible to you. Then you lean over the patient and hold their hand, and then incise their ribs.
But if the ribs cannot be incised in those places due to their moisture and softness, then take those places with dry cloth or cotton or woolen felt, and remove those places with the forceps, and then incise those places and powder some appropriate powder on the incision, so that it is at those places instead of a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the wound does not follow the excretion, then crestize the patient with a cristery in which there is a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the womb and which facilitates the excretion better when the patient expels.
If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause of this is often a lie, and you should take those with your nail, or take those with a needle, and scrape those, and then cure those with what we have said before they are healed.
And the one who comes before should follow this method for suturing: take a needle and insert it into the skin, then remove the swellings to the parts above, and let the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread in the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swelling to the structure, and then remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them unsutured, so that the excess blood from that one flows out.
And then place a cloth soaked in warm rose oil or wax on the anus, and place it on the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that area alone; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then use a needle or your nail to make the wounds moist and remove the scabs from them, which prevents their consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
Then use a stronger plaster than the first one that heals and is excoriated; and then cure those that have healed.
You should know that leprosy, it is necessary, and not if not noted red spots similar to the crown of a clavicle, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts behind the feet and the mentioned ones, and it is caused by those pains.
And then cut that which is in the circle of the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its source; and then cure that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second that precedes in its chapter.
Warts are small elevated fistulas on the surface of the body, and they often occur in children.
And its cure is that you extend and cut that, or that you remove it with forceps or a needle. And if you wish, cauterize that, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And the ant is a small elevated or large fistula on the surface of the body, and when it bites there, it is centered in that area, similar to the bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
And its cure is that you take a needle of awl or of voltor, and it is strong, and place the ant over the ant within the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you cut that which is in the circle of the ant, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its source.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of iron or steel according to this form:
The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, not piercing (it is not perforated), wrapped by someone who knows how to hold the point of the needle and make a turn.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is called in the cauterization of the head in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are used to give cautery.
Some wounds are cauterized with silver or iron or bronze or hammered; and some wounds are cauterized with those instruments small and large according to those that are used, because the one that is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and the cauteries of those who have foul or painful ulcers should be small.
The form of large and small cauteries:
The top of the needle of the canula above in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the distance where the bag is attached as often.
And the end of it is left, which is inserted into the anus, like a lion, retracted to subtlety; and on one side of it has two tubes, and on the other side one tube, and the width of the tube according to the size of the rays and the thickest a little.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb wool are placed, and the reason for it is a palm.
And it is pierced by a tube as it is rotated; and if the space between the tubes is the largest of the above.
And then insert it firmly into those tubes with a firm cord, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the head of the christ, between two distinct strong constraints, and then christize each tube: The quality of christizing each is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and raise their legs up and place something under them, like a pillow or a blanket; and then apply the heated tip of the cautery to the anus with oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or a similar substance; and then the midwife takes the bag and expresses it with two hands until all the contents are evacuated from the intestine into the bowl; and then remove the bag and the patient can raise their legs to the side.
And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps for the whole night, it is better to repeat it in the morning.
But if you insert that into the patient's belly with a solution of stomach and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cautery from the cauteries that children's caterers use.
Of the cure of the plaques.
It has already been said in the division of the cure of the plaques that this is suitable for free people, and thus the cure of those who are male and female with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that the plaques are different according to what kind of plaque is made and where the plaques occur.
And the causes for which plaques are made include gravel in the gallbladder, or incision of spice or of a knife, or percussion by a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
May the plaques that are in the parts of the body include a plaque that covers the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And it is recommended that the cure of some plaques be done by placing that reason and rule on other plaques.
And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Then say that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is from a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear for that patient because of the risk of abscess, then you should first perform a trephination, and do not delay; and extract whatever is in it according to the quantity of its virtue, unless some cause prevents trephination, especially if the wound that exists from the wound is small.
And if the trephination is on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from reflux, violent movements, and heavy foods.
But if some cause prevents the use of the minimum, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And if an abscess occurs in the wound, place a poultice of roasted bread or in oil that is stiptic.
If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and its sinew and air have not changed to the dust that I will recommend you to apply soon.
And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with saliva until it is healed.
If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and its lips are not adjusted for stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about the stitching of theirs.
If the wound is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by stitches but only by a small suspensor, then scrape that and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coyt and similar things until it is healed.
And if there is decay in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then scrape all that dirt and remove it, and cure that.
If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not cut by medicine, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it uncut, then you should cut it with a blade or ligate it; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is flowing.
And if these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is easy; however, you should powder them with this powder, which becomes solidified and prevents air from moving them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; grind all this into a fine powder, and fill the wound with it, and press it firmly against the wound, and let it coagulate with the unhealthy blood.
Then press it firmly against the wound and leave it there until it is not displaced, because the medicine cannot be reapplied if it is moved before it has healed.
And sometimes it was done alone, when not in your presence and with a sound dragon.
And this surgical operation is performed in the large wounds when necessary to be placed on those and straightened, and their recent wounds are covered with their own skin, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then do not use this powder, but instead treat those with what we have said, unless you place it on those wounds with digestive ointment, or place it on those wounds with flour and honey mixed with water until they are completely healed; and then cure them with the other treatment.
But if it happens that the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that which we have said.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the plague affects the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather avoiding cure with that which causes strong hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say vetriol and similar to their own quar nozo to the nerves and contrazo aquel. And do not place your hand over any cause of the whole plague, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is one of the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washed with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil roasted or not roasted, and thucia when washed with warm water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and find humitz.
If the plague is great, then administer sutura, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lowest part of the body, then perforate it in the most protected area.
If the pain is already accompanied by bleeding from an artery and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the spinal column of the gallows or the entire one has already been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the codex with a suture on the neck bone and do not touch that; equal it to that and reduce it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a structure that is decent, and let it heal with ointments in which there is astringency and excitement until it is healed.
If the pain has already affected the bones, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all those that you can from it; and what you cannot remove, let it heal within the time that the pain persists, and it should be separated and the empty space in it should be filled.
If the pain is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder that was recommended to you. If the pain is caused by an abscess, then treat it with the ointment that will come to mind when you remember its capital.
If the pain is caused by a lancet or a fork, and you observe its depth, then consider whether the patient's breathing becomes faster; then you will know that the pain is fatal.
And if there is no depth and the pain is recent in its own place, then you should place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strain it so that it does not remain in its depth and that it returns to the body and that any fluid does not accumulate in the patient, but rather place a poultice attractive, and remove those bands on that day.
If the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the wound's edge, so that the moisture can drain; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid can flow out.
However, if the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, tremor, heart pain, or stricture of the chest, and other signs are good, then you can know that the wound is healing; and then treat it with warm compresses and other remedies until it is completely healed.
However, if the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can know that it has formed a fistula; and then treat it through its neck.
And if the wound is caused by a cut or a sharp object, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with water that is used for stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already been done on the bone, and you have already cut around it, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then let the wound breathe, which is beneficial for the extraction of the plate.
And of the other plates in the other members, the healing is similar to what we have said.
Of the plates of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
And the disruption of small ones is difficult to do by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so if you do not make an incision into them as soon as possible, because it becomes open and swollen, making the treatment of it difficult.
And the best disruption is to migrate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is difficult in those two special cases.
You should know that there are four methods for belly sutures, but two common ones are usually used in sutures of other body parts.
And two other proper sutures connect to other body parts, but they are more proper in the belly suture.
And I advise you to each one according to exposure and declaration.
Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of those two methods: either by permanence of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the hernia due to cold air.
And then when that is the case, you should cover it with a sponge soaked in warm water alone, or you can hold it in warm water with cyperus, spic, and embrocations at that hernia until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes applying this remedy in the area where there is stasis, and it is better than just water in resolving inflammation.
And so when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
And if the instrument of the patient is not removed from this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it not dry out, and it is not occupied by the need to dry out or wither away.
Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt end.
And so when the pain is increased and the intestine comes out, then return it to its original form, in its proper place, if possible above that, because it is better.
When the disruption is widespread, and in the lower part of the abdomen, then make the patient lie on their side, and support their legs as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the lower parts of the abdomen, then quickly place your intelligence and consideration aside so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
And thus, administer this in the severe and mild cases.
And in the mild cases, place this that is prepared by you between your fingers and make sure the administrator holds the disruption completely in their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and remove one stitch at a time if there is any cause to add another.
This is the common method of stitching: take a needle, or a needle of the appropriate size for the width of the wound; and leave a length of thread from the end of the disruption of the ring, and tighten the needle once, or make sure you do not put it in both ends of the suture, both ends of the needle that are outside the parts that are below the wound, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added both ends of the suture and both ends of the needle, and make four stitches.
And then apply strong force around the circumference of the needle, and some stitches in several parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the large one of the same and insert another needle into that, and then tie that with a thread as it is with the first needle; and do not stop doing that until the needles are all completed within the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to pass through the tissue, and therefore it is advisable that they be of medium size.
And do not allow the needle to be left at the ends of the wound intended, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged in stitching so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then carefully insert the ends of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place powdered substances on all parts of the wound, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
These types of stitches with needles should be used in small wounds, as they have one or two or more needles in their stitching.
The second stitch is similar: and you administer the four ends of the ligature, two ends of the thread, in a way that the needle is wrapped evenly in thinness and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the correct thread does not rise from the wound, so that the stitch is the second stitch of the strong cloth.
And pause between each suture the amount of thick oil from the aforementioned medicine.
And this stitch is for women.
And this stitch was used to close a wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and was the disruption of the major muscle of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine of the middle member; and then you reduced it so that the intestine had been open for twenty-four hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and it was closed and healed; and then use this ointment for many years, and keep it in its proper conditions.
And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and for a miracle, why you did not close it with that egg, which was in a place where the egg was not usually or at all medicine, but kept over the wound for two days and frequent baths of honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And if you begin with the suture of the tendon, then insert the needle from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist.
And so, when the needle penetrates the tendon and the other hand holds the needle in the place where you inserted it; then have the other needle penetrate from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist in the other hand.
And so, after you have finished that penetration, then make the other needle penetrate in the other hand's wrist from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist; and leave the other end of the needle where it is, and have the needle penetrate in the other hand's wrist from the part of the forearm to the part of the wrist.
And make the other needle penetrate in the place where the one that is doing the penetration is doing it in the needle's end, which is in the part of the arm where all that penetrates.
And then begin at this point, and with that, gently pull the edge of the intestine that is on the other side in the other direction, and extract the needle from the suture, and return it to that suture and cover the end of the intestine that is on the other side with this extracted part; and extract the needle from the suture that is on its side.
And do this again and again, and do this again near another suture until you have finished all of it according to that example.
And the advantage of this method of suture is that you sew the skin with the needle, so that you sew the intestine one stitch from the part of the end of the suture, and let the other stitch until it is completed.
And the second special method of suture, which is called by the doctors of that time and recommended for this, is that you sew that second semi-lateral part to its corresponding part at the right place; and apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and do this according to your recommendation.
When you insert the needle at the end of the mirror near your own part, make it penetrate into the part of the body, and lay two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the part of the body to the ends of the thread.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the ends of the mirror on the other side.
This method of stitching is better than the common ligature, and it is the stitching of which previous memory was mentioned.
This is the word of Guaila
And moreover, they say that the stitching of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you should insert each one with a thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to do, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second stitch of those which cover the hearts equally.
When a disruption occurs in the middle part of the belly, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the belly.
The judgment of medicine for plague is judged by the other plagues.
The reason is that when you acquire the plague recently, the first remedy is to deny that the air has altered it, reduce the intestine and wrap it in that and prepare it properly, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present and makes hard and stiff and consolidates and cools; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the remedies present, then place on it a tansy, which begins to cause sweating, vomiting, and change the two remedies every day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in simple cases when the plagues are present.
If you fear that the plague may cause injury to the principal members, then apply a cloth dipped in oil of good quality, or oiled, and place it around the affected area, and cover it with bandages.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in the intestines, then apply a stinging black mustard plaster, and more so if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and is causing severe pain penetrating into its cavity.
You should know that the pus that comes from the intestines is less dangerous for healing than the pus that comes from the fine intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine that is called “gegunu” from any plague that may be in it; this is because of the large number of veins that are in it, and because of its great size, and because of the subtlety of its nature, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If the wound is on the back, and you manage to see it recently, reduce it according to your correctness, which reduces the intestines equally.
If it has passed through the space and has already been done white or black, then place a bandage over the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flow does not come out of the veins and arteries in the wound.
Then insert that which is another from that limb, and place two ends of the bandage hanging down from the edge of the wound, so that it is alleviated from the attraction of the wound to the cavity of the wound and emission of the bleeding from the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen the one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of a lance and was the wound of the middle part of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and they were able to manage and ventilate it.
Then I continued the treatment of him who was already cured, but not yet healed, by subtly introducing fire that heals and consolidating the area.
And then I placed a cloth over the patient's abdomen to cover the wound in his belly; and he did not suffer from that wound and remained eating and drinking, and was put in bed and was exercised in his said condition.
And it was said by experienced ones that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then one should do as follows: one should take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with its point over the two lips of the wound; then when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the wound, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle at the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have done it for all the wound.
And then reduce that area and the pain; and remove those things that are attached to the intestine inside where the intestine is healed; and do not cause harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine can be sewn with a very thin thread made from animal intestine, rather than with a needle; and you should take hold of the end of these threads of intestine, which should be very sharp, and then bring the end of one thread to the other, wrapped around, and then insert that thread into the needle and sew it to the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing is only a second option of trust and hope.
But if the pain is large and widespread, especially in one of the small intestines, then it cannot be sewn, but only drained, and not healed from all of it.
Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
When the entire plague and abscess, when it becomes inflamed and ancient, and is turned into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and causes constant pain in the arm, and is not excised, then, in any member where this occurs, it is universally called a fistula and we call it the "old wound".
A second truth, a fistula is a narrow, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and is located in the same cavity as a boil; and for this reason it is not called a "second wound".
And in a moist wound that causes pain, the humidity is often removed in a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is thick, and thin, and liquid.
It has shown all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment of those diseases in the division.
And now I will tell you how to treat a fistula, which is made by surgical operation.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the members of the body; among those that reach great veins, arteries, or nerves, or to the spleen, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to some of the spinal bones of the back, or to some of the joints composed by such a composition as that of the hand and foot; and among those, they are those that are closest to the main member and similar to it.
And therefore among those fistulas that follow this manner are difficult to cure diseases, and do not receive treatment, and occupation is difficult due to labor and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you expect and believe in its treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take an iron or a needle, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it there.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that thin plug, for the thin plug of the body's elevation is relieved and straightens out the twisting.
And if the fistula has horrible contents, it is not possible to place the thin plug over it.
Then cleanse the wounds by their wounds, for the moisture by which you cleanse that one also goes into the others and heals them.
And then carefully inquire, according to the method by which you can recognize if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdana is the cavity of the fistula, or if it is a fistula with many contents and is completely covered by it, and whether it causes the patient's suspicion, and the investigation of the cause of the pain due to your compression on the area, and similarly to the meanings and causes of the accidents to the abscess.
And when you have considered all those causes accurately, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in salt water, long from joint, or of nerves, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which I have said to you.
Then dry the fistula after it has been opened, and remove any pus that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any matter that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or in the thighs and similar areas, and heal that wound so that it becomes healthy.
If the fistula is long and deep, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply poultices covered in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that several times until the acute medicine corrodes everything that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it becomes healthy.
If it does not become healthy by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal it as we have recommended, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which the corruption is held within; and cure that which is inside that which is not healed.
And if it does not heal and there is no gap as it used to be, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again and carefully make the reason of it and its cleansing with the strongest fortified tie, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep length of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore you should not try to remove it but leave it there.
If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps suitable for that.
If you have the strength to extract all those, and none of them are held by any cause due to your strength.
But if there is any resistance due to the moisture, and they do not cause fear or error at the beginning, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are near, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of an oyster to remove the bones of your hour, then place a suitable poultice on that area, and let it enter that area where that poultice is near those flesh and ligaments, and keep the poultice from being consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, then place it under the skin with three drops of oil, or under the skin with Egyptian anointing oil, or in any of the oils, because when they are poured on those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, and those attachments are alleviated.
If there is a large bone like the thigh bone or the cushion bone or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then scrape off that rust only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
And I advise you to use that which happens to a man in his thigh for placing that support and aid on your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are swollen and discolored is on the matter of the body inside which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is matter of a large abscess, and not from an external cause.
And then the doctor extended the heat to that area for a while before the abscess was formed, and then the wet matter was removed, and the cure of the fire was paused until the bed became fistulized, and in the meantime, all the painful parts were treated, which all healed quickly and the humidity of the body.
And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in those parts but in the art, until he was called.
And he saw the bed of that part and the matter that was running from it to those painful parts, and his body was completely yellowed and the color of it was yellowish.
And then he inserted the tent into one of those painful parts and reached the tent to the bone.
And then he quickly examined those painful parts and found that they reached all parts of the bed.
And then he showed and inserted into one of those painful parts, which entered before he described a piece of the bone, and at the same time he rotted that, and it was already rotten and corrupted and degraded; and a part of the bed had already penetrated into the intestines.
And then I will show you that which was discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
And then I will show you that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I removed and prepared, and it had already been disrupted.
Then place your hand on the wound with consolidating medical remedies for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then you will again open and discover on the bone secondly over the first discovery, and again continue the corruption in the bone.
And then I will show you that which appeared from that corruption, and then you will perform the cure for it and its restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I will discover over it another way and not cease to gradually incise the bone in particular parts, and perform the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have incised about a palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then restore it with those medicines, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
And repetition is not necessary in the operation of cutting into him and sectioning him, but only for the disposition of the surgeon and the scarcity of his tolerance and fear of death, which leads to complications in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad breath.
And so, the healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and it is good to dispose of him in his own body and return his virtue; and he is converted in his dispositions and does not do anything against him in ambulation or harm in any cause.
If it is an eminent bone in the place of the body that has already been broken, then you should do this: and you should take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that eminent bone, and command anyone to extend that over; and pause that bandage of thick wool from the first bandage; and put it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of him so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you should uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
When the table is placed incorrectly in front of the bones, it is not forbidden to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
And the sawing should be done gradually over the rotten area, where if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for the sawing.
And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is at the middle or in a separate part, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and afterwards place a cushion, and use the saw of the first part where the corruption is until it is continued with the sawing of the other part.
And the sawing should be done according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, insert the rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be sawn in the ratio but rather in a curve.
If the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, try to find out where the corruption appears to you, and cut that area, and wash it according to each possible disposition, and let everything be corrected by you when no contrary wind or nerve comes.
You should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore try to prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
You should know that that operation means to you in the special case of the instrument that is needed; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of ways of illnesses, then you have already learned how to use that instrument for every illness.
And you will find the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Form of saw:
Another form of saw:
Another large form of saw:
Form of rake: The head of this rake should be in the form of a star-shaped hook, and its points should be in the form of the points of the astrological sign of Aries.
And you should not use it unless you rub those points on the joints when they are corrupted, or if it is a large mouth.
Form of smaller razor:
Form of flat razor:
Form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as large and sharp as possible, and the handle of it from wood, and the point of it from iron. 1. Form of him/her:
2. Form of a razor in which there is a concavity:
3. Another form of a razor:
4. Another form of a razor with a curved end:
5. Another form of a razor resembling a needle:
7. Another form of a smaller cutting instrument:
8. Another form of an instrument resembling a saw, with its end like a blade, and is used in certain places in the removal of bones:
9. Another form of a saw that is suitable for drilling through bones:
10. And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
11. And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have mentioned of razors, cutting instruments, and saws.
12. Of the cutting edges of bones and their sawing.
When the extremities are affected, either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not come, or when the corruption leaves the member without any cause, then you should insert that member into that hot water, which is close to the corruption, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm, which is greater than the loss of the member.
And the reason for that member is that it is burned black within, or if it becomes red before it is cooked, then it will rot inside that member and spread throughout the body; therefore, I advise you to insert that member into hot water.
Similarly, if the corruption is caused by the pressure of certain poisonous causes such as a scorpion's bite or viper or ruetella and similar.
And if the corruption or pressure is in that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
And similarly, if you approach the patient, then insert that of the reed into the wound, and do not give space to corruption until it takes hold in the reed of the arm.
And if you insert that, then insert the arm into the coyd in the joint.
And if corruption passes around the coyd, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, giving another cause or that is a quantity of virtue.
And similarly, do for the foot when corruption inserts that into one of the nuts.
And if you take in the toe of the foot, then insert the whole foot. But if it can enter into the knee, then insert the leg into the joint of the knee.
And if corruption has already reached the knee, then in that there is no cure but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And cover the wound with a cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess to the right position.
If bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
And then tie the wounded member with a suitable bandage and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
And also tell him that the same accident that you and I have discussed, which occurs in a man's foot, is caused by a blacksmith's fire that is similar to a burn from a flame.
And that corruption occurs first in the same foot before it affects the entire foot.
And then that man prepared for more severe treatment than the cure to go to the wounded member with the intensity of its pain and burning, and that the unskilled person cuts the foot at the joint, and it heals.
For a long time, it has happened to that same corrupting disease in the mentioned part of the body.
And then it came to me, and I was able to reflect on that excess of the thing that was placed on the body of the medicines, approaching the cleansing of the part of the body; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to another part that begins in the body.
And he asked me to incise the part of the body, and I did not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess, and more than I feared the beginning of the incision of the body, because the virtue of the patient was weak.
And then he left me, and returned to his land, and it reached me that that man prepared and incised the whole of his body, and was cured.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful regarding that which is caused by this illness, and that it has meaning for the one for which it is meant, and according to which it is done.
Of the care of sinuses and the quality of catheterization with medications.
When an abscess occurs in a fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place becomes like a vessel, and the code that is over it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach corruption, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until corruption enters a member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the care of it is that the entire code over it is turned as it is rolled up, and more so when it is covered with fine cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place because of its corruption.
However, if you hope that the code sticks and that the corruption has not been completed because of previous consequences, and in the code there is a hole, then you treat it with a catheter.
And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that is used is of a certain odor, then use this Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and wine and zinc, and they are mixed in equal parts, and they are poured into a vessel, and they are covered over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches the desired consistency of honey.
And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the sinus, and strengthen the orifices of the body, and leave the medicine in the body for the quantity of ten hours.
And then extract that which is left; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pudor remains.
And sometimes it is cleansed with water of ashes, when this medicament is not present; and you should take the ashes of wood, and put them on the water; and then bring that to a boil and cleanse the sinus until you confirm that the sinus is now open.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then prepare a clyster with honey and charcoal mixed together, and prepare another clyster with honey, because honey has the property of softening and cleaning, and it helps the sinew to adhere more, especially when there is an excess of stiffness and dryness.
If you have done some of these things and are confident that the sinew has returned to its place, then prepare a clyster with the water that makes the flesh return to its place.
And if you take some diaphragm fat and dissolve that rose oil and vinegar, which is stiffening; or if you prepare a clyster with some medicines and other oils that have the properties written about in the treatise on oils.
And if the orifices of the sinew are narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then gradually insert that oil drop by drop, and cover it with Egyptian oil or basilicon oil until it is enlarged.
And if the anus is also open, then you add stitches to it and leave some of the quantity in which the gut is attached.
And if the anus of the part where the intestine is pulled up is dry, then you dry it in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine can pass through again, because when the intestine is constricted in its initial state, the flesh will be in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the intestine within the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you should prepare the member with the preparation that the intestine usually follows according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause in it that retains the intestine.
When it is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains open at all times to allow for the passage of what is in the arm. So that you know whether what comes from the arm is food or not, or if it is digested or not.
And if you observe the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment continues in this way, and you see that the matter that is secreted over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then you should remove it or remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plague, change the dressing and renew the poultice.
But if the sinus is full of subtle viruses, do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of that will eventually happen, and in some people it takes a long time for the generation of flesh in those plagues, and in others it is the opposite of that.
If the sinus becomes filled with undigested food, you know that it does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with a diaphanic ointment, when they are adjusted with excessive addition of salt.
The best way to cure it is to take a diaphanic ointment and dissolve it in rosy oil, and place it on the wound as if it were in its substance, and comfort that ointment with this one, and use it.
And in the same way, when there is no undigested food, use honey when it is thickened, and use it; or take mallow root and aloe, and grind everything together over the fire, and apply this powder on cloth and strengthen that on the sinus; and apply the same honey on the wound when it is thickened, and strengthen it on cloth.
Some remedies are administered according to the long-standing and rightful use of celestial lily (and it is celestial lily) and flour of wormwood, and centaury, and use of those simples or adjustments, triturate and grind those and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use of that.
And if the sinew is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already makes an inspection in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure as mentioned above.
Of cure of broken toes and nails and incision of the finger added and section.
Panarici is an abscess that does not come out from the nail of the said toe of the foot or of the foot, and very often it comes out in the other said, and as it is prolonged and its cure is highly valued, it is a cautionary abscess or it is corrupted, and quickly breaks into the bone before it eats away the root of the nail, and very often it corrupts all of that, and very often it pervades its corruption into the bone until it reaches the said fetid odor, and the end of the said toe is made black.
And when you have that same tool that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure with it, then carefully insert the entire excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area with that tool, which is useful in such cases.
If the bone is sound and the nail is healed, and the additions of the nail can already connect the flesh to the parts divided, and they begin to pung and lead that, then carefully place a thin layer under the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, and insert that flesh with ease, and place over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines that burned corrosively until it is all healed; and then cure that with that.
If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then carefully insert that bone and the extruded parts, because there is no time when it can be healed if it is in the corrupted bone.
And if you see that the corrosion and corruption are coming into the same place, then carefully insert that in one of the nails according to what is prescribed for its memory, and then cure that before it is healed.
If the toe is injured by a blow or a fall, and the pain is very intense, first, you should flex the patient's foot, and then quickly cut off the toe with a sharp knife in a transverse direction above the joint, and be careful that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh that is behind the toe, because you will cause great pain to the patient and may cause unnecessary damage to the flesh.
However, it is not present in all men, but rather in the flesh of some people, and it is often found in the bones, or it is often found in the toes.
And some people do not have it at the tip of the joint, or its origin is in some nodules of those mentioned. However, if it is not present in those nodules, it is not bad, and if it is not present in the joints, it is often harmful.
And of those who are not fleshy, the incision is lighter, and you should make an incision at the tip of their joint with a thin knife.
Because of the location of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, avoid its incision.
When the location of the bones is not given, first make a round incision into the flesh until you reach the bone, and then use an appropriate clamp to hold it, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
Because of the location of the bones between their joints or by birth of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar reasons, therefore avoid that consolidation until they return to their natural form.
And place between their clothes some olive oil mixed with rosewater to prevent them from being consolidated unevenly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin piece of plaster until it is consolidated according to what is appropriate.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of the hand, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
At the beginning of symptoms, they are varicose.
When symptoms are varicose, their veins become thick and full of melancholic superfluities that cause pain in the limbs of the body, and the main event of them is in the hips, especially in the hips of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer a black bowel purge to some patients with strong expulsions, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
Their cure can be done in two ways: one is to cut and insert that black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The section of the thigh is done in this way: first, boil the hip with a tail to enter quickly before the black bile becomes too thick, which is feculent from the hip, and then strengthen the patient's leg at the most superior part of the couch, entering under the blanket, and dry the vein in one place, or two, or three wide section, and then raise the black bile to the middle of the thigh, above and below, until the amount you want and how often you want, and the patient can bear it.
And then approach her, and command her to avoid foods that generate black bile causing anger.
Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that does not help the patient.
The elevation of the bed is done in this way: you raise the patient's bed, if it is possible by the legs, and place the hot water bottle on it and massage the patient's leg with hot water until it becomes warm and the veins are opened; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if the bottle is not at your present, until the member is softened.
And then apply the cord in the right of the vein for sectioning in the long or in the back of the patient, or in the lowest part of the leg you should do the drainage, or in the lowest part of the foot you should do the bandage.
And then apply the cord with a needle and excise the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and it should be done by the one who sees that patient decline to black.
And thus, as you have already taken out and removed that white, thin cord.
And then you place the bone back into that hole which is raised and rotated from the cord, and suspend it on an open jar with gold.
And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then scrape the cord from the part above the vein where it appeared.
And then lift that and insert it into the rear section of the bone, and then extract it and place it inside where it is on the second section, and then extract it from the section above.
And do that inside where you extracted it from the section that is most subtle or most distant from all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
And if you do not follow the instructions to extract and raise it, then insert a strong, double-edged needle and tie it to that, and extract it, or insert it behind the bone and rotate your hand in all parts where it is rotated. And be careful not to lacerate it; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes out over the patient and causes harm.
And when that entire area has been cut out, place it over the wound covered with wool soaked in oil and not soaked in oil, and cure that part until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the rectitude we have mentioned, then cut it at all the tortuous parts of it and in the places where it is enveloped, and suspend it on hooks until you lift the entire part.
And be careful that you do not lacerate the vein and do not harm that part, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your wisdom in that matter.
The shape of the incision made to cut the vein:
It should not be as sharp as the hooks or of sharp extremity to avoid harming the vein; and it should be made of flexible lion, for if it is too thin, it will lacerate the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have mentioned.
Of extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the hollows in lowlands, such as the Ategi in Arabian lands and in the lowlands of India, dry and arid lands with little vegetation, and in which there is no grass or abundance.
And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
And its decomposition is from the putrefaction that leaves the wound behind, such as poison that enters the body of snakes and worms and parasites and worms generating between the wound and the flesh.
And the susceptibility of its occurrence is from this vein that happens in the hollow, very inflamed; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is drawn out from the location of that blister, which seems reasonable from a plant.
And then, when it appears from there, you should cover it with a cloth of lead, which is the weight of a dragon, about two dragons, and tie that one and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
And so many times when some cause from them leads to the parts being displaced, wrap that in cloth and do not allow that. And if the wound is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the rind inside until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pustule in the spot and ulcer.
So that it may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in the length of their arm and hand, and it has reached me that it is one of twenty palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of their treatment, then introduce the ray into the wound of it and pierce that along the long track of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the spot for some days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein has some obstructions, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with painful symptoms, and is from which opening it comes.
And therefore treat that as we have said in the division and apply what has been mentioned above.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This disease is called in some places by the name of bovine sickness because it is caused by many obstructions in the belly and it is a worm that is not between the intestines and flesh, and it goes through all the body and causes it to swell and break, and it is shown at the feeling of its own part of member in member before the intestines are disrupted and come out.
And its generation is from the putrefaction of some humors such as worms and snakes and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the malignity of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very soon it enters and destroys the brain, and that is caused by many obstructions.
And so when you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done unless you first observe its position and appearance, and then strengthen the part above it and the part below it with a bandage and tighten it strongly, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is located in the flesh and not exposed, then you place a pointed cautery with fire on the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen the part above it with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines that evacuate bad humors from their body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Due to excessive pain.
This disease is not named in our land gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
And now I will tell you the second thing that I will recommend to you. He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after it had been removed for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away as if it were worms moving in that way, more lively than it should be, as if it were silver when running from place to place.
And then the pain of that place disappeared and remained in the muscle, and after an hour, it was like this.
And then correctly in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended to him that he should turn around his whole body after seeing it, and it was too marvelous about the change of it and the speed of member in member. And I had already seen that happening in some people after that manner, but I had also seen words that those were not caused by the change of member to member. I have never seen such swelling in the breasts as in women.
And I have not thought that this was the case only because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this state, the sensation of heat was reversed.
And it is necessary that this reversal does not appear in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not apply heat to that place as we have said, but strengthen it over it and gently press on it until it is covered with a layer of heat, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see that swelling in the breasts, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels heat, and carminatives those bad pills and those of serapi and similar ones.
Of extraction of herbs.
Herbs are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they grow, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those to which there are tongues; and of those that have stalks.
And when pain appears in the spine of the servant and passes through the bone, and is above the skull, which is on the brain, because of violent convulsions, scotomy, vertigo, pain in the jaws, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great fever destroys the word and the voice, and is above the location of the wet white substance similar to pus, and yellowish from the same as swelling of the flesh.
And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then you should refrain from the cure and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
When the splinter is close to the heart, it is located near the right breast, and it feels like it has caused a severe injury, not a minor one; and the movement of the splinter is similar to the movement of the limbs, and it causes black discharge, and if that fever spreads to the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
And when the splinter has pierced the lungs deeply from the discharge, and the vessels that are close to the neck have become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and quickly, and demand fresh air frequently.
And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the ribs, and it causes great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
And if the tongue is stuck in the stomach, it often causes severe pain and vomiting of undigested food.
And if the tongue is stuck in the abdomen and remains there, it often causes some pain or tears in the stomach lining, intestine, or intestine that is ruptured, and there is no hope of recovery without its removal.
And if the tongue is stuck in the bladder, and it blocks the urine from being excreted, and it causes some cause for the discharge of the parts, and it often causes severe pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, wings, and thighs, and the similar parts of the body, are saved according to the major dispositions when the tongue does not block a vein or artery and is not poisonous.
I will advise you of what I have seen of these tongues, so that you know how to treat them.
The cause of this is that in a man, the sage plant grows in the lacrimal gland of his eye in the corner of his nose, and he extracts it from one side to the other, through the grays of his eyebrow, and it is cured, and does not harm the eye.
And he extracted another sage plant from a Jew who had it in his eyebrow, through the eyelid, and the sage was already hidden and not achieved from that one but a small part of it adhered to his face, and it was a great sage of the sharp sages of the Turks, with no eyebrows.
And the Jew was cured, and no harm occurred in his eye.
And he extracted another sage plant from a Christian man who had it in his groin, and it was an Arabic sage, and it was the one with eyebrows; and then he inserted it into that one between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; and then he carefully removed it, and the Christian man was cured.
And another sage was extracted from a man who had fallen into his abdomen, and it was thought that he died from that; and since he had not changed for thirty days and nothing happened to him due to his conditions, she incised over the sage and drained it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
And another man was seen in whom a sage was found on his back, and the infection had spread over him, and after seven years, the sage was absorbed into the cushion.
And a woman was seen in whom a sage was found in her abdomen, and the infection had spread throughout her body, and she did not change in her conditions and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
And another man was seen in whom a sage was found on his face, and the infection had spread throughout his body, and he did not feel any pain, and similar symptoms to these.
And the sage was extracted from the prince of the king who had fallen into the middle of his nose and had already declined to the straight part a little, and the entire sage was hidden.
And I was called to heal him within three days of his sweating in the sickbed.
And then I again examined the wound of the patient; and then I inquired about that pain with subtle questions, but did not feel it; however, he felt it at the point behind the ear, and then I suspected that that point was related to the wound.
And I applied the ointment in that place where its virtue is both attractive and digestive, believing that this place would help me to find the location of the wound, so that it could heal over it.
And no accident occurred in that location, significant of the wound having reached that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and the wound was healing at the same time, and the patient remained without pain for several days until one day the patient felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until the fire was gone, and I examined the patient again, and again I felt the subtle location of the wound, which adhered to the skin.
And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I can see the end of the suture, and pass through my time with that for several months.
And then approach and adjust as the wound becomes larger, and place the forceps in it, and remove that, and do not neglect to continue subtly and ingeniously on that with maneuvers of engineering until one day you can hang the forceps descent from those, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then restore that wound.
And although doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no damage in it in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sutures for which you can understand that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or do not comprehend those freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare the few on one side with the many on the other; and they find that the operation is new and the instrument new, which must be descended from the external causes when an accident occurs.
And therefore it is said that wisdoms are not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that which is forgotten by the place in which it is inserted, or comes from the flesh, and is attracted and forgotten.
And if you do not obey the order of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and allow the attraction of it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is fixed in the bones and does not obey your order, then leave it for several days and repeat it with attraction and moisture in each day, and it will be forgotten.
And if you do not obey your orders promptly, then carefully cut around the spine in that bone of all parts until the space is widened enough by the saw, and then extract it.
If the wound has already been closed in the body's cavity, and it is closed from the sensation, then you should ask for that medicine, and if you feel that, then you should inject that medicine into the patient with a suitable syringe.
And if you cannot reach it due to the congestion of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should make an incision on the wound to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the wound.
And if you find those tools in the part where it is stuck, then you should remove all the flesh from that part with all the instruments that you can use; and invent ways to do this, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the bones and the twisting of those parts.
And when you administer the extraction of the wound in any part where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that object; and subtly perform the subtlety that the wound is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attachment to it and that extraction.
If you cannot do it at that time, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be repaired, and then repeat that which is usually done. But if you have difficulty in stopping the flow of blood, then administer the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure in its capital chapter.
And guard your skill in the beginning of a vein or nerve or cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the sickness; and do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness, as you would if you were doing it yourself.
And therefore, you should make the patient lie in a position that is according to the figure by which the fire for the cauterization of the sickness is done in him, as it is more useful. But if you cannot do that, then administer the remedy that is possible according to the figures.
But if the sicknesses that are expelled by the contrary of another part, or if any part has already proceeded to the parts outside, or if it causes softening of the exterior of the sickness because of the part that is above the proposed code and sometimes that eminent; then you should separate from that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
If it is held in the bone, then gently rub against the opposite direction until the knife is in the bone, and widen the opening, and then remove that.
And if not, leave that for another day, and then insert it when it is possible.
And if the knife is in that place, then push it against that.
If it has fallen out and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into that, if it is hard, use a hollow needle to push the hollow space of it into the coat of the knife and then push it against that.
If the knife is hollow, then strongly push it against that, because the knife is guided by that.
And if the knife is poisoned, then carefully remove all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with that which is appropriate.
And if the knife catches on the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut above that, then cut above that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and after that, if necessary, apply a plaster and cure that before it is healed.
Shape of forceps that holds the jaws:
With its extremities shaped like the beak of an eagle, which is made like a claw when placed on the jaw to prevent it from slipping:
And among them are special, large, thin, and flexible ones, according to the quantity of the size of the jaw and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and its construction:
With the beak of an eagle in order to prevent the instrument from slipping on it and being pushed into that concave jaw:
Of vein puncture.
The veins of puncture, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are near the temples, called jalisains; two herbs that are in the two temples, and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspics; the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegils that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are left of the tongue. May the veins that are cut in the chest be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it must be tied with wild silk; and the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is tied in the domestic rib, and it is called "citillar", and the common people name that one "the belly vein"; and the veins of the arm, and it is tied over the fire, and it is the vein in which it is cut, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the little vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest, and it is in the two ramps.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is tied with the curve of the wild silk rib; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the thigh of the domestic rib; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the thigh of the wild silk rib; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is an ancient and persistent disease, causing headaches and old sores on the head.
The quality of treating those is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the back of the neck in the place where the veins are thick with a cloth of good friction; then strongly press the patient's neck between two places that appear at the sides of the head, and the places near the ears; and ask for that one, and if you feel the pain of those, here is an attempt.
Then take the surgical needle, and that one which is inserted, and then introduce it behind the vein in the neck through where the flap comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and the neck to the parts above and insert the vein at the beginning of the incision. And the length of the incision should be about twice the diameter; and make it as deep as you want.
And apply strong pressure on that which is unhealthy to be healed.
And before the beginning of this book, there was the indication of those and their cauterization.
Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is ancient and has been misused and abused as an excessive and acute flow of blood to the head.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by their own neck with a finger through which appear the two veins at the sensation for manifest and demonstrate their polarity on the other side; and then you should try.
And then you should raise the cord above the vein at the parts indicated by the other side, and insert the phlebotomy into it, and raise the vein in its; and insert that as you have done in the two veins others; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then remove the bandage from the patient's wound, place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that side and press and strengthen that area with great constraint, and leave it until it is healed.
And then the memory of their names, and those who are unknown, and the attachment to the beginning of the book.
And then the venipuncture of the front vein is approached from the cephalic vein to the patient's old facial wounds, and emigration, and rogue and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the venipuncture of that is as I recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band that appears over the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which has this form:
Place the puncture at the top of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and leave it to run blood according to the amount you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that area until it is healed.
Some people use a bronze probe, but do not let the probe be sharp at its end like other probes, instead make it blunt before the sharp end, and probe along the transverse line where the bone is prop and strong to avoid breaking the bone when it is thin.
The swelling of the two veins that are next to the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to an infection in the eye and inflammation in the eyes, and in facial diseases.
The quality of the bronze probe is that the patient should bend their neck forward and lean on one side, and then probe along those areas, and you should be standing over their head.
The probe should be inserted along the transverse line in a short distance from the probe, where there is no flesh; and if the probe is thin, it will easily break the end of it.
Then apply pressure on the wound as much as necessary, and place your hand over those areas, and stretch them with a bandage, and then remove those.
May the fleubotomi of the vein from the nose be compared to acute fever, strong sweat, and facial maladies such as rash and migraine, and especially when it becomes chronic.
And the quality of the fleubotomy in this case is that the patient strongly holds their neck and brings their own nose to your left hand, and takes the subtle fleubotomy long and places it in the second straight location on the top of the nose, where the vein does not appear to the senses, and where the pus begins to flow soon.
So that you gradually place your hand with the small fleubotomy and make the pus flow according to your need; and then clean it with a cloth, as it is restored better.
May the fleubotomy of the two guidegui cause constriction of the arm and at the beginning of leprosy and other maladies such as impetigo, bad corrosive ulcers, and herpetic conditions.
And the quality of that podiatry is that the patient should tightly tie each foot to its own ankle with a bandage; and the artisans stand over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a mattress.
And then the podiatrist gradually wraps the long vein with a bandage, and removes as much blood as is necessary or as much as possible; and do the same with the other vein.
And then remove the bandage and tightly tie both veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave them in the bed until the wound is healed.
And the benefit of that podiatry for the veins is to prevent small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of that podiatry is that you should make the patient sit, and tightly tie their ankle with a bandage, and then rotate their lips and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the proof of each is by the darkness of each of those, and that which is more so is when there are small black veins around them; and then incise each from the beginning.
If you have any doubt about what to do, and you don't know which of those is correct, then you should understand from the incision of the largest of those, and the most manifest of those.
And make the same incision as the two veins that are on the lips above.
If from the two veins that are below the tongue, the jawment is to approach the lancet of the cephalic at preferences that are in the throat, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth ailments.
And the quality of lancet those is that it follows the patient between your hands downwards, and raises the tongue from it, and looks behind the tongue, from one side of it vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then lancet each; and you should be careful that your hand does not end up lanceting those, because after those are arteries.
And the veins that are phlebotomized in the groin are on which all men bleed, and the phlebotomy of them is done by two methods, either they put a leech with a small tail or an olive tree at a declining angle; or they cut the phlebotomist and call it venipuncture, and this is the form of it.
And the leech of it is like this sometimes, and suitable for opening convex veins full proceeding from apparent thick veins, and to those that contain heavy swelling.
And this leech is of less breadth and more subtle end, and suitable for phlebotomy of thin veins that contain subtle citron.
May the judgment of the fleubotomy of the great vein, which is one of three veins: four extracts the sand from the maladies that leave the gallbladder and the collar, and from that which goes through the chest and the abdomen.
And advise the fleubotomist, when performing that fleubotomy, to be careful in that area, where there is an artery, and if it is off-center and misaligned in the puncture of the fleubotomi, cut that artery and cause a flow of sand, so that no fleubotomies are performed with that fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.
And if the basilica does not appear as expected, then advise that you leave that and move to the other, or that you surround some part of it; or that you perform the fleubotomy in place of it at the end of the arm, where it is manifest, and cut that with the fleubotomi alnessil as we have said.
If you want to perform a bloodletting on the patient's arm, first determine the location of the artery where you will make the incision, and then place your thumb over it; then lift the arm and cut the vein along the concave section of the elbow joint, as we have said; and be careful not to perforate the artery.
When you see that the wound is healing well, apply pressure to the location where you placed your thumb, and if this pressure causes the artery to swell, then release it.
If you see that the blood is flowing like a child's urine in the bloodletting wound, and the blood is thin and watery, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and press the wound with a clean cloth for a long time; and if the blood stops flowing, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the cold and do not expose them to it until they are healed.
If the spleen is not removed, and if you must not present medicine to it, then you insert the artery, which appears to you; because its extremity is contracted, and the spleen is removed; or you take a scar from a fistula, and perform that, and take one thread and strengthen it over the location of the vein, descending from the membrane and into the other side.
And if the spleen is removed, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which the preceding recollection of the location of the powders abscindent flow of spleen is made.
The removal of the spleen from that location is difficult due to the small space of the belly and the possibility of the membrane of the arm.
If the vein is dark, the subclavian artery is greatly used to remove the spleen from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And approach the person who is most afraid during the bloodletting of the patient, because that one has a vein; and then adjust the puncture of the bloodletting to the vein, it will cause great pain to the patient, and the healing of the patient is difficult, and often not completely cured. And this vein appears as a wavy line on the skin; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach the bloodletting with the one you have done the incision of the artery, and avoid the vein with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should puncture the vein along its length.
The danger of bloodletting from the vein of the head is that it draws the health from the head and contributes to the illnesses of the brain.
And approach this carefully, if you want the bloodletting to be done with an olive or a myrtle branch; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, if the abscess is in a man, when it is not laryngoscoped in the first percussion, then do not touch that abscess.
The first of these is the one you know that laryngoscopy is not administered except for the conservation of health and the hope of it and the caution of future diseases, and that it should be performed laryngoscopy in one of the veins that are in the chest, such as: cephalic, fusca and basilica; and that it should be performed laryngoscopy at the beginning of primaveyra, before breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at mealtime, when signs of replenishment appear.
And it should be done between the first and third hour of the day.
The bleeding that is administered should be done as needed and convenient, whether at night or during the day, at all hours and in all circumstances.
And it is forbidden to bleed those who have not reached the age of fourteen, and women should not be bled except during the fourth month until the seventh, and those who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And if anyone wants to be bled for any reason, they should first check their veins with a lion's claw, if there is a wound held in place, so that the veins do not spill excess blood during the bleeding of the veins, which are pure and do not cause harm to the main members.
And those who are suffering from seasickness, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication should not be bled until they have fully recovered, nor should those with hydropsy be bled, and bleeding should be avoided in cases of colic, vomiting, and stomach pain, and in cases of multiplied gout, work, and exercise during meals or vigils, and for all causes that dissolve the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
And then consider the subtilization of humors that cause this, if the swelling is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then introduce baths and if any cause does not prevent, or is exercised by some exercise so that the swelling is subtilized.
And place the fleam on its chest during the day, around the hour of tierce, as we have said.
And perforate that chest so that it is kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, ira, fear, and all physical accidents, as we have said, such as labor, excessive pain, cold, and similar things to them.
And at its bedside make it present the causes in the use of which men have aromaticity and odor and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the fleam over a cushion that is put or that of that which should be fleammed.
And then carefully extract the patient's arm, and wipe it with a cloth or three times; and then tightly bandage the wound and wrap those cloths around it.
And if the stricture is cold, as it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prevent the flow of the bile; or if it is a softening, and then prevent the flow of the bile entirely.
And then apply the stricture, so that the one who should be bled wipes their hands together between their fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the sense.
And then the bleeder takes a small amount of ancient oil properly; and places their finger on the indicator of the right hand over that vein, where the blood is to be drawn, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that from those veins which are located where the cord would flee from the bleeding, and of those which are full of venosity and when paused the bleeder over that one is contracted, then the bleeder should be removed; and if the bleeder does not touch the vein, and if they do, that one is strict.
And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and investigated in all these causes.
And then pause the flagellant, but if the vein is punctured in a vein, then it is; otherwise, you repeat that other vein nearby that location one or two times, or over the patient's heart, if the location is not apostemat.
And if the location is apostemat, or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not strain the bandage, because that would cause the abscess to burst, nor would it penetrate into the body.
And then repeat the flagellation if necessary.
And if the puncture is small and corrects itself subtly, and you think that it may not be enough to reach the desired amount, then you repeat the flagellation in that area again with straightness and adjust the bandage a few times, and do that heart procedure while the location is apostemat, because the location becomes apostemat in some people after a few punctures.
If that wound has already become inflamed, do not touch it, as it may cause any harm; and place some part of the cloth of oil on it, which will help heal the body's wound. It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer oil bandages in all phlebotomy, which veins doctors prohibit from the body's blood, and they perform tyriac alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on one of those over the area, as the wound is made thin and is turned when it is large.
And if in the location of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by clots, and more especially to that which has not been bleeding but only clotting, or in the insertion of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the location sponge infused with water and salt, a little warm, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And cover that you do this close to the opening of that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do this; and if you want, pause over that some cause of anointing and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of sugar or honey or a similar substance to it.
And move the swollen and raised parts with incision of the base of the tongue.
And then place your hand over that, and if you later find softness of your compression over that, then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you pause over that some cause of which we have said, because it will greatly flow from the artery of the vein.
And make an astringent in that which is stopping, so that the place is durable, and cure that with another cure before it is healed.
And cover that you extract from the vein to all men according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color which remains over the vein according to what appears.
If the bone is black, leave it to soften before removing; and similarly, if you see it swollen, leave it to become thin before removing; and similarly, if it is sharp, remove it when its sharpness has been lessened.
And if the person is tall and strong and needs to have a bone extracted in a wartime situation, then amplify the fleurette of the vein and let the fleurette be on the left.
And in the case of a weak person, do the opposite of that, and let them extract it in a wartime situation, and let the track be straight.
The best thing to administer in vein puncture is transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of vein puncture saves from bone and nerve damage, and is more praised and safer than second-latitude and second-longitude puncture.
And when syncope occurs during vein puncture, then let them cure that with a small amount of infusion in the form of milgrana or simple oximel; and extract it from the bone in three or four wartime situations.
And if there is a complication of complexity, then take a syringe and infuse it with essence of mira or essence of honey aromatized with species such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar spices, or with an aromatized essence and a certain odorant.
And if the syringe is accidentally punctured, and its cause is the issuance of a certain amount of blood, then take some water of flesh and an aromatized essence with a subtle odor; use an aromatic balm, and let it be applied to the wound.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the chapter on syringes for evacuation.
And whoever wants to bring their own arm and dissolve their second blood clot, cover the syringe with the same one that is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the small amount of blood continuously according to the quantity of its virtue in the days.
When someone wants to perform the surgery on their own arm, and they are very strong, then do so around 7 or 9 hours after the first amputation.
When someone wants to remove their own ribs from the opposite side of the part where they are inclined, it should be done on the second or third day.
When that rib in which there is a severe pain and inflammation, causing a high fever, should be removed with great care, and a large amount of it should be amputated before the symptoms of sincope occur, so that you will have preserved all the conditions of the amputation; and that your hand should be placed on the side of the ribs, to prevent death from sincope, which is caused by ignorance and negligence of the surgeon.
And when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second rib, after it has been closed and difficult to remove from the vein, do not force it with such violence and bend it excessively, as this is very bad.
Having the layman who is to perform the phlebotomy, or remain that, with the sharpness of the lancet that is coagulated from the vein; or pause over that of tyrian silk, or of sagenea, and compress it within that the blood is not let out too quickly.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation is subdued.
And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then sign that on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called “funis del bras” is phlebotomized in the place of the fusca or the basilica, when it is not atrophied or agglutinated, which are composed of those.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is that the patient introduces his hand in warm water until the vein appears clearly.
And then apply strong pressure on the narrowed part of the urethra; and then insert the catheter second, not laterally or in line with the length.
And make your catheter insertion wide and place it at the joint of the arm where you inserted it previously.
And if the discharge of urine is prohibited, then you should immerse the arm in water and let the urine flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing the arm in water and the same applies to placing the body of the patient in cold water in the time of winter.
And the catheter insertion in this vein is safer than from all other veins, because it does not have a pulse or nerves.
And the catheter insertion in the back of the arm is like the injuries of the leg.
And the quality of this catheter insertion is that you press the arm at the elbow or at the arm, rather than placing it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and has been demonstrated to be veined; and then insert the catheter transversely; and if you insert it from all angles, it will not hurt.
And do not let your hand remain on the patient's throat, leaving them exposed to the risk of damaging their nerves.
And then repeat this process in the lower back, as if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And as the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place your hand on the vein or salt, so that it does not become solidified constantly; and similarly, you should do in every straight line.
The difference between the throat and your hand is that they are compared to the maladies of the melon.
And do the same in the throat as you did in the other one.
And the difference of the jugular vein from the throat is to the maladies that are in the part behind the neck, similar to the maladies of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and to the maladies of the ronchos and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their similarities to the maladies.
And the quality of the foot bath for him is that the patient inserts his own foot in warm water and makes movements over the friction area where the veins appear; and ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein is taken away from the said pain, and from there it branches out on the surface of the foot as a ramification.
And then perform friction on the widest branch or behind the cushion, where the vein is located, and place it under the bandage, which is better and more salty.
And if you perform friction on that on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and pause your friction with the one you friction through, as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the friction be silent.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you rub the foot of him in the warm water and let the pus run out in the area where it is evacuated.
If the flue-bottle is mistakenly placed in the first vein, then repeat the procedure on the same spot, as the location is safe; and do not fear the malice, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have mentioned.
And similarly, make a point on the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have mentioned, behind the knee of the wild animal's leg.
And the juice from the flue-bottle procedure is at the angle when it is properly cauterized.
And the quality of the flue-bottle procedure is that the patient is in great pain, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion under their leg from the side of the wide entrance above the knee into a long, subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then you flue-bottle each opening that is possible and transverse, which is better; or incise those at the beginning or sever those at the end, as the location of this is safe.
And it is in men more common; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the touch of all, then apply a cotton swab to some part of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot and the ankle.
And be careful of the nerves, and make a small incision in the amount you want.
Then remove the structure and place your hand over the area of the cotton swab incision and press on it, which is usually healed.
Of the remedies and qualities of using those.
Remedies are of corn, or of earth, or of verdigris.
Remedies are made in two ways: one of theirs is incision and extraction of pus, and the other is remedy is incision.
And this remedy that is incision is made in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the remedies that are administered with incision and extraction of pus are fourteen parts of the body, one of which where remedies are placed is called alnocrati, and the last part is divided into the head; and the middle part of two parts of the neck is underneath the chin; and remedies behind the jawbone after the mouth; and remedies of two spoons; and remedies of an eagle's beak, and it is on the edge of the coccyx; and remedies of two tongs, and they are of two bones; and remedies of two cavities; and remedies of two cushions.
And if the incision does not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is sometimes done by phlebotomy; nor should one believe that ventozacio should be made with fire or hot irons in some bad condition for folding inside before the whole body is completely evacuated.
However, if it is necessary to cause ventozacio due to illness or continuously, administer it at all hours at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in some cases of those, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command that a blister be made before it has passed two or three hours.
And it is necessary to drain the blister from the nape because when that confers gravity to the head and that which is poured into the veins, but rather that that be appropriated evacuation of all the body.
And this blister is in the location of the lumbar puncture of the cerebral.
And it is not good to use that which is of simple complexity, or in which is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason do not use those of the old, and in the heads of which are diseases poured.
And rather than that which is continuously on that is made forgetful; and for that reason do not order the blister maker to place his hand on the parts behind, lest the generation of forgetfulness.
May it be noted that the ventilation of alcohol is in place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for this, it confers asthma, and the constriction of the lungs, and the scissure of the stomach, and coughing, and the replacement.
And it is necessary that the alcohol ventilator be small, if it is placed underneath, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilator of alhagdahan confers the accidental pains in the head and to the tongue, and emigration, and prefocus, and pain in the teeth; and it is in place of fleubotomy of the basilica.
And it is necessary that you command the ventilator not to press his hand during the scarification so as not to pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And the ventilator placed in the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is in place of fleubotomy of the herb that is in the lower lips.
May the steam that is made over the two spoons be compared to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
And the steam from the two parts of the forks is greatly helpful in the process of vein bleeding, which includes the basilic, femoral, and cephalic veins, where those veins that are most superficial in the flesh, and those small veins that branch off from the other larger veins until they reach the three main veins.
And command the steamer that he not proceed with incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then his nerves and arteries are left.
And there is a steamer that is used to steam over the buttocks and is compared to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left behind.
And make sure that the steamer is large and made of iron, because the area requires strong separation; and it should be thin and used for incision during the incision process.
When the bed is covered with many blankets, which pulls the entire body down, and relieves old pains of the ribs, the back, and the bladder; and provokes menstruation, and relieves constipation and diarrhea; and takes the place of tracheotomy for two hours, and alleviates coughing, and two hours of caviling.
However, it can weaken the entire body and cause hiccups in some people.
And from the blankets, alleviating coughing is preferred to alleviating coughing with two hours of blankets.
The quality of the position of the blankets is that they are placed at the beginning of the night and gradually increased in temperature, and do not prolong the position of the blankets, but rather pause them occasionally, and maintain them constantly, and let the humors come to the place for equal advent. And do not cease repeating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened and inflamed, and that the pain of the back appears.
And then you should shave and repeatedly scrape the skin in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Because that man who has thin flesh and is prone to ulcers, you should shave him in one go and not repeatedly, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the blower to fan the shaving and apply a small amount of it, and at the same time facilitate the scraping.
And if in the shin it becomes thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving, the path of subtlety to the shin and its moisture is opened. And in the second, at the examination of the acquired moisture of the extraction of the shin.
And if the shin is too fecal, then make a thorough shaving in the third cleaning to obtain the rear.
And finally, when we want to extract the shin little by little or a small amount, provide us with a shaving.
And if you want to extract a thorn, use a sharp incision; and if we know that the thorn is large, then you should make an incision with a pointed instrument.
The term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
And if the one who has the thorn has a large, hard, black thorn, and its pores are straight, then you should choose locations for the incisions that are more lenient, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use oils like aloe, lavender, or chamomile oil, or camomile oil; and if it is in the winter, use oils like narcissus, lily, or camomile, or thyme oil.
And if the excess is large, rough, then you should choose oil like amaranth, or basil oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, or similar ones.
But if the thorn is in wide pores of thin flesh, then you should avoid using oil, and instead use water like solar water, or fresh water, or water of chamomile, or similar ones.
And if the patient's skin is moist due to excessive humidity, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of salt, water, and similar ingredients.
And if the patient's excessive perspiration is thick, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of mint water, tarragon, or camomile tea, and similar ingredients.
And it is important to keep the armpit clean; having been cleaned, it should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and it should be kept close to the armpit.
What is the reason why one should be bled before being washed?
If the person who is to be bled or the one who will do the phlebotomy is irritable and has a sharp and inflamed skin, then it is important to use cooling causes such as vinegar, sour milk, laytuguas tea, secanabin, julep, and similar ingredients.
Pause their meals and place them with polenta, and meat from chickens, and cooked foods made with herbs, and similar to those.
Of that which has a bad complexion, take borage or borage of acacia seeds, and sumac, and some fragrant herb between old and new; and recommend to use little wine and food, and pause the meals of bread, cane, pepper, small birds, and pigeons.
And recommend that on the day of ventozacio and bleeding, the wine is greater than the food.
And recommend that wine is given to some men with tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, so musked, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant bleeding or nearby, so that the main members are strengthened and that the sinew is refined; and do not recommend that they take that scalfatz.
Let the ventozas that are their incisions be ventozas that are paused over the feet, and above the calf and gout, and above the navel, in the places of the joints, and the big toe, because these members do not suffer incision over them.
And it is not sought for those but for attraction of blood from a member, such as a cotton bandage on the breast in case of blood flow from the wound of the navel; and they use that to dissolve the moisture of the member, such as a cloth on the abdomen and umbilicus; for that refreshes the member and draws out the blood and relieves the pain that is resolved by moisture.
And it is placed on the ribs when they are affected by hernia or boil, for the strength of attraction quickly heals the hernia and eradicates the boil from its location.
And similarly, when it is placed on the foot and ankle to draw out moisture in those affected by swelling.
And these bandages are administered with success only sometimes; and some are administered with heat.
And some are administered full of cold water in the afflictions of the ankle.
And that is why the bandage is full and large, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs suitable to it have been boiled.
The form of ventozum administered by fire: the width of the orifice should be twice the distance we have formed it; and the quantity of the powder should be the length of one palm; and it should be placed on the side of the wound, in the location where it is in the circle, the most towards the wound, the thread should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
It should be made of hair or citrus, with thick margins, lion's teeth, and sharp edges so that it does not harm the member in its position over it.
And it should be at the edge of the longitudinal wound made of hair or iron, where the candle is placed by the fire.
And this ventozum should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the amount of it should be less according to the illnesses and the state of the person who uses it.
The ventozums of children and the elderly are different from the ventozums of young people and large-breasted women.
The quality of applying this ventozum by fire on the member is that it extends the flame from the wood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place it at the edge of the longitudinal wound in the middle position of the ventozum, so that the fire is lit around the part where it is not burned.
And place your hand on the patient's body, and the dressing over that, until when they are holding their breath and do not need to open the dressing and let the steam out over that area, then the wound will soon be dissolved.
And apply the medicine according to its method, and repeat that if necessary for that area.
In a wound that is being treated for pleurisy, use water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal incision, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the body alone.
And this is the method of it: This dressing, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter XCVII.
Blood-soaked dressings are not administered to any body parts except to those in which it is impossible to position ventosas, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a naked part of the body, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers that are in the waters of polluted pools.
And then take the patient's clothes and place them in the water of the polluted pool, where they are boiling, and do not cause any harm in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body through the beginning of bleeding and vomiting; and then rub the patient's limbs before they become red; and then place them on top.
And when they are full and case.
And if it is possible to ventilate the area with wind, it is better in a room.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and then apply hot water; and then rub and express.
And if the body of the sick is prolonged, then place it in the pool of bloodsuckers, and then remove that cloth from above when the drainage is complete.
And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with vitriol trisulfate, or with garlic and similar substances to stop bleeding, until the wound is separated; or place the most ripe beans on top of the wound, and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then separate the wound.
And if necessary, transfusion of blood, when possible, change those.
And if blood transfusions are prohibited from suspensions, then apply heat to the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be found; and place your hands over those, as the blood will soon dry up.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle some powdered aloe vera, salt, or ash on those places, and they will cough soon.
And here begins the lecture on the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh child, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences on our earth is hidden; and I have not done so at any time, but I have learned it after a long reading of the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And approach the study and experiment throughout the length of one's life.
And I have already described all of that in this chapter, which contains the main science and upon which the best experiment was passed; because it also brightens up for you others and delivers it from the occupation of length; and it also brightens up in the end of brightness; and it also shows it in the end of declaration; and it forms in it some forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two previous chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from the fact of bone fractures, from those of which previous mention is necessary before we begin to remember the membranes of the broken and different ones of each. So that we may say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which understanding is given, upon which the artist and the station are placed on the truth of those; so it is you and those who know or learn this noble art other than you.
When a fracture or dislocation or twist or carpal tunnel syndrome occurs to someone, it is customarily called a "fleubotomia" or "alleviation" of that, or whatever else, unless there is some cause that prevents it, as in the case of debilitation of virtue, or if it is the one who is affected, or old and decrepit, or if it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and bird flesh and crab; and do not eat large pieces of meat or fill yourself with foods that fill the veins with sanc, until you are sure of no abscess, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their usual first treatment.
And when the bone is beginning to be restored, it is customarily called "nutrition" of food that is heavy and thick in which there is viscosity, such as bread made from wheat flour and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and bellies of cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar to those, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more lightly and mildly.
And you know that the bones of the skull when they are in men who are in their prime and in the elderly, cannot be continuously and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
But nature adjusts and annects over the broken bone of all parts in some cause similar to glue in which it is thickened that adheres and strengthens that part that is enchanted and connected together, until venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent that from its works.
And for this cause it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, just like we have said.
And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the skull; and a fracture of the ribs is different from a fracture of the shoulder; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in each separate chapter.
Great variety of fractures in itself is a sign of illness. The types of bone fractures are diverse in their appearances; for example, some are made by arches, others by stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the ribs, stars, and additions proceed and do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a breach and disruption in the skull, and the small fracture.
And for each type of fracture, there is a particular pain in the restoration of it according to what will come from the memory of it in its separate places.
Large swelling due to bone fracture. And for that, it is known as a bone fracture: the swelling of it, and from that elevation and apprehension to the touch, and when you feel that at your hand.
Therefore, if there is no swelling or pain in the location and it does not make you wince when you touch the bone with agitation, and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is swelling or a small fissure, and you may feel it when you press your hand on it and compress the area; place something over it of the medicines of which you have remembrance appropriate at that moment; and keep it straight by subtle restriction.
And you will know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another, as it remains entirely in its place, then cover it with something that begins from your hour for rectification of the habitual that happens to it apostema caution.
And if an abscess occurs, leave it open for several days until it stops oozing; then apply a poultice of equal parts of bread and milk.
And you should know that the healing of the wound and its contraction is more difficult than that of the bone in which the injury occurred.
And then apply strength to the second one as it heals.
But if the bone is broken, it is necessary to extend this member, which is usually the leg or foot; or your hand if the member is small; or two cords or one cord and a hand.
And place your hand in the position where you placed it, while the parts of the broken member are being extended; then apply pressure to those additions and pull them back into their places.
And be careful not to hurt the patient with your operation or cause further injury; and apply the bone to the other as best as possible.
And if at that time you touch your hand on the patient's body and see any different cause, correct it and equalize it according to the amount of your skill.
And if you excessively extend and compress, as some foolish surgeons do when they move their hands, it can cause the accumulation of pus around the wound, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen from their movements.
And the quality of the fracture in the limb is such as I have recommended, so you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance and size and shape.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, you should wrap them in very thin cloth.
And for those that are large, like the mattress or the pillow, you should wrap them in a thick and strong wrapping, because the looseness of the wrapping strengthens the limb greatly and equally to all parts of the fracture, so that there is no gap.
And then, start with equal evacuation, place a convenient bandage over that fracture, on the location of that fracture, with three or four layers after the limb has become slightly less swollen; and strengthen your hand by holding the bandage.
And then, go to the most swollen part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not tear the location of the fracture. And then gradually extend your tongue into the area of the fracture, and slowly soften the structure until you reach a large portion of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the fracture, and gradually bring the bandages to the part that has been left behind after the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place a cushion or cloth between the bandages that is equal to the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place a cushion over the other bandage, and gradually equalize these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and then place the cushion on the place where the abscess was and that reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen the bandages.
And if the cane's handle is made of laurel wood, and well formed; or of pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each handle be according to this form and figure:
However, the star that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the handle should be according to its size and proportion; and strengthen the other end with another bend according to your first structure; and then lay a cloth decently over it, as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
And it is recommended that the threads be made of thin and subtle silk, and they should be of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of closing wounds with thick threads of cord, and this is a great error when catgut is used to make the structure equal.
And thin, sharp instruments are not suitable, because you will not be able to accurately cut what you want, and you will not avoid the risk of one puncturing another.
And if the patient is lying flat on his back near the puncture site, then place a soft cloth or woolen blanket over him to prevent injury from that spot.
Some fractures are accompanied by dislocations, and some occur in the spine, and you will find a membrane in that area.
And you should know that all broken bones do not require immediate immobilization; the reason for this is that when a bone is large, it does not need to be kept still on the splints until five or seven days later, according to your judgment of the risk of infection.
And this is the method of splints that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Translation: A plaster of a consistency similar to that used for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexions and especially for women and children, as it does not contain heat or humidity: you should take powder from ground molasses, and this is the medulla of the flour that you need to move the muscle in the sides of the moli.
Translation: And if it is not present, then crush that which is in the same way, but grind this white of egg, and place the application on the unspoiled or delicate part; and use that.
Translation: Another plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and torsions: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from milk thistle, all ana drac. x; of manna and aloe vera ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all of their crushed and ground and mixed with water or with the white of egg if the complexion of the patient is scaly; and use this plaster, as it is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many men.
Another plaster for fractures and sprains: take marjoram, white wine, dragon's blood, and Armenian bole. X grams of marjoram, V grams of white wine, VI grams of dragon's blood, and XX grams of Armenian bole.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their strainers, and their confits in water or albumen of egg, and administer it.
Plaster for joints and bones that are separated from their places, and for painful accidents in those and in fissures and fractures: take a piece of linen cloth and immerse it in VI vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
In this plaster, the virtue of restoration is not present, but it has the property of preventing and expelling pus and pain properly.
Another plaster for restoring broken bones: take fig branches and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Hand plaster applied for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want to resolve a long-standing abscess: take aloe leaves, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together and well kneaded; if the member is not scalded.
However, if it is scalded, then apply this moistened colchicum or moistened water from it.
Another stronger plaster for the resolution of long-standing abscess than this first one, when it happens to the member: take leaves of aloe and seeds of lily, and balm, melissa, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all mixed together and well kneaded; all of this is rubbed with water or milk or honey, depending on the quality of the member and its color.
However, if you do not have Ypocras wine, then a wax and oil mixture should not be placed on the member's forehead for its restoration, but rather a cerote made of wax and oil; and it is recommended that it be thin between coarseness and subtlety.
May it be seen in Guyana that they are placed on the broken member for the restoration of it and the causes in which exsiccation is a little bit of heat so they have with mirrors, similar to their own causes that we have mentioned.
Recipe for a plaster that comforts the injury and pain: take equal parts of mallow, honey, peeled human skin or penis of an owl, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make a plaster.
If the amount is according to the kind of wound that was made and it is not displaced, consider if there is no pain or swelling and the bone is not broken, then you should not remove it for several days. And if there is pain, swelling, or inflammation at the location, then you should remove it in that hour, and apply the plaster to it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge of lion's mane moistened with water, and soak it in warm water until the swelling stops and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil or rose oil over it for one night until you are sure of the abscess being caut, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and that the pain of it has decreased.
And then gently repeat that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong bandage for your first constraint, and gradually heal that which is sick.
And if you see that the abscess and the pus and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already healed from everything, and you need to apply a bandage and a constraint, then you repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm comes to the member from those that we have said, then do not remove it but wait three days or four or five or six; and some of these days are left until twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, before the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to what precedes its remembrance.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more exhausted than usual, then you know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a clean cloth soaked in warm water to that area for the entire day; and do this for three days; and gently loosen the bandage, and through this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more successfully.
However, if the folk remedies for healing the broken member are applied at another time when it has not been restored to its original position, according to what is usual, and then restored according to its curvature, this is an error according to their operation, and great fear arises, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient remedies in their freedom and would be better than that operation.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they do not do that.
Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by a blow to the bone, which penetrates the entire bone, which is called the shaft, just like it does in the stick, and for this reason, this type of fracture is called an impacted fracture; or the blow enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh but does not pass through to the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called a complete absolute fracture.
And the severity of these fractures is great or small, and the type of fracture whether it is contracted or dislocated; and the cause of this is a blow from a pole or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum which is behind the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these fractures is great or small.
And the type of fracture is that it is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
And the fracture is made by a blow or fall on stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some part of the bone to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave place where the ribs are when they are broken by their impact and the broken pieces enter the parts inside.
This is more commonly made in the bones of the human body, such as its ribs.
And these species of fractures are called simple, as they occur when bones separate from each other. And you would also find the cause of all this in its place.
And you would also recognize all these species of fracture by detection on those and by inquiry about their causes and the corrupt flesh that is on them.
And a special kind is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is applied to the injury, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that manifest themselves clearly due to the cause, such as vomiting from colic, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to the symptoms of major dispositions, these are not cured.
And if you do not see any symptoms that do not correspond to the cause, then you hope for recovery, and then you begin the treatment of it.
When the cause is that it has come to your leg in the beginning with the same pain and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day fourteenth, entirely disposed.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving the day seventh, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pannicol, and that accidents which have happened.
And if the fracture has already reached the pannicol covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should study inscribed with the small and atrophied part, according to what I recommend to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient with the pain, and discover over the bone according to custom and your ability, according to the figure of the pain, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if it happens to you that you detect the bone, flow of pus or abscess carefully, then you should pause at the patient and that which is necessary, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in six and olive oil, and make a bandage over the pain until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor tool, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor tool, slightly wider than the previous one; and this is the form of it:
And then use the wider incisor tool.
And you should name different incisor tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of which are shorter than the others and have a sharp or dull edge at the end of their extremities, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor tool so that you do not hit your head and cause injury to yourself.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill around it by using incisor tools called "taravals" which are not deep.
And these are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone to where it is located, so that the taravel has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left of the sharp edge similar to the margin or a small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the dense part of the bone.
It is advisable to take many of these small needles that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is present in all parts of the skull, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and breadth according to the quantity of its size.
This is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of perforating in the circle of the fractured bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it around its points until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around it is.
And then insert the small scissors that are between each fracture of the bone, and make it as thin as possible on top of it, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or your hand, or some other cause for the movement of those that will appear at this, as with fine tweezers and forceps.
And be sure to guard against the scissors touching any cause of the skull.
And so, when you have circled the bone that is perforated, and if it continues to be attached to the fascia, and you extract it, cover it with a cloth that is rough and unequal to the other instruments similar to an incisor, but rather more sharp and more subtle than the others.
And if there are any small fragments of bones and sharp edges, then take that one with difficulty from the instruments; and approach it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is very long and frightening, which Gualia and Laurez call great; and this is the word of it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and cheerful incisor, which is the form of it.
And if the lens-shaped part is not indented and does not cause any problem, and the sharp part is located two centimeters apart in length, as often; then adjust the lens-shaped part to the cipher at the face of the sharp part entering the bone.
And then perforate the bone with a small needle into which you can insert the entire bone for ease of movement, and be sure that the tendon does not get injured in any way, and if the medicine14 was the most powerful of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if it was asleep.
If any attached cause to the tendon is found in other locations of the bone, then insert that into the lens-shaped part at the end of the needle, and release that from the bone with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the tendon, and what is cut or stuck to the bone is the face of that, and it is in the roughness and subtle scratches, then remove that roughness and remove those scratches with a fine razor that you have prepared from various amounts so that you can administer them in the most convenient places of theirs and the most correct of those after that in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and the shape of that.
And you should give in your reason the one that makes you believe that it is the best, and then use it appropriately near that place, and do not stop doing that until you reach administering the thinnest part of all those razors.
In each of the other small cracks and thin fractures, you should give treatment according to what you lost for the correction of it.
And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in large fractures.
And if the skin is stretched when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the same quantity as the wound, and immerse it in rosinated oil, and place it on the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and immerse it in vinegar and oil, and place it on the first cloth, and do that as well as you can over that, without pressing it; and then administer a thin layer of linen, and do not press it except for the amount that the wound has, only enough to hold it together.
Let this man rest from this cure for a day or two until it is certain that the abscess has been cautiously treated; and then remove him and administer medicines that are excessively moistening, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of myrrh and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that is to remove but not bite.
And guard yourself that the wound in your cure is not raw; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or another; nor do you allow to aggregate virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's panniculus, corrupts that and pores that, and happens above the patient that malice malignant.
And happen in the head's skull, as from it is modified the bone and much when it is thinned the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and therefore consider now if it happens to the patient those accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for all.
If no other medicine has been used except for the one placed above, and it is effective in treating that blackness, then take a piece of honey and four pieces of olive oil, and place those lines on a cloth, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the specific treatments that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces evenly, but rather one of those certain angles, because in it there are two bones, where the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it does not break and does not affect it except for its angle, tortuosity, and swelling.
But if one of the two pieces is broken, then you should introduce the other piece into its own nose, and equalize that fracture with the opposite side, until it returns to its natural shape. And this should be done by you for your own convenience, and be careful not to disturb the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not permit it, then apply pressure to the end of the bone where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same.
And bring the patient to the first day of the fracture for restoration, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cauterizing agent.
And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be so thick that it fills the nostril.
And it is said of the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in bandages and changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is recommended that the cloth be wrapped in a piece of waxed paper to keep the bone from moving.
And sometimes a splint should be inserted into the nose, in place of the calga, or covered with a cloth from the lion; and that you have not broken the fracture of the nose too violently, and that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make calgas.
And if another splint is necessary, apply it to the nose with beeswax or with a mixture of quicklime and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if no splint is necessary, then cover that deformed part with a mixture of starch and powdered chalk from the white of an egg; and place your hand on the lion's skin to prevent the nose from being deformed.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or crushed at the fracture, then cover them with a mixture that is appropriate for those; and close the wound, and heal it with what is suitable, and apply appropriate bandages.
If there is a problem with the nose, then apply warm compresses and administer a catheter with a tube to relieve it completely.
Chapter 4
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look if the fracture is only deformed and not completely broken into two pieces, and is curved to the parts inside, then it is not serious.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert the same finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and push it against the part of the fracture inside, and your other hand on the part of the deformed bone; and gradually equalize them.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then apply traction on both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
If teeth are dislodged and disrupted, then you should hope that they remain attached to the gold wire or silver wire or silk; and place a piece of cloth over the broken jaw, and place a doubled cloth over it, and place a large stiff cloth decently on it, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above according to how you have prepared the support and what is suitable for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be calm, and place a soothing drink in their mouth.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day you should take it off and apply what is already altered to the wound with powder of milk, album of egg, or flour of cinnamon, before you have placed the plaster on it, and place a lion's wool bandage over it.
And then with this annex and adjust the plaster to it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three weeks.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications in their bedrest until they are healed, and that abscess remains.
And if the fracture is severe, then consider whether the separated bone is broken or not, and if it is not broken, then use the same method that is appropriate for removing those bones from the instruments.
And if the holes of the wound are narrow, then use the forceps according to the amount of your need.
And when you have set those broken bones, and if they do not remain in place, then enlarge the holes of the wound; and if they are not wide enough, then place one of the appropriate bandages on that area and keep it there until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
The scapula is broken in the part near the shoulder, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When the bone is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore; or if there are fragments in the wound, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is complex.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is complex, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the broken bone and follows the broken ribs, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
And then align the fracture with the ribs until it is shaped like the second rib, and not in the prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make the size of it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the broken rib and tie it with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
And if you cannot tie the end of the rib to the broken parts, so that it does not reach the neck, then cover the patient with a cushion larger in size.
And the assistant priest pulls the muscle of the patient from the parts that were previously entered, so that the bone of the furcula is raised to be in the position on top, and then you correct the fracture and equal it to those mentioned above.
However, if you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains for ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision on that area with one of the scissors that you have prepared for that purpose, after having placed the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or a hammer of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a carpenter's hammer of which this is the concavity; and its length should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
However, the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that there should be two ends with which, one end being wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you incised when you extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is sure to become an abscess, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the size of the wound's incision.
And if an abscess forms, then pour in warm water and apply a cloth soaked in oil and warm water, and place it over that.
And even if the metal plate above the broken bone is not removed; and in order for you to see that the patient's condition improves each day, when the bandage becomes soft or you see that the plate is no longer needed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the bone.
And then place the patient's pillow on their back, and place another pillow under their arm to support their arm in the new position; so that the assistant can raise the broken part of the clavicle to the level of the muscle; or hold their arm against their chest.
And do not remove the bandage unless an abscess forms in the wound within 12 days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that it has become loose at that location, and adjust it to fit the bone and restore it until it is healed and the broken part of the clavicle is coagulated.
And it should be strengthened and made comfortable according to the wound in 28 days, and some people have it done in less time than that.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
The splint is broken at the back of the shoulder and not broken in the middle, but only on the edges.
And when the place of the shoulder is broken - and it is broken in the middle - and it is not known except by touch, according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it according to the natural figure in any way possible.
And place your hand over the powdered bone of alum and lion; and place a rolled cloth on it; and place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more.
If the layer is concave at any point of the splint, then level that concavity with lion's mane, and place the layer according to equality.
And place a strong bandage above the wet layer according to proper tightness and firmness of the layer until it does not remain in its own place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, tie another ligature and strengthen it and equal the style if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their side.
The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the ligature, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and place it behind the heel, then you cut it on it, and stop it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is sometimes broken in the middle of it and that ends here; but the extremities of it are somewhat bent and comminuted.
And when the leg is broken, it declines to the parts of the foot and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and strong fever and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the bone broken and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the leg is to lie the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the leg, adjust the ribs of the leg to two straight lines, and carefully perform the operation of the leg and maintain its balance according to all possible methods that are suitable for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken leg on a thin tablecloth or calendered cloth, so that you wrap it in a cloth; and carefully apply the poultice to the broken bone so that it is not maggot-ridden; and go to the wound as soon as it has softened, and strengthen it with stricture. And consider the wound throughout the hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
If it is necessary to remove the bandage or plaster that has caused irritation, pain, or an abscess in the area, then you should remove and discard it, eradicate the ointment, and rectify the condition using a suitable method of treatment; and if it is necessary to reapply the ointment, do so according to its application.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of ribs when they are fractured.
You should know that rib fractures do not occur in the broader parts of the ribs, but only in their narrower parts, which are cartilaginous. And you should not be afraid to examine the patient's ribs during the inspection of the patient and the described symptoms.
The restoration should be such that it matches the fracture described above, as much as possible, until it is healed, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone according to this method.
And if the rib fracture is inclined towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture experienced by someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and this causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood, which is difficult to cure.
And the ancients used to treat that with a large amount of ointment.
And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth that causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and stretched, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
We do not advise this unless it is not the cause of generating an abscess, if it does not happen; and if it has already happened, then we help with that.
And they said to him that it should be placed above the wound and that it should suck strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the drain will draw too much fluid to the area due to weakness.
And they said to them: cover that place with a woolen cloth that has been previously soaked in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, which is the same as when you apply the second plaster; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the patient suffers from severe constriction that they have not experienced before, and the bones puncture the veins, then cover them with a cloth over the patient, tear open the torn costa, and place your hand on top of the instrument that contains the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
And then they should adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess forms, then you should cover it and insert powder in hot oil and place it on the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him lie on his left side while he is healing.
Chapter 9.
About the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum and backbone.
Some wounds can lead to fractures in the bones of the neck and back, and they are often accompanied by injuries to their surrounding tissues, similarly to the sacrum of the back. And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider this: if their muscles are already softened, stunned, and dead, and they cannot move or stretch those muscles, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in those areas, then know that they will not be healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
And if they feel pain in those areas when pressed or pricked, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will likely recover.
And if you see similar symptoms in the backbone of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
When you see that it has already become soft, if you notice that those things happen in the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes constipated and unable to urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of it is to perforate the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with some drops of olive oil and rose water; place some people on top of it until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen on that one; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if it happens that the tissue of the bone is separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and cast that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some ointment, until it is healed.
If the back of the knee is broken, and it is the end of the thigh, then enter your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint over it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken bones in it, then treat that, and stop that, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the anus.
The bones of the anus are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that place and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize the second one that you have on your hand to the first, so that it is evenly distributed between them and is similar to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or that has already declined to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their back between them and prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of cord, and strengthen the structure on which you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of that which is placed in the place where that fracture has been restored by the structure according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if there is an abscess, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place another on that which precedes it; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has a cover.
And if there are fractures or bones that are crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11:
On the restoration of the fracture of the supporter.
This is the part that is between the ribs and under the shoulder blade.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp with your hand as follows:
And if it is attached to the two ends of two ribs, then lift it up from the place and suspend it.
And place the patient on a stool; and lift up the broken arm over the chair until it reaches the tip of the shoulder, in the middle place where the curve of the chair is attached.
And suspend it over that heavy object, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and the surgeon places the fracture in its place again, until the fracture returns as it was.
And the other servant should place the patient on their back and support their head with a pillow; then command two ministers to hold one under the fracture, and the other behind them; and each of them should extend their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then apply pressure on the fracture with the pillow and on the other pillow, and each of the two ministers should extend their parts.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the pillow on the wound and the other behind the fracture to protect it.
Similarly, if the fracture is near the wound, then place the pillow on that location and on the wound.
Equalize it with the wound and its surroundings, and when it is well equalized according to what should be applied by good application, then apply pressure to prevent post-traumatic infection carefully.
If an abscess occurs, leave the restriction inside for seven days, and place a poultice made of bread crust soaked in vinegar and oil on it until it heals, and then apply that again.
The method of applying that is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; then adjust the arm on this supporter, and place your hand on their muscle.
Then cover the cloth and apply pressure on the arm supporter to keep the arm in place, unless there is any reason not to do so due to the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And place the splint that is farthest and strongest among the others over the fracture; and between each splint, place a layer of the same thickness as the splints, which should be three inches long on each side.
And then apply pressure to the splints and the restriction that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary for your structure to be placed more straightly on the location of the fracture. And when the fracture becomes longer, the structure should be smaller.
And if you see the position of the pins and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and the pins inside for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that it does not occur in the wrong location or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
But if you are sure that nothing of this happens, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place your hand over the helper full of wool equally, and consider in every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not torn or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
Pause the patient's meal according to the order we have given before, unless the meal is too subtle in the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then cover that with a cloth.
It is customary for the helper and the servant to be strengthened in ten days; and then cover them with a cloth, and give them a bath and medicate them with the remedies that correct that.
And if the fracture is not healed after that time, then you should not remove the bandage and the splints within one day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones that are called two branches; one is small, and it is the one that is called the wrist, and the other is large and it is the one that is placed below the small one, from the elbow downwards.
And if the larger branch is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are both broken at once.
When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration would be more difficult, and its healing would be more difficult.
And when the large intestine is cut below the fracture of it is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And even worse when two bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate the restoration of it by placing a small extension.
But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then place a more forceful extension.
And if both intestines are cut, then place a stronger extension.
And place the hand of the doctor on the abdomen for the restoration of it and extend the extension over a cushion, and the feet of the patient should be above all others, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a flat bed.
And place a cushion under the patient's head or back to prevent them from moving.
Then the assistant extends their arm on the side of the patient that is farthest from their hand or clothing, and another assistant does the same on the other side.
And the doctor straightens the bones as much as possible according to the best figure that can be achieved.
And if there are nails in the bone fracture, then carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
And if there is a nail that has entered and cannot be hoped for in the restoration of it, then do as we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is in the thigh, you have already taken care of that specific case, and therefore take care of that cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth made of roasted oil and white wax between subtlety and delicacy, and strengthen the cloth over that thin structure until the abscess is cured; and then remove the wax and place an ointment prepared from ground moli and clarified honey, and place a poultice. And let the cloth that is placed on that fracture be as close to it as possible and as strong as possible.
And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is found in its major positions, or if it is a fracture in one or two places at once.
And then place your bandage most firmly and forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when more of the bandage is above or below the fracture, place it more gently than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that can be moved easily between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and its position close to those days. And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned for that member, and then make sure that you introduce the member into water before that problem stops.
And do not keep the member inside until it becomes painful, and then return the bandage.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and appearance like those, then straighten all of that with your skill.
And if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive swelling, then gently loosen that one and lay it aside for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
But if no cause of those things has occurred to the patient within about 20 days or around that time, then do not allow it to be discharged.
And have the hand of the patient suspended over them by their skill in moving and make them sleep on their side.
And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is very severe, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the body and the skill of the healer.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those like it.
You should know that the pinch of the thigh and the ankles of those who have the mentioned tart end with a fracture, and do not touch them except for certain very small movements.
And when you touch the patient's fracture or injury, make sure that the patient is lying flat and evenly on their back, and place your hand over the affected area extended.
And then, the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor holds those that are connected well with good concavity.
And make sure that the bandage and the poultice are applied, but do not touch the abscess carefully; and place your hand over it according to the size of the area, and you have already covered it with a cloth of linen.
But if the splint is in the parts of the abdomen, and make it similar to a cloth, and command the patient to press that on their abdomen splinted; then strengthen the cloth long.
And the cushion of the body should be in the cloth where it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and strengthen it according to what is covered.
If the fracture is in the parts that are deformed, then place your hand under and above the part of the bone, so that the muscle is opened and straightened; and then place the structure, as the hand is rolled between the mentioned ribs.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the joints of the mentioned bones, then if it is said to be a sprain, equalize and strengthen the hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object under it so that the fracture is elevated and not deformed.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned joints, such as in the wrist, or elbow, or ear, or ring finger, then equalize and strengthen the hand on the palm of that joint; or all are tied together continuously, which is better; or place it over that small straight object, as we have said in the wrist.
And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the disposition of abscess cauterization and opposition — at the operation — at that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Chapter 14
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared to the second sense that it becomes in the part indicated and in the most inferior.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is stretched over the fracture and another ligament after the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
And then the surgeon stretches all the ligament to its indicated part, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is towards the upper part of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the indicated part, so that the extension can be in its place, and the other ligament after the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is towards the lower part of the thigh, then the ligament should be placed at the end of the femur to the indicated part, and the extension should be at the parts after.
And then the doctor gently moves the bones that are out of place back into their natural position and joins them with a good joint; then cover the area and apply a bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. However, if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it alone for a few days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of the member should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, and fold it twice or three times, and then leave some excess; and then cover the area between the thigh and the buttock.
And then insert a long thin strip of cloth between the buttock and the bandage from the denuded area to the other parts, and then bring the ends of the strip over the top of the two parts, and then wrap it around the bandage and the buttock to cover any excess.
And then place your hand on the buttock in the location of the fracture, and place a splint over the bones of the bandage.
And then fill the empty spaces between the couch and the cushion with multiple folded cloths, to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
And then begin the bandaging from the center of the wound over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you approach the edge of the wound, your bandage should be thinner and lighter and moister.
And then extend two ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the strips on the other side to prevent the bandage from slipping off its place.
And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to the member; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing the bandage and correcting what has happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
But if the bone is broken and you cannot align it according to what is possible for you, then leave it as it is and bandage it again, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance of when it was healed.
And sometimes certain bandages are used to strengthen this fracture of the ribs or other adjustments that are suitable for the ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of the patient in such a way that this does not happen to the patient who is suffering from paralysis; and if it is restored alone, another thing should be applied to the other cushion, then it is necessary that he paralyzed one should quickly be placed.
And you should know that the rib is strengthened in eleven days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the variety of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
You should know that the fracture of the collarbone heals quickly, but it does not happen to the other bandages.
But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is called a splint or several splints, and over it all is placed by the feeling.
The restoration of the broken parts should be equal to what was torn from the patient's body, and it should be added and joined together as much as possible for equality, ease, and manufacturing.
Then place a poultice and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and stretch it tightly over the wound.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, as well as abscesses and similar things that should be placed on the whole accident according to what is suitable for him to be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the costal.
And according to the type of fracture that has occurred in both bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of the arm is done similarly, and the operation of the arm is one.
And if two bones are broken at once, the pillow is turned to all parts.
And if a more delicate bone is broken, the pillow is turned to the dental parts.
And if a larger bone is broken, then take it away, and this is one of those causes that you have not yet understood.
And then administer extension and equality and ligature of the wounds according to that proportion.
However, if the fracture of the bone is not healed by the time there are no more signs of swelling, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the arm, there is a cause for an operation if you equalize the wounds and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the soles, and they are made entirely of white palm leaves; aligned with those that have small roughness, and not like the hands, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the arm, and the deepest into the most distal part.
And then wrap each in a blanket of two folds according to its length, and place one on the part of the cushion of the one side and the other on the other side, and the end under the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three blankets in three places of the extremities and at the middle, so that this structure the cushion is prohibited to tilt to the right and left side, and it is in good position.
And already a cushion of wood according to the length of the cushion is administered; and it is placed on the cushion to keep that of movement.
And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is placed properly.
And then consider the cushion each day and study that which is behind to study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then stop at that which is proper before it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and those called.
No fracture occurs in the talus as a whole; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and those called are rarely fractured, and do not occur in them except occasionally in their arrangement.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then the patient is placed on his side on the prepared ground as if he were walking.
Then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
Then place a bandage and splint above, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen that bandage with the patient's leg and structure descent, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is necessary.
And if the patient has passed three or four days, then you remove the bandage, as you will find the bones in equal proportions, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is with traction.
But if he says they are fractured, then you restore those, and level them with each other, and tell him about the restoration of the said bones in the manual. And then place the second fractured bone along its length, and another one next to it; and then place this table on the foot, which was recommended to you, and strengthen that joint with a decent restriction.
But if that fracture of the bones is two or three or more, then you place each bone on its length covered in lion cloth, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and let one of the caps of the table stand on the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is advisable for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which were told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents, what covers it.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the jawbone, the bone of the patella, and the clavicle of man.
When the jawbone is fractured, then perform that surgery in a crouched position, and approach it to the part of the back a little, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife should place her hand on the jawbone of the neck, and do the same as before; and then the jawbone should be struck gently, and the little one's head should be raised little by little, until the part of the jawbone is found as before and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on the little one's back, and when he wants to urinate remove them gently and allow him to urinate, and reduce and return that second as before, and then return to the first powder.
And do this for seven days or around those days, until he is restored.
And if you wish, take an egg from the hen and strengthen it on the mouth of a syringe; then insert the entire egg into the wound, and blow through the syringe until the egg is inflated with its contents, as the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with warmth and rest for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the pelvis of a man or woman are broken, then administer in the healing and needling of that bone, as we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And that which is drained should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and should not be given to just anyone, but rather to someone who has some knowledge and understanding of this my free book; for that fracture signifies to you in the greatest dispositions via dryness in the healing and structure of that bone, and therefore understand it.
In the wound of a man when it is broken, take wheat flour, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and let it be covered, and let it lie for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Chapter 19.
On the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient for the person who has suffered a displaced fracture, and especially if the bone is large as those of the thigh or shoulder, or similar to those, that you first check and perform reduction as soon as the conditions for reduction are present, as we have previously mentioned.
And if the displacement does not occur immediately, then you should check that you retain the bone in its place, and if there is another cause, then powder it with three grains of sulfur.
And when you begin to restore the fracture on that day, do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
However, if an abscess occurs, then you should leave the restoration of the bone until the ninth day, within which time the abscess will have subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harm.
If the bone is fractured and exposed above the heel, then carefully reduce that and equalize it with your fingers, making it easier and shorter extension.
If the extension is not prepared and the balance of it with your fingers, then reduce that with this tool; and this tool is made of iron, its length being seven or eight ditz, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for that, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these according to the amount needed in treatment for all types of fractures.
And if it is round, and is in the small greasy part so that it is not folded during the operation, then place the gauze over that.
And if it is sharp at the end where there is a margin on its other ends; and if it is under that, it should be thick at the top and thin at the bottom, entering into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", which means a little palette.
So that the patient's arm can be placed on the edge of the bed with its elbow raised above the edge of the bone.
And push it into a cushion that returns the bone, and make it equal to some balance.
And then try to equalize the limbs of the fracture between them, and if the limb of the patient is broken and thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then try to insert the limb of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that bone into where the scissors or saw that we have mentioned can be used; or use a saw on that bone in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those that are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and if the patient has great pain during the reduction, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you consult with the patient about greatly.
When your bone fracture is fully healed, apply a sterile black adhesive bandage to it, especially in summer, and do not place it over a wound or any other cause where it could cause further injury and corruption.
And then administer stelas at the time of the patient's complementary bone healing, and leave the wound exposed to the air unless it is inscribed with the trauma and used with bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it can cause further injury, as has been done by some doctors, and it can lead to death or serious harm, such as infection or gangrene. And if the patient's structure is loose, soft, and different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and cause severe pain in the area, then do not place it over those bandages, but instead use that dressing of hard cloth in place of stelas and press it against those areas.
And when the pain starts to occur one or two days later, where it is generating heat, then you remove the cloth that you had placed on that part, and administer lotions, using those that according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
And it is agreed with you that you remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at matins and vespers until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pus runs out of it to the parts behind for ease.
If the wound has passed several days and it is not consolidated or drained of pus from it, then you know that here are signs of smallpox, so inquire about the wound to determine if it is smallpox. And of those signs, those that remain separated and extruded, those that do not separate and put the member and cause pain to pierce those that are possible for you.
If the wound becomes infected with a specific type of corruption or putrefaction, then place on it one of those remedies that are suitable for that disease, as described in its own chapter.
And about that remedy in which you place your poultice: when the large pieces are crushed, raise it over the member that is there, like the bones of the cushion and the helper, and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, as many accidents can occur because of this remedy, which may cause death; leave that in place for about 20 days or 30 days; and later cure the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it there.
Chapter 20.
Of the cure of a nodosities that occur in the tissues of some fractures.
Many accidents can occur in the tissues of this nodosities at the site of fracture healing, and more so near the joints, and it is formed by the figure of the member; and very often prevent the member from performing its natural operation.
Then consider if the wound is recent and administer those medicines that have been used in such cases with aloe, and honey, and marjoram, and serracollo, and thickening, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirm those as astringent, or album of cow's milk, or astringent honey, and place that on the wound in a cloth, and bind it well.
And loosen the bandage that does not cause pain for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the wound is healed; or strengthen it on that piece of plaster, which has the property of maintaining everything that is inflated in the limbs.
If the wound has become hard and tight and it is necessary to cause an abscess in that place, then divide that part of the wound that is most raised from it, and scrape off the excess and inflamed, or rub that with a rezor until it is healed; and cure it before it is healed.
Chapter 21
When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its original position, it should not be too thin or fragile.
When a bone fracture is restored and the limb is too thin or fragile, this should not be done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution to the ligament and tendon of the broken bone, which is not healed according to its own nature; or excessive strictness of the ligaments that prevent nutrients from reaching the limb; or excessive use of ointment; or excessive movement at a time when it should not be done; or weakness in the patient's body and weakening of the limb.
And the treatment for this is to massage the patient and make the limb move gently within the time when the wound is multiplying; and administer baths; and apply gauze and lettuce on it.
And place a bandage on the limb, so that the bandage draws out the most nutrients, or continuous application of ointment with water tea, until the nutrient reaches and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
Concerning the treatment of broken bones when they are healing properly and preventing their operation at that time.
When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed, the swelling and elevation of the broken bone and the formation of a lump should be treated in the shape of the limb, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, you should not accept the word of someone who claims that the member is newly broken.
However, many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is so detestable that it causes great fear of the one which is mortal.
However, if swelling and lumps are recent, it is recommended to apply hot water in which softening herbs are steeped, such as elderflowers and chamomile, and similar ones; and this should be done with the ointment made of mollifying ointment, such as diallaquel well made; or it should be pressed with powder of chamomile and smeared with goose grease or oil of crambe, and this should be applied to that.
Some warts are dissolved by frequent application of a lighter ointment that is very moist, and it should be applied to the entire limb at all parts in all hours.
If the twisting has already become so severe that it is very strong and becomes a stone and causes the need for surgery with a knife, then it is necessary to remove the pus from the wound and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and shave off any excess bone with a small saw, and apply some remedy to facilitate that in that pain and difficulty.
Chapter 23.
On speech about dislocations.
Dislocation is an injury to one of its joints, so it is prohibited from moving, and the figure of the limb is distorted, and brings pain and great injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation at that time.
And to avoid any harm or stretching during the hour of abscess formation, as the swollen parts cause spasms and slow pain.
When that happens, you should cover yourself with the patient's cloak, and let it rest until the abscess is ready to be opened; then treat the member with hot water and oil, and reduce it with ease.
And all members should be treated with the water that will bring back their memory to their place.
And you have already arranged the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the top of the shoulder, bring it up to the top of the shoulder that was lowered.
Chapter .xxiv.
Of the cure of jaw dislocation below.
So dislocated jaws, if not treated; and the dislocation of others is made in one of two ways: either they are rearranged from their places by slight removal, and become slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, within which they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his palate.
When the dislocation of it is not severe, then return it to its major positions to prevent further injury.
If the dislocation is complete and total, then apply reduction of it gradually, and do not delay for too long.
And if the healer has the patient's head, and inserts the finger of the one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other hand holds the jaws of the patient; and commands the patient to cease his jaws and remove those from each part; and the healer equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw back into its place before it returns to its original position.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then apply evaporation with water and oil, before gradually reducing both and do not delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.
And so when we return and she is lying down, her mouth is closed and not softened, then place a poultice of cloth moistened with wax and rose oil on those powders; and it should be applied to facilitate the movement of the limbs.
And the patient's head should be placed on a pillow between two cushions, so that it does not press against the midline or the left side; and do not force any cause without their consent; having the same vision, then remove that which is forbidden, before the pain returns and the jaws are unlocked, then do what you will.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force it through the opening of the mouth for food, drink, or defecation, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at an hour when they are not converted to their usual places, then apply warm compresses and frequent soda, and strengthen the abdomen of the patient, and frequently and forcefully vomit.
And when you see that, you will know it is bad; and those who have experienced such an event usually die within ten days.
Chapter 25:
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the back of the neck due to its connection with the chest; and some people are dislocated at the front part, and that is called dislocation in the shoulder.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then firmly grasp the area with your hand, with strong grip, so that it returns.
And place a poultice and powders on that, and strengthen it.
If the extremity of that which is bent and continues in that way is not dislocated on any day, then you should reduce and bandage it according to what we have said and according to what is available to you.
And then place a poultice, powders, and compression, and command the patient to rest in quiet until they are healed.
And this method of treatment reduces the extension of the muscle when it is separated from its own location.
Chapter 26
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the acromion to the ribs.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and appears at the acromion behind the shoulder, and especially in those in which the flesh is thin, more easily comes out; but in those in which there are thick flesh, it is more difficult to come out.
And many men have suffered from trauma or injury to the muscles, and the muscles of the affected area become infected with abscess, and they are lamed because of that which has already been dislocated.
Therefore, first of all, you should seek to understand that which is over and above your knowledge about it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when you shake the parts behind it; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated muscle, because there are differences manifest between them; and you should feel in the hollow of the muscle cap, and behind the shaking, touch the cap of the muscle as if with a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its natural position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should apply pressure or traction, and then you should feel for it with a manifest touch, and it should not be hidden.
And from this dislocation, a false reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; and then places his fingers below the tendon of the foot, and elevates the joint with strength in its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends it there; and then places it behind where it returns naturally.
If it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given an infusion that softens and loosens, such as if their joints were made of high grass, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported below the tendon of the foot with wool that is equal to flexibility and resistance, and the doctor places his hand on the sole, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not slip behind, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not slip behind, for then it returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that one, and insert his muscle behind the patient's rib cage and raise the patient's rib cage to the parts above where the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from behind their belly. But if the patient is lighter, then cover it with another cause that is suspended, so that it does not pull, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced in another manner: and it is that there should be a long bench on the ground with a round shape, like a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and placed behind the patient; so that it is placed over the top of the bench, cover the patient with leather lions, and the patient stands according to the length of the bench, and extend their arm from the other part; and extend the joints of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce the hernia due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a cloth of the length of two arms, and its width of four fingers, and the heaviest part of the hernia should be placed at the tip of the second finger in this form:
And then place a red cloth over the head to prevent the hernia from descending on the patient.
And then place your hand or arm over the hernia through the parts behind it, and tie the cloth to the assistant's hand and arm and the end of your hand.
And then place your arm on a step ladder according to its width, and your hand should be extended behind it, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, where the joint enters quickly.
And when the hernia is completely closed according to any possible method, and then cover that you place behind the tip with a wool of equal quantity; and prepare an ointment of powdered myrrh and album of egg on the whole muscle, as it is rolled over, and place strength behind the tip with a bandage of decent stricture; and the cloth should be rolled over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not squeeze the hand of the patient for seven days.
And make sure that the patient's food is placed near them while they are resting, as it is more beneficial for their recovery.
And the food should be given closer to seven or eight in the evening and then some exercise should be done; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
However, if the joint is dislocated due to prolonged exposure to moisture or other causes, then it should be treated with a pointed cautery three times, as described in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not fixed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over it for some time, and it is not fixed, catheterized, or able to lift that arm to the sides, then know that the nerves at the head of the muscle, which are at the top, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in that place.
When the dislocation of that which is made in the chest and breast or parts behind it, reduction is done by pushing and extending with the hands, until it returns.
And another remedy should be given in that place, and cure it while it is being healed.
And if severe swelling occurs in the limb and movement is delayed, then the patient should use warm compresses until that swelling is reduced and it returns to its original state.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and it returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part that connects to the back part, and the dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden from you where it is found behind the armpit or behind the touch, according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch the other shoulder muscle, this is your clear indication.
And if you can, cover them and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible so that the abscess can come to them, for if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not always healed; and especially when it is in the parts behind, for it is more harmful than all the other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and more severe symptoms that can lead to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended to both sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back of the patient and below, and he should press the joint towards the palms of his hands, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return to it as you bend your hand towards your palm, until you strike the back at the root of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and two assistants hold it in place to prevent movement during extension.
And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage on the patient's chest.
When the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
And then place the patient on a cushion that has sterility and excellence in its composition, and extend the arm downwards, and let it hang from the neck, and leave it like that for several days.
And then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage and leave it like that.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the application of the plaster and bandage, and leave it like that for several days before removing it.
If an injury occurs near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moisture in bath and gentle friction, and compress it until it is alleviated; or place a fat pad over the joint, and leave that on the bone and the night. Then place that in the bath; and when it is soaked, then you friction the joint gently with cold friction, and repeat over the fat pad, which is a roller of motion, one, two, and three times. using a bathing instrument, until it is lukewarm.
And if you wish, place a wet and burned cowhide bandage on that; and do some of those turns, because that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the shoulder.
Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is the other joints, but rather, the speed in reducing it at the time of dislocation is important because the joint may become abscessed or something happens to the abscess.
And the reduction of this shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the other person's arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its original position.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already attached to the chest of the person, then the patient places their back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is in front of the arm, then the position of the arm should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then press that abscess and let go of the person; and do not do that, because otherwise, it will not heal or you cannot reduce the joint more than passing days.
When the joint is second in its twisting; and if the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and it is not inserted into it but should be strengthened with a pointed cautery for the joint of it and strongly apply that to it as well.
Therefore, when the wound is returned, place a cushion over it which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and then it should be removed and left alone, and the muscle of the patient should be exercised.
However, if the movement of it is obstructed and occurs in it some gravity, then apply a wet cloth and some friction for several days until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at all times.
And when one of these dislocations occurs at the back of the hand or on the belly of it, then tighten the tendon and push the dislocation of it towards the fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the said patient, suspend the device to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to its own day.
And when it is clean, apply the second method according to that description, and do not stop releasing it during the day and exercising the movement, and apply it at night; and do so for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do the same if it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When an accident occurs to some of the vertebrae of the back or neck with complete dislocation, and they remain without moving any more vertebrae from those places, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
When the patient cannot control their bowel movements and cannot hold it back, and their body is softened by heat or warm blankets or pillows under them or over them, or a sponge in that place, then heat is applied to four parts of the body.
So it is now called a "gelatination" at those parts.
The cure for that is to consider whether the gelatination has occurred due to pregnancy, because in that case it is not a cure or a healing of all.
In those cases where it occurs due to injury or percussion or something similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that long sermon, which brings the most profit; but I have already opened and explained that from which few people are excused because of its proximity to understanding and its exposure, and I have exposed and formed it with various instruments of that kind, and shown it to you and spared you that.
And those that are not cured are only those that occur naturally, and for that I would recommend this remedy.
And the patient should be extended on his face over a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended behind it with a wet cloth to prevent the chest from being exposed.
And then place a pillow under his head, and another pillow under his feet at the other end of the bed.
And the nurse should hold the pillow, and not be placed in a ditch; and another nurse should hold the other one according to that form.
And then wrap a cloth around the patient's head and place the leon ferm titillator on it; extend the other end of the titillator to the pillow under his head, and fasten it there; and then strengthen the other bandage over his ankles and under his feet, and fasten it to his abdomen; and then adjust all the bandages and fasten them to the other pillow under his feet.
And the assistant extends the bandage to the part of the wound, and does not leave the two wounds and the bandages of his places in which they were placed, but rather does not stop there as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the patient's spine between his shoulder blades, or places them on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose length or width is about three brasses, and dig in the wall where we said that the patient should have a place between the edge of the table. And the assistant places his hand on the patient's spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him until the spine is straightened and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the other one which is turned around the other side; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head in the back of the two thighs, the length of which is about an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other two thighs; and let the distance between each thigh be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the turn is made, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it is not crooked.
And there should be a thin rod in which the needle is placed, and it should be rotated between the two holes of the two rods.
And at the end of it there is a hole in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm more than that which is rotated; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the cords that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the hole which is to be used as the head of the rod, and the cords that you have tied in the cushions of the patient in the hole which is to be used for his feet.
And then each rod should have a minister who twists the rod against his chest, and the doctor equalizes the sacrum as we have said.
And after the sacrum is returned and the area is equalized, then cover with fresh clay from the riverbank, and stop; and place a board over the clay, the width of which should be three palms or about those, and the length of it should be the quantity that took up the area of the swelling, and on the part of the sacrum.
And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then have medicines that moilify and cleanse be administered through long-term administration, which we have recommended; and it is already being administered in that place a linen sheet.
And some wounds occur in the lower back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already threatens to cause death if not treated with this medicine, will surely kill you.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only dislocate, and do not occur at those places where other joints are removed and concave.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the front parts, or at the front parts, or at the back parts, or at the back parts.
And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts behind, and to the parts in front or to the parts behind.
And of the dislocation at the parts behind, when you adjust the bed of the healthy person to the sick one, it is longer and the pillow is less than that of the healthy one, and the sick one cannot bend their knee but must lean on it, and this is the place where the pustule often forms from an abscess, so that the head of the cushion has already reached here.
And the opposite of that which happens in dislocation is at the front parts, because those accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
And of the opposite of that which happens in dislocation at the front parts is to extend the bed on both sides, but not bend that one which has pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed on those front parts; and the urine of it is retained and the swelling of it forms an abscess, and you must place the bed of it on the thigh.
And if the person on whom dislocation has occurred is unable to extend their arm, nor to bend the elbow that bends it, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that spot.
The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is ancient and old, that it has already been treated by others, then administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, but do not expect that in that cure there will be any complications.
And in the case of that person whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do this: turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and in front, and to the right and left, because it will soon return and not require any other cure.
And if it does not return in this way, then you should prepare strong men and extend the cushion of the part behind the arm, or hold their hands, or lay a bandage on the cloth that is laid over the forearm; and another minister should extend the hand of that person above the wrist so that it touches the fingers of the hand; and place a strong man at the end of the bandage, and another should clean the end of the bandage.
And if the extension is from the shoulder to the shoulder blade, or from the back to the side of the ribs.
And if the extension is of all those in a row, when the patient is raised to his own side and keeps hanging down.
This type of extension is particularly common in all four cases.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for each type of treatment that is appropriate for its own cure.
In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient on his own back; and then place your hand on the back of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is placed below meet; and then extend the cushion from the side to the other part of the shoulder blade.
And then another servant strongly grasps the arms of the patient, and presses the back of the patient's body and extends it to the parts below by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
This speciality is the least curable disease among those that this member is reduced to, compared to other specialities.
However, if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this healing speciality, then tie both feet of the patient together with a strong, light rope, above their toes and below their ankles.
And the length of each should be four times the quantity of that, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be twice the quantity of two arms.
And command a strong young man to raise the pillow under the patient's head, and another young man should suspend it from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the pillow with force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the body, command the patient to lie on their back according to what we have recommended in the position of the hamstring; and strengthen the rope over the patient's bed properly and over their chest.
And then place two cushions under them, one at their feet and the other at their head; and adjust the cushion under their chest on top of which they will be wrapped in a warm blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension is not torn from the parts behind.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation occurs at the parts behind, then it is necessary that the cushion be extended more widely, and according to this method narrated above on the back; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and the other hand covers that, and the covering hand pauses at the part behind the dislocation to the part of the elbow.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, then it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and lifted on the ground; they should have something soft to lie on, as we said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and they should be on their face and the limbs are extended, as we said, without pain.
And they should be given compression with an uncooked egg on the location where the joint is.
Then, when the reduction is completed as follows — and the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member according to what is said is returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the bend as if the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and another under the other.
If you see those joints in the correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again every day until the patient is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the base, at the joint behind, and at the joint in front; and it is not dislocated at the tip.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by making the patient lie down, unless they can already sit up; place your hand on their face, and hold their foot between your hands; and then make them hold your palms against their back, and bring those between their shoulders to strengthen, and another minister extend their leg inside so that the back returns to its place.
And then the patient's bed should be made to adhere to the cushion that is not laborious.
And then place that plaster on it and make the bed adhere to the cushion, and leave those in place for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's bed for walking until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension of the same limbs that were mentioned in the previous cure for the hip.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes becomes swollen by slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated according to the complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the joints of the foot.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the ankle becomes inflamed due to the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of its removal is of great relief, and it is that it be extended with ease to the hands and return within a short time.
In its cure when it is dislocated according to the complement, let the patient lie down straight, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from the back of the other in the middle position of it.
And then you take your right hand directly on the top of the foot, and your left hand on the side of the foot behind it in the position of the hollow.
And then approach the foot to your left hand, and approach the right hand for two reasons, and extend the right hand; and place the cushion of the foot against the right side of the bed.
Do those two things according to what you have counted.
And then place the cushion of the foot on the right side of the bed, and you are at the back.
So return in one or two ways with this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, as it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it with that method, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a firm pillow under them, and put a cushion between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not get cold.
And then the assistant should hold their limbs, and another assistant extend the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient holding that, so that the body of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another servant should hold the clean cloth to the parts behind, as the dislocation returns to its place.
And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the reduction of it is healthy, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
And be careful not to tread on the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that is not too tight and does not harm it.
And leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for forty days. But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation has dissolved and rotted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
And if the abscess bursts, then be careful to administer in its cavity what we have mentioned earlier, in another place of healing and soothing, until it is recovered.
Chapter 34.
Of the cure of dislocations of the toes.
That which is dislocated should be equal to a little extension of its tendons; and this is not difficult, in front it is easier.
If the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then cover that you make the patient lie on their side with their foot at the same height as the ground or on a table, and be present there.
And then you will place your hand on their foot, and place the other on the joints, and press that against their foot to return it, and you will see that it is equal and does not appear in the prominent location.
And then place the other on their belly under a table that holds all of their foot, and have two covers, and strengthen that against structure decent and firm for three days; and then remove it and let them rest from walking for several days, until it is restored and assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the types of dislocations that can be caused by pain or fracture or any other means.
When any of these causes occurs, and you pierce yourself in the treatment of that and in its restoration, various evils succeeding the death.
And for that reason, one should not assume in the treatment of that and its restoration, but rather the one that is known in the art, of long use, merciful and compassionate, late, not burning or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that cedar tumors as much only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but rather to that one to which you hope salvation from perdition, for relief from the malady, and in which some hope appears. And then make an effort to restore it as soon as possible from the beginning of the cause, giving that it engenders tumor as much.
And then if the member returns as you wish, then administer a regimen that cedes tumor as much and heals the pain with this one that is suitable for it from the decoctions of drying.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should pierce their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that which precedes in those places.
And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded you; for that is better for you to leave to your Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutary than those which you will see in your time. Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God be not blessed. Amen.
