Oh children, if I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion and explanations and declarations, I believe that I have fulfilled my promise to you to write this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of caesarean section has been prohibited in our region and time, until recently when the science of it was revealed, and its evidence is established; and there are only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been lost and have led to errors and uncertainty until the understanding of it has been established and its length and art extended.
And I believe that I have fulfilled the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cauteries and other instruments of the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
In ancient times, the reason why a skilled physician did not have to memorize all the parts of the body in detail was because the art of medicine was long and required practice in the science of anatomy, which Guall taught before understanding the significance of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and knowing the bones, nerves, and cartilages, their number, and their size; and the pulsating veins, quiet vessels, and their locations.
For which reason, as Hippocrates said, it is not necessary to have a name for everything, but in the work, it is more important in the art of medicine.
But we have already mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, it is not surprising that they fall into error, as I have often seen many of them, because they are formed in this science and obtain their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor saw a woman who had been bitten by an Echis scorpion on her neck, and it had pierced some arteries of the neck causing great blood flow into the woman that she died among them.
And another doctor saw that a man had been struck by a stone from another man's work, and the stone was large, and it came to him and passed through a third of his abdomen, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already called for help to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew under him where he would die.
And another doctor took the wages of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to a skilled blacksmith who was near the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the plate, with pulleys and levers of strong structure, and did not allow the plate air.
And then remove the dressing according to his wishes, and remove the bandage, and remove the compress for several days and order that it be removed; and this should be done while the wound and the foot are healing, and reach a state of improvement.
And then you should apply it to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and achieve peace and relieve his pain.
However, if corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained from that one, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient died.
And another doctor performed an incision on a pus-filled tumor, and it became ulcerated in a few days, until the great heat of the disease destroyed the patient.
The cause of which is that the cranium is purged of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach the patient with iron from all over, but rather that it be in the member that suffers from all of it.
For that reason, my friends, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and another in which it is performed in the best possible conditions.
I have already existed in all places of this book where the operation is performed, and error and fear occur; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the one who causes these things, so that the people do not attribute them to you and dishonor you.
And therefore take up your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with success and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to health and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and keep your weapons from that which makes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name will not escape you: because more remains for your glory, and more later in the world and after your sanctity.
In some cases, it is necessary to perform dissection in certain areas: Do not treat a bad patient badly, so that bad doctors will not remember you.
And I have already dedicated this book to three chapters.
The beginning of the division of the book, and the first part of the first section. The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on vents, and on plasters, and on the extraction of stones and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torticollis and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
That you should know the quality of those handles of that cautery and of its tips, and in what manner it is forbidden to use it.
Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the handle of the cautery and its tip is a long and prolix, and subtle for the wise, and secretly hidden; and from there one has spoken much about secrets, and they have disagreed, and to me it seems a little like their speeches, I fear a long discussion.
And therefore I say that the cautery corresponds to all the universal composition, which is matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions of the tail and its matter.
In the composition of the tail and dry matter, they disagree; because some said that the cautery is useful for that, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in disease that is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that the disease tail and dry matter has that is burned and dried is healthy.
And tell that one who says the opposite of that, which is said to be very helpful in all cases where the tail and dry sweat are seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men with the moisture of them to the appearance of fire, it is easy to see the bodies of men.
And I say by the words of that one, which has experimented this thing to me sometimes in the past.
But perhaps not everyone can come over to that which has been extracted and exercised in the capital of cauteries by previous practice, and who has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the time of those.
But in other appearances, do not be afraid of you, and especially in diseases that are moist and humid, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the helpfulness of cauteries in those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cauterizing with fire and its goodness is that it is simple, because the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not the other member that is adjusted to it, only does a small harm.
May the action of medicine come to that in the members which is of the same kind, and it often brings pain to the affected member, and it often causes difficulty in healing.
May the fire, by its greatness and goodness of substance, not do that, but rather be superfluous. And we know this from experience and long study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this you may be excused from the length of the sermon. And if not, it is not read to me in this pause, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, that is philosophical demonstration, which would be sharpened in your pains.
And know, children, that they disagree about the time when it is appropriate to make cauteries and pause at the best time of primevera.
And you say that cauteries are appropriate at all times, because the harm from the time accident is submerged in the advantage of which is thrown, and more so if the cauteries are for pain or necessary pain, quickly and fiercely, which do not suffer delay because they fear those that come maliciously, which is greater than small harm coming from the time.
And do not catheterize in your feet, oh sons, that is only understood by the common people and foolish doctors, because that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always effective, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
But nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his disease will return in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his disease, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of him from the aggregation of the excess in him, and that which is obtained to him in his acquisition in foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member of few excesses and moisture, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in him it will not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
And more commonly, the pointed cautery is the most effective method of medical treatment, and it is called correct treatment, not because I understand what they mean by that, but because they believe that there is no other cure that can be obtained through medicine or any other cause that would require a pointed cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is not always the most effective method of medical treatment, but only when administering methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer a pointed cautery, and it is effective for that. And from here, they understand that the pointed cautery is not always the most effective method of medical treatment, but they do not understand what I understand as common sense and too many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterization, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are those who say that it only works in certain people, and cauterization with gold is good and better than iron if you do it as they say; but however, when you make cauterization with fire made of gold, it is not up to you, since it is done according to the amount of gold you want for the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you adjust it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets are placed in the fire for the craftsman to use for that purpose.
And for that, a pointed cautery is made with a lighter and more conveniently placed in the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that the patient can ask what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization applies to the moisture and cold that cause this accident, which is the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called crisis, from the head to the parts of the hips and the arms, and many sleeplessness, and tooth pain and jaw pain, and generally all illnesses that occur due to cold, such as paralysis, drowsiness, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to empty his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's strength and age and custom.
And then command the one who is shaving his head to do so with a razor, and place that shaved hair between your hands on a chair and place your hands over his chest.
And then place the razor of your palm against the nose between his eyes. But remember, when you reach the location that you have indicated, mark that spot and then use the pointed cautery of olive oil, which is in this form:
And then place that on the location that you have marked, with a movement that goes down, and make sure that it is not too tightly held at once, and you rotate that.
And then slightly raise your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of grain, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the location and leave that for three days.
And then place your hand on the side that is facing away from the fire and let that one be destroyed by the flame of the fire. And then apply the four-herb ointment to the area until it is healed.
And they say that as soon as the plague is removed, the more the arm is bent, the better and more beneficial it is.
They say that one should cauterize the tendon at the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone is attached to it.
And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then apply the ointment.
They say that one should apply the cautery to the back, until it reaches the bone strongly enough to break the bone, and this is the way to make a small incision: And they estimate that from that area, the vapors of the head escape.
And one should keep the wound open for a long time, and then apply the ointment until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries in all men, except in those who are second in line for fear; and let that one, if possible, be better for their health when it is; because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
The first type of cautery is safer and better for me; and from that one, I advise you to do the work for their health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When in the head there is chronic and long pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and it uses gargles, and beaks, and capipurges, and ointments, and drugs, and candles, and wax, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that they have and do not know how to apply to it again from among those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not free and often there is a great deal of bleeding, then that cauterizer uses another cauterizer. And then cauterize that above the horn of his head with a pointed cautery where the bone is broken. Cut the bone and expose it from the skull in the amount that we have found and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the back of his head in the place where the intestine is placed, â€” and that is the place where the cushion is placed. And place your hand in the wound, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other cauterizations of the head.
And I say that this cautery is in this place, because it covers the point where the pointed cautery is applied to the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized in the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter three.
Of the ancient non-antiphlogistic cauterization.
When the pain in the part of the head is very severe, or it extends to the back, then remove the medicines that make the head better, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the chapters on illnesses; and all this is not helpful, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with a sharp-burning cautery, or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as a medical instrument to hold an ointment jar, and apply it to that area and cover its extremities with bandages. And then incise the area of pain in the temple with a sharp knife that is inserted into the correct location behind it, and hidden.
And then apply pressure over the stopped area due to downward constriction, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the jar, and leave the plague for two or three days, and then place a bandage over the location where the wound is healing.
And then cure that which has been inserted until it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some medical instruments which I have written about in the previous treatise on medical instruments.
May the cautery be made in this manner: ignite it with this form:
and it is called a clover cautery, because its head has the form of a clover flower in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small point.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and pull your hand back - so that the skin is not torn - and slowly move the small iron at speed.
And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the thickness of the needle is such that it covers the entire area, then lift your hand to prevent the artery from being torn, so that there is no bleeding.
And then apply a salted cloth to that location and place it there for three days; and then apply a heated, moist cloth and cure it until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the tip of the lancet according to the cautery, and avoid injury to the artery in this procedure.
Chapter fourth.
Of the cauterization of an ancient puncture.
When you cure an ancient puncture with the remedy we have mentioned in the previous healing, and with the remedy we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not apply the healing, and see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is white, because it means above the location of the pain a line of length equal to the thickness of the other; and place your hand firmly on that area and insert the needle until you reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often bruised from chewing, and that the jaw not be adhered and the nerve that causes pain in that area, and that it does not become spasmed.
And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of sanctum from the artery that is embolized, in which there is fear and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not studious or experienced; and leave the operation in the beginning.
And you will find the remembrance of the regimen for the flow of sanctum from the artery according to the same manner, in its own location in this book.
And if you see this patient who does not benefit from this cautery and you see the body of the patient bearable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of strangulation of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conforming.
Chapter Five
About the cauterization of gout pain.
When there is pain in the big toe caused by cold humors and it is treated with the previous method, and the pain does not subside, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
Then apply the pointed cautery close to the fire, and bring it around the entire big toe as if it were a wheel, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one. Along the edge of the big toe, gradually push the cautery a little at a time until you feel that the area is hot enough.
And if the pointed cautery touches the entire big toe, and it feels like that, and then cure the areas before they are healed.
Chapter Six
About the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and is not treated with cauterization except for the specific ones that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasms of the nerves.
When you treat that area of torture with jerks and capillary and gastrointestinal remedies, and do not compare your treatment, then it is recommended to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden needle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your cauterizing instrument in the opposite part of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauterizing instrument at the right side of the golden needle, a little above the crown of the head, and in the temple, the longest one should be twice as long as the previous one, and place your hand over the cauterizing instrument until the required amount of the affected area is burned.
And this is the form of the cauterizing instrument, and it is called a lancet, which has a specific shape. May it however be more subtle to have one less than usual; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive greasiness.
And then cure the area with that which is given for the process until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with that which we have said, and does not compare your medication and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cautery: over all the corners of his head; and with a cautery and the middle part of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the back. And the method of the cautery is made according to what is mentioned above.
And it has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then cure with that which processes.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by a stroke.
Given great amounts of grains and large pills to the patient at the beginning.
Then remove the cap from the patient's head and place your hand on their chest, placing the described ointment from this treatise on it.
Then wait for some time, as that is the way of using the cautery. Do that again according to the method that has already been mentioned.
And if those methods are successful; and if not, then make three points on the back part of their head, which should be placed between the most elevated part of the head and the nape of the neck. Wait for the longest time between each point, and then carefully cure the burned area.
But if you are more skilled and the patient can tolerate it, then make the point in the middle; and if you are less skilled, then make the point on both heels.
Then cure it before it is healed; and if the point is made with oil, do so according to the form given.
Chapter 9.
On cauterization of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
You proceed as described in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and then shave the patient's head, and then apply the cautery at the middle point of the head, and apply the cautery to all the bones of the head, and apply it to the back part of it, and three cautery points on the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of softening of the body for three cautery points and the patient can bear them, and the condition is strong, then apply the cautery at four points on the spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery into the neck where the collarbone of the patient is, and raise the hand from there. And then care for that which has been healed, and this cautery should be made with olive oil.
Chapter 10.
On cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flatulence.
And therefore, modify the patient's brain at the beginning of the treatment with years and the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer ginger and mustard to the servant who is modifying, giving it for several days, good nutrition of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput of the patient, and over each hair of the head, cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cautery which I have said, having paralysis and softness of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And if it is a cautery with oil, follow what has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then pause the subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thin, and have become thick and heavy, then cautery is applied to those parts which we have called "the ones that have paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them that which cleanses their brain according to the same thing that has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a proper incision on the top of their head over the circle, and place a dressing on that spot.
And the patient should be kept lying down throughout.
And then place a liniment; and it is worthy of ancient sheep's tallow. And apply that over the fire for heating, prepared according to measure, which the patient says relieves them when it is in them. And then apply that in the middle of their head over the circle, and let it be rubbed into them until it is absorbed.
And give the patient this medicine every week for a whole week, following the other regimen until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with a pointed cautery according to the most of them, but always hold your hand on their chest with a cauterized hand: this is a special kind of cauterizer that moistens the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen part in butter or in grayish wax.
Chapter XII.
Of the application of hot water descending on the back.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of hot water on the back by the symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that water which melts the head of them, and keep that one from all moisture.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And command the patient to shake their head, and make small points with that cautery in the middle of the head; and then make small points with two cauterizers on two temples if it is the beginning of hot water in two backs, or on one side if it is the beginning of hot water in one back.
Incise all the veins and tendons that are behind the cord; and place the cauteries in that long, on the side of the temples.
And watch out for blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see blood flow from there, stop the bleeding with some medicine that is available to you.
And you should also have knowledge of the skill that is in the extraction of tendons and the treatment of those abscesses and caution about blood flow.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and with two cauteries produced recently.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of old tears.
When the tears from the eyes are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in the place manifest of the head and it is verified that this is excessive and flexible, then cauterize that one with the cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water cazent in the eyes, and with the cauteries in the middle of the head and with two cauteries in the neck behind two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck behind two bones. If necessary for addiction, then cauterize that on the entire length of the shoulder blade above the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of cauterization of bad breath from the nose.
When you treat that person who has been mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three drops of oil; and then remove the cap from it, and cauterize with a small cautery or an olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a small cautery or two cauteries on the two upper eyelids under the eyebrows.
And be careful not to burn that.
And this is the form of the small cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of cauterization for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery or this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, make points on the two superciliary arches with a small cautery in each part, and lengthen them from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the superciliary arch.
And do not press your hand too close to the cautery, but according to the amount that the tense part of the eyelid is stuck.
Chapter XVI.
About the cautery of the eyelid when the eyelashes are converted into the parts inside and out.
When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted into the parts inside and out, if you press the eyelid, make points in those places according to two methods, either with fire or with medical cauterization that burns.
If you use fire for cauterization, command the patient to look at those eyelashes that are like those that clean them, while they are prolonged and equal; and if you press that which is their own, then strengthen the eyelids of that one with a bandage so that it does not open until the eyelashes have grown.
Therefore, when they are born and grown, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelid, using a second hand in the shape of a half-moon, and the beginning of this method is near their ears.
And then place a soft cloth or moistened cotton on their eyelid.
And then remove the pointed cautery that is this shape of it.
And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in a zigzag pattern, until the surface of the eyelid is burned, which is like a half-moon, appearing properly.
And to ensure the healing of the eye work, it is that you lift the eyelid which has already been contracted and the ears of the patient should be elevated for the puncture of the eyelid.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the cloth until the wound is healed. And if necessary, cure that wound before it becomes infected.
But if the eyelid returns to its place and becomes softened, then make another incision with the cautery over that area as you did before.
But if the eyelashes are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area while it is raised to its natural position and equalized so that the eyelashes do not push against each other.
But the cautery should be applied in such a way that the patient is commanded to pull the eyelashes while they are extended and equalized, and then a piece of cloth or cloth should be made into the shape of a fan to cool it.
And then take a piece of soft cloth and a live coal, and if that is not available, and mix those causes with water, and make it into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and spread that over the cloth that was made into the shape of a fan, and place that on one eye while the other is covered with a soft cloth; and then place the head of the patient in a comfortable position.
Pause the medicine over the wound and press it gently but not too hard so that the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like fire.
And so, if the burning sensation continues, remove the medicine and press it gently on the wound; when the burning sensation ceases, remove the medicine and wash the wound with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has been lifted as it was when it was washed due to a cut or incision, for that is good; and if not, return to the medicine on the area where the medicine has not been applied and does not discolor before your operation is completed and it is contracted.
And then press over the wound with a clean cloth until the pus of the abscess is drained, and then treat it with an ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
And you must guard your operation that you keep clean diligence in the wound so that the medicine does not fall out, and if the eyelid becomes soft and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that area where the eyelid is soft, and usually as it was done at the beginning, and do so until it is healed.
This is the method of treating gout.
And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and shape, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
And do not obstruct the correct path to the one who studies this art.
Chapter 17.
Of cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal bone of the bone.
When you treat a fistula with this method that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, do not compare your treatment, then cover your head with a cloth in your hand, and hold the head of the patient between your hands in such a way that it is not too tight or agitated.
And then place a cotton swab soaked in alcohol or mucilage of poppy on the bone of the patient.
And then ignite the cauterizer of which this is the form:
which should be curved, like a cane or a pen knife, from one end of which the cauterizer is made.
And if you see it entering the other end. And if you want to draw it out with a tent.
But it is better to leave that which is concave as it is, or work on the other side.
And if the fistula is open, press it and insert clean and dry material into it. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and hold it away from the patient's face and nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the treatment, the cautery goes into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery one or two times, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that area and apply dry material around it until it is healed.
If they have been ill for several days and have not recovered, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is suitable in its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing fistulas that the first said: enter the location of the fistula and make a hole in that place; then place your hand over that fissure, which has the form of the lead; and put in that amount of one ounce of lead; and with your hand hold it well for retention, so that the lead does not reach the edge of that place; and cover that edge of the wound with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous cure.
And if the fistula is healed by the method we have said of cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nostrum and reduce the fistula to the body of the nostrum when it comes to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Vesicles or blisters often occur on the lips, and especially on the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those wounds with the method we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then apply the small cautery as follows:
And place it according to the thinness of the spoon.
Then place your finger gently in those wounds until the cautery reaches the bottom of the wounds.
And then apply the healing ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of fistulas in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a swelling forms, and it is broken, and it becomes chronic, and pus forms and a fistula is formed, and you do not apply your cure, then apply the cautery according to the amount that has been discharged from the fistula, and place that ignited in the opening of the fistula, and then your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the back of it make a blister or two; and then apply the healing ointment that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
If the wound is healed and cured, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
About the use of cautery for teeth and the softening of the jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and these diseases are not cured by medicines, place the patient's head on your knee, and hold the cautery in the shape that will be used, without you placing the quill over the tooth and inserting it into the area where the cautery is applied fiercely, and keep the patient away from the heat of the fire until the temperature of the tooth reaches the point where the pain is felt.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and this can be done because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21
Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the treatment does not relieve the pain, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
With a cautery made of cow's horn, you take the horn and blow into it until it is hot, then wrap it in cloth and place it over the end of the tent, and quickly push the heated cautery into the tooth that hurts.
And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the horn above, and place that over the painful tooth, and place the heated iron on top of it until the iron reaches the root of the tooth.
But the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the proper time of day or night, and if there is any discomfort in it, and the heat of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then approach the cautery in the shape it will come, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or on the next day.
And cover that the patient opens their mouth with good border and holds it for an hour, then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize as much as you can on the part that you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
This is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22
Of cauterization of protrusions.
When protrusions are caused by cold humors that infiltrate and are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to gently push them back, then approach the cautery with the shape of which is this following, having two ends prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other end, and place that ignited on that abscess several times, and another if necessary, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and then place it over the wound filled with boiled water until it has healed.
Then cure that wound with an ointment and bandages until it has healed.
Chapter 23.
Of cauterization of warts and of the construction of a blister.
When moisture comes onto the surface of the lung, and especially when it is cold and humid, then at the beginning of treatment, give the patient laxatives, and then cauterize that part of the lung where the moisture is located.
And be careful not to touch the cauterizer to the lung or not to burn the lining of the lung, but a little.
And cauterize that part with another cauterizer at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the lung. And the pointed cautery should be inserted in the same way as before.
Then care for that wound which was previously inserted before it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cautery of a patient's lungs and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisic, and it is an old wound, then cauterize that wound with two pointed cautery over the breastbone in the places where the lungs are located; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the pointed cautery be inserted in the same way as before.
And if you want, your cautery should be made with the pointed cautery called puncta, the form of which was described in the punctation of heels.
And let your points enter those; and then care for that wound which was previously inserted before it is healed.
And now the cautery should have three points for the operation, as follows: first, you can make three cauteries in this form.
Chapter 25.
About the cautery of the nipple, which is a help.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humors and does not stop at its return time, you should return its dislocation before it returns to that place, and with a small movement, move it as necessary, as we have testified, so that first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and then raise the cushion which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the mentioned parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the parts below.
And then extinguish the cautery which has two points; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the cushion until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will be as follows, now of four cauterizations.
Some are adjusted according to this count, and for what reason they are the cautery of eight.
And then place your hand on the cautery for a while to apply salt, and then make the patient comfortable and not suffer for some time until they are relieved.
And if the dislocation is at the joints above and below, then do this: apply the cautery over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cautery of the stomach.
When there is cold and moisture in the stomach before that extra part of its complexity and multiplied many times to it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then cover the patient's face and extend his hands and his things, and then apply the cautery with three cautery: one cautery on the chest for the amount of one pointed cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cautery, until the figure of cauteri triangulada; and lengthen between those that are not adjusted that will cause pain.
If the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thickest parts of the pork's neck.
And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then add it. And if you want, burn with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach is burned at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should hold the pointed cautery over the stomach according to the quantity that you want to test, and then burn those points with this cautery; and after that, apply the appropriate treatment before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the burning of the hernia.
When pain occurs in the hernia due to coldness or humidity or thick wind before its normal composition is restored by excessive egress, and the patient is cured with the treatment we have mentioned and not otherwise, then the patient should be laid flat on their back, and three pointed cautery according to this form and this quantity should be applied over the hernia below the ribs, where a man lies down.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the width of the said device, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body's diameter.
Do not understand the meaning of the word "cauteri" in this context.
And if the quantity of water that is attached to the quantity of the main part of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then he should be seated, who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to use these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the main part of the codex be attached so that the whole body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, as the codex here is subtle; and know that.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing an abscess on the foot with a pointed cautery.
When the inflammation or abscess in the foot is painful and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased gravity and pain.
And if it is in the tunic of the foot, then the pain is often very intense and has exhausted the doctors with treatment.
Therefore, the patient should be placed on their side; and then carefully examine the location of the abscess; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which has been described on the other page. And then cauterize it with that and the cautery until all the tissue is charred, until it reaches the bone, until it exits.
And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except for that which is prolonged in the art of medicine, and in which most patients have known to be beneficial; but this one has been tried for some time on this operation, nevertheless it is better to leave it to those who know, and it is more effective.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of gout.
The ancient cauteries of the bones of astrology to gout were made in this way, and this is the one you should take from the long dry bone that is found, and it should be of the largest size.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and then cauterize at that location where the scapula is connected to the collarbone; and with two small cauteries on either side, one slightly declining towards the part where the beard was left, and two small cauteries between the fifth rib and the ribs, declining slightly towards the back; and another cauteri in the middle of the chest; and three small cauteries on the back; and another cauteri in that location where the scapula is connected to the collarbone; and two small cauteries on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri between the scapulas.
And do not let your hand touch the pointed cautery, but rather keep it away from the edge of the wound.
And they also said that ancient healers knew of men who used a pointed iron tool similar to a needle and ignited it, and then placed it at the location between the ribs, until they reached the abscess and pierced it, as we have mentioned in the abscess of the throat.
However, in this piercing with the pointed cautery, there is no need for fear, as it has not happened yet in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cautery of the mouth.
When treating the illness of the mouth, do not compare your treatment with what has been said about the cure in the division, but rather use the following three methods for the cautery, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four points along the length of the mouth according to the shape of the cauteries of the throat, whose figure has been given earlier.
And each cautery should have the largest part of a rod or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, the one that we have said in the capital of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the vein that is at the end of the thigh on the left side of the patient.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the vein according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the same latitude.
And then insert both flames, light one, in the moment that those penetrate the vein of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery for at least three days, as it is more beneficial than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter 31:
About the cauterization of hydrocephalus.
Do not make points in hydrocephalus, but rather in a specific place.
When you treat the hydrocephalus, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment to others, but rather make four points around the navel, one point on the stomach, another on the chest, another on the back, two points between the spine, one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the point should be according to the thickness of the skin.
And leave the point in place for a long time to prevent pain from lasting too long.
And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the point is placed, as it is beneficial for them to stay there and recover quickly.
The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the abdomen is similar to that of the one mentioned above, and the shape of the one used to cauterize the back is according to its own form.
Chapter thirty-two.
Of cauterization of feet and cushions.
When the feet are swollen with hydrocele and filled with water sodium, cover them with a cautery on the back of the foot in no contact with that which is between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand and do not return to that, because the water sodium will drain.
And the cautery of this form is as follows: And then make two cushions, and in each cushion make a cautery at the end of the cautery cutaneously. And the cautery of the length of the cushion: and the one at the bottom and the other at the middle of the cushion; and over each cushion two cushions.
Let the wound be open for a long time to allow some water to drain from it.
And then treat those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that enter through the pores, the digestive and retentive virtues are lost, which are in the stomach and intestines, and they are cured with these methods of treatment and not with cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a powerful cauterization exhibited in the cauterization of the stomach, then cauterize it with a large cauterizing iron according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterizing circle and with four cauterizing needles in the delicate circumference of the abdomen, with the subtle cauterizing needle; and with the cauterizing needle on the abdominal wall over large wounds, or with two cauterizing needles.
And if the excessive humidity and the patient is able to tolerate it, then cauterize it on the lower abdomen and intestines, and strongly adjust two cauterizing needles on the stomach and near the groin, which will cure the condition perfectly.
Chapter 34.
Of the cauterization of ancient hernias.
When in nature ancient hernias or one of thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division and do not compare it with other treatments, then cauterize with three cauteries on the small of the back, and with a cauterizing iron above the belly through two incisions.
And if it is found that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is puffed up, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauterizing iron according to what has been previously mentioned; and with one cauterizing iron on the chest, and with another cauterizing iron on the abdomen of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauterizing iron for some time under, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the cauterization of the arteries, approach their incisions.
When you incise the artery, then light the cautery that is shaped like a ray. Approach that lit cautery to the incised artery and insert it through the opening until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood flows.
And make a few or two, if the arteries are too many, then cauterize each one after you have returned, and care for those that you apply to them from the mouth until they are healed.
And if you cauterize a large cautery on anything, it is more harmful than useful.
Chapter 36.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
When someone has an abscess in the natural world, and it is old, drain the pus from it and remove the corrupted humidity, and then apply a subtle probe to that area, and approximate the amount of its depth with the front-pointing probe.
Then use a pointed cautery that resembles a needle. And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the amount in which the probe enters.
And repeat this process with the cautery entering until those corrupted parts are burned in a few minutes or several, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn nerves and veins; or if the abscess is in the body of the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do this unless the abscess is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
And then care for that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not left in place, then it is known that they penetrate into the bones and corrupt them, or that is the cause of those conditions from which they will remembered in their location.
Chapter 37.
On the cauterization of warts.
When pain occurs in warts due to friction or heavy pressure, and the patient's breath is blocked, then it is recommended that you cauterize each wart with a small cautery, where the remembrance of the cause should be remembered.
And if you cauterize too much, then do so with a small distance, so that three cautery lines will come out, and they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold urine, then cauterize that area a little further away from the bladder, as soon as the pain begins in the penis, and cauterize with one cautery in the middle, and another on the opposite side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use the clavihus according to what is appropriate.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the marrow.
When there is injury and wetness in the marrow, and because of this compression is prohibited, and the mesenteries of it are corrupted, and its provocation is delayed, and due to this, pain occurs from them, then it is necessary that this place be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery over the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a clavihus.
Chapter 40.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When the ligaments that are infiltrated at the part of the elbow, and that cause the inflammation of its place, and because of this, the cushion is lengthened over the other when they are compared to each other. The location of the dislocation is often in the area where it hurts.
Then you should cauterize the patient with a pointed instrument similar to a cautery, as you have previously tested in the circumference of the wound, and so that the wound falls into the middle of the circle.
And the cautery should have the same shape as the one used in stomach cauterization.
If this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed instruments like an olive branch.
And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire chain; and then cure it when it is healed.
Chapter 41.
About the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the wound area, and its cause is cold and moisture, the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned and not with the one that is ancient, and this is because it is heavy with gross humors such as fetid or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: the medical cauteries with burning coals, or the fire cauteries.
And the second type of cautery is known as one that cauterizes that over the part of the ankle, with three triangular-shaped cautery tools in this form; and do those well deep. And the space between each cautery is the amount of the diameter of the tool, whether it is an olive or a large one.
Sometimes the cautery is placed on the middle of the leg over the knee, because there are four cautery tools.
And if you want, cauterize the circle of which the form is preceded in the cautery treatment of the dislocation of the ankle, and that circle contains and burns the entire tendon.
And this is the method of cautery in such cases when pain is adhered to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
And if it extends into the space, then cauterize that over the space on the location where the patient is, and with one cautery on the calf for a few of those called the lateral part.
And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the nail.
And if the patient complains that the pain extends to the area where the foot is located, then cautery those points here with three or four or more points as needed.
And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the knee, then cautery those points here with a pointed cautery.
And be careful in all cautery that the pointed cautery does not burn the nerves or great sinew, and that for that reason it is not suitable for use on the patient.
And I have also seen another of those who cautery on the scalp and burn in the cautery until the tumor is achieved, and the bed is inflamed inside that the foot is corrupted. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cautery each one according to this method.
And the wise men said in the cauterization of any cautery, this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the length of one palm; and its thickness should be according to the size of a finger bone or a little more.
And they said that this circle should be one third; and the space between them should be the thickness of a finger joint; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those iron strips should be a finger or two fingers, and make them properly covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it curls and produces sparks, and then it should be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that point with three cautery needles in one motion.
And then leave it for three days; and apply a poultice to that point and leave the dressing covered for several days; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Translation: Oh sons, of this kind of cautery we have not used much because of the fear of its effect on him, and because of some things we have found that affect him.
Translation: The places where he suffers from burns, and the one that is near him.
Translation: The places where he suffers from burns, and the one that is near him, you should make two circles with a tube without a hole in it, such as the one used for guaiacum; its length should be equal to the width of their body, and its ends should be like nuts or hooks.
Translation: And if the space between his thighs is greater than the width of the cautery, then place it below and above, and make sure that it contains between them in this form:
Translation: And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient lies, and cover it with your hand; then take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like a small fire, and you should do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and adhere to him â€” because that biting is like that of fire â€” until the biting ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the tail of the snake with water that is not boiling.
And then leave it for three days and pause over that border until the black of the abscess remains, and leave it for several days, and run from there; this is the last remedy.
And then heal it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or leg, make it in the state that contains water as it is made in the water equally.
And this is the method of boiling water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and unextinguished fire from the ashes of one part, and draw it out and pause in a new boil of which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
And pause behind the bottom of the boil in another boiling water, and pour over that alkali and live fire from hot water that takes those by a certain amount, and put it on those with a good compression, and leave the boil that comes out of the ashes into the boiling water.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, because that water is very strong, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because that operation is like fire.
And there are some medicines that are cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh and other causes that are mixed together.
And Galen reported from an ancient man the operation and cure of which is cured pain in the water and sciatica vein, and magnifies that it is of that, and says that there is no need for other cure, because it is healed by a method such as recommendation, because that one enters into bath and has already known of that.
And it should be near a certain green herb, and if there is no green herb, then take fresh fig; and the mot should be crushed with a few grays and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the bed, and tied.
And let it rest for the amount of three hours or until the patient has enough of the sweating.
And then put that in the bath and when the patient's body is wrapped, enter that into the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use this cautery with these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
It is said that when the goat's wound is made, the vein is cauterized, it is improved for him; and this cautery is done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toe of the foot and between the heel.
And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to that with fire until it is charred; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of the cautery for two painful joints.
Sometimes the pain in the two joints is caused by various reasons, such as injury or impact or excessive excretion, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of moist and wet matter.
And cautery does not cure in this single species, which is made for the infusion of moist matter.
Therefore, after the patient's excretion of bad matter and similar to them, which are made on the two joints in which the pain is three lines wide, more than that, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the virtue of it.
And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cautery is made with three or four pointed cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cautery at the onset of gout.
Wounds occur in children with this disease; and it is said that they happen on their structure in the morning, elevation and movement.
And usually in the lower lumbar vertebrae of the back and at night overshadowing the others.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: which grips the cautery over all part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cautery around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines. And make the points close together.
Then cure the area before it is healed by what we have said.
Remember that cautery should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
On the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And since gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then use cauterization again.
And you should cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with a pointed cautery.
And if it is a cauterization, use this type of cautery:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to other joints or to other parts of the body, and it is not improving, then cauterize each one with three or four points on each side of the body using this cautery olive branch.
If you need to use a pointed cautery that is not yours, then use it on the affected area, do not press your hand too close to the cautery before, only around the site of the injury.
And if the pain can enter the bone and both, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in the previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called gout, then prick in the circle of the finger bones as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the said places, then prick in the circle of the finger bones on each nail and on the tip of the hand.
And if the pain can approach other joints or muscles, then cauterize all the parts of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen is done and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery will heal, God help us.
Chapter 45.
On the cauterization of wounds.
When the wound is in the joints and the intestines are protruding from under the skin, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to loosen their clothing on that day and use mild laxatives so that the opening in their abdomen does not become larger.
And then follow the patient between your hands on their side, and tell them to hold their breath while the hole is being made or the intestines appear.
And then return the intestine to its place, and try to repair the rupture on the side of the pelvis without moving the end of it, which should resemble a circle at the bottom of the abdomen.
And then use the cautery in this form:
while holding it with a pair of tongs and burning incisions. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place your hand with the cautery over that spot, and enter through that opening to reach the bones of the pentenilh at the middle of the duiduni; and repeat that other method if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn that intestine because it does not come out from under the patient without causing death or other great harm.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not touch the bones, and do not complete your operation.
And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
Then care for the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed over the edge of the fire.
And then cure those other wounds before they become infected.
The patient should lie on their back for four days until the wound is sealed and the infection has passed.
And make sure that the nourishment given to them is according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be given through their stomach, and that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And when it is time to get up after four days, then administer appropriate medication, and keep that for another four days.
And they should be well rested and replenished with food and drink, and of strong will, because when they follow this regimen for healing, the entire body will be healed.
And you should direct the healing of the other ruptures in the other parts of the body, and at the beginning, and so that they do not recur, then cauterize the rupture with a pointed cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda is like the clean part of it; and then cure that wound which we have said, and it should not be adjusted.
And then the first doctor said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular pointed cautery, rather than with a needle.
And then a line is placed over the wider part of the rupture, and another line above it; and your hand holds a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Chapter 46.
Of the cauterization of tortion.
When the limbs are deformed due to injury or impact, and persistent pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, patience, and effectiveness, as well as the location of the tortion and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed with the first cautery, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery over it; because according to the custom of those pains, they are points in the member that approach the bone, so that you can achieve those cauteries within the patient's body before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cautery for leprosy.
Some leprous people are burned with a cautery for great relief, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flaccidity and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and that at that cure, and do not say this, and be careful over the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one in the middle of the head, and with the second behind him, with the forehead to the end of the hair; and the others on two ears; and another behind, on the nape or back.
And finally, your hand on the cautery a little inside where there is a small pressure on the bone, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then use the cauteries we have mentioned in the previous chapter; apply a cautery to the tip of the nose, two cautery needles on both ears, two cautery needles on two spine bones of the neck, two cautery needles on the spine bones of the back, one large cautery near the collarbone, one over the shoulder, two over the elbows, one over each elbow, two over the shoulders, two over the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hand; cauterize all the joints mentioned in the previous chapter, both on the hands and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the bones of their hands.
And be careful not to burn those nerves that are above the ankle.
Some of these wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the pharynx.
And you know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the other parts, because their body has already been stunned.
And you know that the cautery should be of appropriate size according to the members and joints, as indicated by the tools of the specialties.
And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the cautery of stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it does not heal, then you should cautery that numb member with a cautery appropriate to the size of the member or its part.
And let the tip of the cautery enter slightly into the skin. And then care for it with the medicine until it is healed.
And some wounds are cauterized with a certain substance that causes wonder to the muscles and feet, and the spine of the back and the flesh of the nerves that move that member, and it remains a wonder.
Do not use any other substance but that which is known in the anatomy of members and the exit of all the nerves that move the whole body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of barbs that are curved.
When barbs are too long and do not conform to any of the ingredients of medicine, then cauterize on that one with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the species of the codex until it remains white and the color of it is changed.
And then care for that flour of errors and of lentils with olive oil and with leaves of arnagle, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of iris, each one is a part and all are mixed, and then let it be linen and place it on the location where it is placed until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
Of the cauterization of the neck.
When cancer begins and one wants to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen this some time ago.
And it is better to be cauterized around it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter 10.
Of the cauterization of the abdomen.
When some abdomen is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or due to time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of the abdomen; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery; and afterwards apply a plaster that will accelerate its maturation.
If you want to make the perforation with the pointed cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle location of the foot, where it should penetrate the skin.
And if the cautery is placed in that location which is too far, so that the arm of the patient is injured; and then care should be taken to ensure it is healed.
Chapter 52.
Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
A corrosive substance is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it comes into contact with, like fire eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrosive in the location where the cautery of fire has been made, then place small and large claws according to what is suitable in the location where the corrosive is.
And then cauterize all parts until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause left of it.
And then let it rest for three days, and place olive oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption is gone.
And then carefully remove that burning flesh.
However, if after three days the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas.
And apply some sharp medicine to that area, which is similar to a cauterizer. However, a pointed cautery of fire is not as effective in burning off the pus.
And I have already told you the cure for that area with sharp medicine in the division, and take that which will be needed for the duration.
Chapter 43.
Of cautery of claws and other similar things.
Claws are often found in the parts of the foot that are affected by the disease called claw, which is a great cause of pain; and cautery is done in those areas in two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
However, cautery with fire is done by igniting the pointed cautery similar to a spike, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the claw in each part, and it should be of sharp edges.
And then place that fire on the knuckle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the knuckle until the cautery reaches the depth of the knuckle. And leave it for three days until it begins to swell. And then apply that with wild marsh-mallow leaves mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on it for a day until it is completely removed from its roots.
And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and there are wounds in the surface of the body, especially on the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cauteries with water, and take a syringe of iron or of wood or of pen of lead, and place that over the knuckle; and then slowly inject a small amount of water through the syringe into the marrow of the knuckle, and turn your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the knuckle, and find the water in the tip of the root of the knuckle; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water to take effect, and then remove it, because the knuckle has its roots removed.
And they did that to all of them, bringing them into the room where they were in the body.
And they took care of those who had broken teeth by removing the remains of the teeth that the flesh was growing into.
Chapter 40.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When a person has trembling caused by injury to the nerves or by fever due to some cause, or by another similar cause, it is customarily advised that you cauterize them with four cautery irons or with one on each spine of the back, between each spine there is one cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, use an olive oil cauterizer.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and the healing of the injury is accelerated.
Chapter 50.
Of the cautery for accidents to the body.
When there are wounds in the body that have been caused by sharp objects and have become infected with pus, it is customarily advised to cauterize over the entire head of the boil with a thin cautery made of myrtle wood, the end of which is held in the fire; or with a long instrument of erestology; or with a lenticular cauterizer.
And some people cauterize the area around the beginning of the expulsion according to this method; and they do not believe in it, and those who perform it disrupt the excess and heal from it.
However, it is better to do this before the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of cauterization of fluxes of hernias by incision of the arc.
People who have flux from hernias that are incised because of the pressure, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar cases, and it is difficult to remain in that state.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you should always place your hand on the opening of the hernia, and place your palm over that area until it is closed and the flux of the hernia does not come out.
And then place the burning oil of small and large olives, by many names, and blow on them until they are extinguished.
And then approach the second location and place the cautery on the area where the artery is broken, over that vein quickly so that it will not bleed again, and insert the cautery until it is sealed and restricted that wound.
And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the cautery and extend it, then take another cautery constantly from the cautery that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come over the patient or any other misfortune.
And you should know that when the blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four methods: either by using a cautery as mentioned above, or by extracting it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it should be tied with a strong thread or bandage for its firm structure, or it should be placed on medicines that have the virtue of restricting the wound; and they should be strengthened by a cushion or constraint of decent structure.
May the one who administers a decent restriction of the patient's clothing and the patient's stricture with bandages or due to the position of causes and similar, does not compare but burns.
If that happens to anyone and it is not the doctor present or medicine, then begin with a pause of the indicated remedy on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand at the great constriction of the patient until the swelling of the infected part of the plague is not remained; and above the arkeria it should not remain; and above the arkeria it should be sprinkled with cold water of great coolness until it is congealed and swollen; and more cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and punctures and of bleeding and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization with fire or medicine is necessary, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the sub-heading of the chapter from the head to the feet.
I will proceed in this chapter for such a purpose, so that the one who desires it may be helped by that, regarding what he has asked about.
Since I will begin that, child, know that in this chapter it is for the purpose of frightening what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
Because for that child who is in great caution, during the operation which is in this chapter moved evacuations the one which is with the blood that is in the life of the aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of the exudation or purification of the plague or extraction of the splinter and its likes. And of all those accompanied by fear and trembling and in the most of them death.
And I warn you that such a thing does not fall upon you in which there is doubt, because some evacuations are from the hands of men who are from diseases. And of them there is some that you will go to their disease and it is from death, and they suffer because of the violence of that which they find of their disease, and because of the length of the disease of the other, and of the disease is fear which means death.
And of those who give you such advice, you should trust them and follow their instructions, as their knowledge is beneficial and their ignorance is harmful.
And therefore do not trust anyone who comes to you in this manner; your caution should be greater than necessary and your eagerness; and do not assume any cause without first obtaining certain knowledge that verifies this for you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
And use this method in the treatment of all your illnesses for diagnosis and indication of that to which you are converted for salvation, as in that case, it is helpful to you for acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire your understanding and not lead you astray with false directions and protection, as that is in His hands.
And you should distinguish this chapter by headings that follow the second chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is clear to you what is being asked about and for which you have a need.
First chapter.
On the cure of gout which is contained in the head of infants.
You should know that this disease is caused by cold in infants and when the child's head is exposed to the cold, it becomes inflamed.
And sometimes it is caused by an unknown reason.
I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those who I have seen, it also had this characteristic, which is that they were likely to die, and for this reason, I have seen many of them left without treatment.
And I have seen that a child's head which was full of water, and the head of it was always swollen until it could not be placed on its size, and more than the moisture increased until the fire died.
And this moisture is added between the bone and the skin, or it is added behind the bone on the skull.
When the operation in that case where the moisture is between the bone and the skin and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the head at one slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions of this method:
And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should open all the incisions of the head and pour the water into them when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your liking. However, if you cut in the middle of the head, make three incisions according to this method:
And remove all the moisture from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that liquid over the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with dressings, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until that member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some people have it in the occipital region, or in the part that is affected, or on the right side, or on the left; and then attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do that which you find most possible.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and engage it in flow of blood and cause death to the patient by that flow of blood during evacuation of humidity.
Chapter 2.
When something happens to someone who has had cataracts or wounds in the legs or chest, and that is not treated, and no healing is found in that, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for that.
And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the patient's head has, and approach the location with dry cloth to prevent the arteries from appearing, and approach the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is; and the locations of each above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
And therefore cover over the artery with a tent, and approach each incision at the tip of each part until it reaches within the bone, and that is for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the needle beside the artery and cut that which is incident to the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is cut, the blood flows out quickly, which is often fatal by frequent occurrence.
But if the armor does not appear at the skin, then measure the amount of the aureola from three such spaces, and then try to insert it, and pierce the bone.
And that amount of blood drawn from the wound is one uncia, and if it does not draw more or less, then all of it depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the armor in him.
And then consider the swelling, and if there is some cause of suppuration under the bone, then cut it open to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And then strengthen the swelling with feathers and with lint from linen, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of the stones that are in the temples.
When one has experienced ancient or sudden attacks of headaches, due to humidities of agrimony and quality in the fingers of the temples, or severe ancient pain similar to those, and it is treated with medical methods and this does not help, then we have shown extraction of the stones in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises their fingers in the temples; and understands the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its sides, and it is hidden only in a few people due to the force of the blow.
And if it is hidden, then the patient's collar should be strengthened with some cloth; and then apply force to the place with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly. And here is the form of the spoon you should use: And here is the form of the spoon you should use: when you reach the arch, and then scrape the wound and remove any excess from the parts that are not covered by the spoon, and then remove the bandages that were left there, all of them.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at the end of the needle, and then cut one part according to the amount by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing from them.
And then empty the blood from the wound in one drop at a time.
And if the wound is large, then cover it with two layers of soft cloth or cotton strings, and do not let it become infected during the healing process and prevent the flow of blood.
And then cut away any excess that is between two layers; and do this at the same time or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that pointed cautery into the hole of the pointed cautery until the edges of it are incised, and it will be in the place of that work of that metal.
It is better to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish moisture, and therefore it is better in cases of improvement.
And cover the extraction of the archers that collapse the original location, and place them on clean wool made decently, and then apply appropriate dry medicines to heal the flesh and warmth within until it is healed.
And if while working on another adventure, you find blood flowing from the archer's wound, then you should press that blood, or the pointed cautery, or what fills the original location, and press your hand inside until the blood is stopped. And if any of those causes is not present to you, then place your hand over the location where the wound is congealed, and dip the location in very cold water until the sharpness returns, and then press it again according to what covers.
And this is the most commonly used method for extracting arrows, which involves cauterizing the vein with this cautery that has two points, so you can feel both locations where it enters, and pause when it reaches the bone and cuts the vein in two places, so that the part between the extremities of the arrow is lengthened, as they are not all solidified by this cauterization.
This is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows: However, if the sharpness of two points is too great, it is better to have less sharp ones, because if they are very sharp and approach each location, they will not cut the flesh at high speed.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut more easily.
This work is better than all other works and is more useful.
And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the arrow.
Chapter Fourth.
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic ulcers on the wounds.
When the acidic ulcers are on the body of those who have veins above their forehead, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels as if it were wrinkled like the face of a lizard, and the wounds of those people are extended, humidified without any reason that their hairs are known, and the patches of their skin are scabbed by the acidity of their tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and they named that cure am spassa.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision falls short: the first incision should be equally spaced according to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little bit of the movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the two archers' positions, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws. And if the space of each beginning is three times as much, adjust it.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
And then place the spatula between two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Scrape away all the tissue that is between two incisions above the bone, and do so from the incision that is moving towards the second incision. And then spread this spatula and place it into the first incision another way, using another tool called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not on the other.
And place your hand on the sharp side of the bone, and the other side on the meat attached to the tissue, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the hips.
While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then make that in the median fissure into the other fissure.
And when the amount of blood is equal, express the locations of the patient's toes with a ligature.
And then place your hand in each fissure of the old man's body, and place your hand on those bones that are already infected with pus and oil and pus, and make sure they do not become an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of water or tea, and then cure that with an ointment made of basilicon, oil, and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of gravel by means of catheter and the descending urethra from the parts below the cap.
When a person has been catheterized and continues to do so, and the urethra of the patient is narrowed and its walls are weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they cannot close them, and in front of the cap there is sharp pain and external discomfort, then you know that the catheter and the materials do not come from the motas veins from below.
The best cure for these is to command the patient to turn their head, and then make a small incision on the right side of their forehead, near the temple; this incision should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples, which are often bruised from the beatings, until you reach the bone.
Dry out all the pus with gauze or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cloths. And then apply a clean bandage above the wound to prevent pus from forming again.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then apply a poultice inside the bone where it begins in the flesh, and use the same dry regimen as if you were taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of columbine and mixing them together, and making this into a poultice to be applied to these wounds on the flesh.
Chapter 6
Of the treatment of that which attacks the ears.
All the causes that attack the ears are of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to a stone, such as iron and copper, or it is a plant cause such as celandine or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and other similar substances, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone attacks the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not fit in the ear, and if the ear is blocked, then place it in the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some violet oil or sage into the ear, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nose to prevent the onset of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, because these remedies are effective against these causes.
If it is not extracted spontaneously, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicaricatory needle with this form:
And if the needle is inserted, it is good; otherwise, then administer extraction with the thin needle of doubled-up glass.
And if it is not extracted by that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and seal around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed in but only the needle. And then extract it with the strong attraction of the suction cup that we have found.
But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a piece of alum or a piece of prepared material that has a small amount of the substance, place it at the end of a ray, and wrap it around that side that is properly placed. And then insert that into the auditory canal with ease, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
If all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
The method of incising that part is to first ligate the patient's sephasic vein and then remove it according to the method of the virtue of the wound, and then make a small hole in the area where the gold of the wound is located, and insert a drainage tube in the most affected part of the wound. And if the incision is in the shape of a crescent moon until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then you can use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the incision in that hour with speed, and heal that part before it is healed.
If the cause is one of the grains that are believed to be inflamed and inflatable, then you should administer treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a thin needle according to this form: And administer that abscess of that wound which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think that that wound has already been moistened by the vapor from the ear, and pause it in small pieces, and try to extract those from the areas where there are onions or subtle gestures, or at the beginning, as we have said, which is praised for the extraction of it.
May the water that enters the ear canal be used for sneezing, and fill the ear with an old cloth, and put it on the ear in which the water is, and if by that it is removed, good; and if not, take many small pebbles and lions according to the length of the said, and cook those in the fire for a short time, and let the patient put one of those in the throat of his ear canal and strike with another pebble on the pebble that is in the ear. Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is fully drained.
Therefore do not stop this treatment until all the water is fully drained. And once all the water is drained, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
And then put in another cloth and make as many folds as possible until all the water is drained, and remove that which was used to extract the stone, as described above.
When extracting a beast entering into that ear, if it is small, use the same method and similar tools as described in the division; but if it is large and causes pain to the side of the intestine, then administer the extraction of it with care and precision, and the cause of this is less likely than all other causes found in the ear.
When extracting worms from the ear, if you follow the method described in division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a warm cloth.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then remove that sharp or thin instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow needle and widen it from the bottom of which this is the shape of it: And insert the thin end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then pull out that strong instrument, and make those movements until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey you in this manner, then open and close the circuit of the candle according to what we have said; then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion is the one that you use to apply the medicinal oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape of it: And make that of silver or of iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the container here where it is necessary to serve. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the container decently, and then pour oil into the hollow of the container, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the container â€” and that is in the aurelha â€”, and then insert the ray above and express your hand on that area to compress the temperature of the liquid until the oil is expelled into the hollow of the container and the patient feels the oil entering.
And that which is in the aurelha should already be heated by the fire for a short time. And be careful that the substance you will distill in the aurelha is not too fragile, because the medicines of the aurelha cannot withstand such substances.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of the opalescence of aurelhae.
Some women have been born from the bellies of unmarried mothers, and such cases have occurred in some men, opalescence in the flesh of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that area; and this opalescence is sometimes made in the beginning of the wound of the aurelha which does not know the expulsion, and sometimes in the parts before.
And in the case where the first aid is not understood by the patient, it is in the major difficulties of healing.
And in the case where the first aid is understood by the patient, then place the ear of the patient to their sun and watch for it there. And if you see an inflammation appearing, then open the thin spatula of which this is the shape of it:
If the end of it in which there is a small latitude, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lion lengths so that it does not touch the ear.
And if the inflammation is caused by flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then open several thin needles and incise that vehemence before it is completely stopped.
And if the inflammation is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and lift that needle in the meat of the ear.
And if the inflammation has been felt by the patient that they have found it difficult, because of the heaviness, then press that difficulty; and watch that you do not press the nerves of the ear.
And then place the second cloth of the same width as the opening of the wound that you have wrapped in the egg yolk; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any cloth and soak it in vinegar and powder it on the wound according to your choice, and use it; and if you see that the second cloth has become infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled clay, until the infection has passed; and then care for it until it is healed.
And if there is a sudden flow of pus, then immerse a cloth or piece of cloth in cold water and place it on the wound, and use the other treatment that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of sty in the eye.
Sty in the eyes that sometimes occur in the eyelids of some people are warm, and some are dry.
So that you can hold those instruments or not, and cut those spatulas from their ribs, and place your hand on the locations according to the following:
If the pain is caused by blood flow from a vein, then you should cauterize those spatulas with a pointed cautery.
The best cauterization is to make incisions and burn away any remaining cause of the ribs; and when the spatulas are cauterized with fire, those ribs are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure for great swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
There are burns in the eyelids of the eyes that have some cause similar to swelling in its strength and hardness, and because it becomes larger, it is called a pimple.
And the accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the swelling comes from that which appears on the eyelid and is moist throughout; and the cause of it is unknown.
Then make an incision over that place to facilitate the extraction of the stone, and then scrape it from all parts until it is removed, and then suspend it with a string and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, it will not cause harm to that part where the oil of the stone restores it and encases it.
And if the large stone declines to the parts of the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the large stone with a string, another that you do not know about the incision, and press it from all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it will never be known in any case.
And after the incision, wash the wound with salted water; and care for it until it is healed with what encases it.
Chapter 10.
Of the treatment of cataracts above the eye.
Cataracts are gray spots that arise in the tunics of the eyelid above, and mainly affect children, aggravating their eyes and causing blindness to them; and they cannot see the clarity of the sunlight because of this.
And so you see that they are always talking about their eyes all the time, and over their sleeping eyes; and these have humid eyelids, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of cataracts is in the eye; and when you press the place with your fingers, you push the cataract into them.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient places his head on the finger, and then place cloth underneath him and around him, and make a circle according to the quantity that it contains throughout all parts, and then place that over that and press the fingers on the entire area so that cataract is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then puncture in the middle of that humidity with a sharp point, and the puncture should not be larger than the puncture that is made in flaubotomy.
In the prepuce where you are cutting the skin, make sure to reach the arcernach, as in the most displaced cases, arcernach is processed through a fissure in the form of white glans.
So extract those wet cloths that you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and turn them between your right and left hand until they are spread out.
And be careful not to adjust in the fissure, so that the spatula does not reach the glans and the other one descends.
If you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small wet cloth in the fissure until it is processed; and then extract that one we have mentioned; and wipe away the blood with warm water and place them on the area and stretch those wet cloths.
And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure, so that that which is removed from that wetness.
And then cure that which is sick.
But if a pustule occurs in the area, then cure that with healing ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those to the wound and make methods of maladies as with frequent tears and softening of eyelids and cloth until that which is causing destruction of the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini at the beginning and sutura; or by cannulas as I will say.
And therefore cover that you place the cap of the patient on your left; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the pus is behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through the part above, and that which is â€” near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs â€” near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
And then insert a thin probe into the lower part of the eyelid, adjusting it between the eyelashes and the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it next to the eyelid, wiping it with cotton or cloth, and then cover the eye with a clean cloth, as in the figure of a bandage.
But remember that the figure should be according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, which varies among men, as some require that it be inserted into the eyelid a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is relaxed.
And then insert the thin probe over the two lines that you have placed, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lower lacrimal canal. And if your incision is close to the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the onion in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape it all off, and then adjust the stitches on the two lips with some thin wool or silk thread, and remove the crust, and make any excess glue on the two eyebrows with some ointment, if you want to do that, otherwise, do not worry.
And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds, and cure that.
And if you wish, leave the stitches in place, and cure that with a poultice made of what dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its aggregation; but stitches are better, and therefore do as the ancients did.
But it is still necessary to be careful with the patient, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
And there is another way in taxanir, and it is that you put a figure on the eyelid with fuel oil, and then raise the eyelid by three fingers and separate and gather according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, then take three fingers, and if it is not equal, take a needle in which there is thread, and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle in the larger lacrimal canal, and the second in the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust between the two needles according to their equality, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, and raise the entire eyelid over the one where it is recommended to be.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not healed yet.
If an abscess occurs on your incision or fistula, cover that abscess with a plaster and the same ointment, and apply it.
Sometimes the eyelids become swollen and converted into scars, so use the ointment that we mentioned for incision; but stitching is more artificial in such cases.
To bandage the legs follows this method: And you should fold the cloth and cut it according to the figure that I have mentioned; and then make two narrow strips of the same length as the eyelid and slightly wider than the width of the palm. You have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
And then add each narrow strip under the excess skin of the eyelid, and tightly wrap each section with strong stitches, and leave it for several days until the skin under the stitch dies and becomes discolored and rots within a few days if it is not properly treated.
If it is too late, then break the bone with a hammer, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make these tubes: and have the quantity of length and width neither too much nor too little.
Chapter XII.
Of lifting the sharp hairs in the eye socket when the hair is hard.
When they are not natural, hard, sharp, and prickly hairs, then the operation is that you take a thin needle and place it in a soft and sharp cedar wood, and then adjust the ends of it and the nails in a subtle way. And the length of the needles is the quantity of one palm.
And then you place another thin needle next to it in a short time, and if you want, remove the ends of that one.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, for this is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eye socket that requires it, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly before it goes out of the natural position.
And then pull the eye out and insert it into the solution, and place one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand out and insert it into the solution, and place it in the eyelid to return it to its natural position.
But if it is not returned to its position, then insert the solution at the parts where you have prepared it, and wait until it returns to its natural position.
And then apply it to the eye, as you have done before, and wait until it adheres to its position and heals, and leave the cloth for two or three days, until the eye has healed and returned to its natural position.
If the wound is too short, then adjust a longer one from the natural hairs, and raise it to that one, or until it is long enough to be evenly spaced, and then raise that one.
Chapter XIII.
About the treatment of the eyelid that is above the eye.
When the eyelid is drawn downwards, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called entropion, and whether it is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or similar to them.
May the operation in it be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a wad of cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use treatment of it from the causes that dry and constrict; because if you do that, it returns to be drawn downwards more than at any other time.
Use in those cases where there is a cause that melts like fenugreek, and rub the water in which they are soaked and mixed with him, or apply dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oil, and pour it into that place, and cure that.
The treasure of your cure is that you puncture all the engine that is not consolidated according to the form that fire has at the beginning.
And this operation, which we have said, is only a correction of echalixacrati that does not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Chapter xiv.
Of the cure of echalixacrati that is made in the eyelid.
This echalixacrati that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament echalixacrati; and it is of some nature, other accident.
Other accidents are made by plague or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar things.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle, and cut it with the needle, and insert it into a wide space. And if the shape of the eyelid returns to normal after the cut, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make both wounds on the side of the eyelid behind.
And the ends of both wounds should be made into two angles at the beginning, which you have made while they are converging, and make the angle of each one into a figure when they come together.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: Î».
And then place the flesh there for the amount that is on the side of the eyelid behind it, which will close the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices inside which it is healed.
And if the wound is caused by a laceration or suture or cauterization, then make sure that you cut the flat incision on the eyelids according to what is prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips according to what we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that the blood flows in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the artificer always prepares everything in every possible way that is possible inside which it makes return to the figure in its natural form, or near to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and the tools in the best dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck above the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, therefore you should insert the extraction of the ray under the eyelid, and raise it to that area, or extend it to the eye.
And then you should insert the adhesion into a thin space, which is not sharp for incisions, having a small opening so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not descend the white of the eye from its sharpness.
And your incision should excoriate that adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should apply saltwater to the white of the eye, which you wash; or distill it with lavender dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the conjunctiva of the eye, place over the conjunctiva a piece of waxed cloth soaked in honey, and use the third day to apply consolidating remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the beginning of a nail and the elevation of flesh from the eyelids.
You should know that a nail is of two kinds, either it is nervous, which is similar to a hard, fine thread; or it is not nervous, similar to white moisture gathered together, which when it touches the eye, often takes on an ulcer, which is then abscinded and the ulcer does not stick to it.
And the special nerves do not begin until the major lacrimal, which gradually covers the vision and prevents the light and movement of the conjunctiva.
When the nerve works at the beginning of it, the patient should place his head on his elbow, and then raise the conjunctiva of the eye, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail from the ulcer with a pair of tweezers and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the joint of the cavalry horse or ox or cow, or similar animals, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle small by small and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce that with the needle, and hold the nail firm; and extend that to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil. And then continue that with the needle through the back of the patient.
And then you insert the needle into the space of the lacrimal duct with a thin spatula or small forceps, and remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce continuous tears after insertion of the needle.
And sometimes the nail is extended or held firmly as we have said, and then excoriate the skin on the side of the needle which has this shape:
And be careful that the spatula does not touch the corneal tunic and that it breaks in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or salted water, and leave it there for several days; then care for that wound to ensure it is healed.
If the nail is not tender and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that place, then this type of nail is healed with medicines, and it is healed as well as possible and recommended for use in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp lancet of suitable sharpness in this form: with thin sharpness. And if you see that it is rarefied and contracted and begins to form in that place, then pour some of your own urine into the foot bath made of salt or rose oil or salted water, and keep it there for several days.
And then repeat the operation on that until everything that is in it has been removed, but if the contrary abscess causes pain in the wound, then leave that and cure the abscess when it begins to heal.
And continue your operation until the patient is healed.
The problem with the lacrimal gland, if noticed to be causing great harm, should be removed surgically; and incise that part, but do not end the incision because you do not want to cause excessive tear flow.
And then drip some medicine into the lacrimal canal and let it heal until the patient is healed.
Chapter XVII.
About the incision of the lacrimal gland and that which is born from flesh adjusted in the eye socket.
Sometimes flesh is born in the eye socket, and it is overgrown before covering the pupil, or approaching or stretching over the eyelids and strongly pressing the eyelids to the parts of the eye and is assembled at the edge of a balustrade.
During the operation, the patient should pause their head on the table; and then open the eyelids of that person and collect all that flesh with an incision convenient for that, and that with a forceps or a hook; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the cutter, and guard yourself from the eye socket that you do not descend that which is your operation.
And insert your instrument into that which you inserted those or the spatula we recommended in the beginning of the needle, or small forceps by which you gather the abscess according to how the form of it approaches this chapter.
Then, when your instrument is completed and the entire area is cleaned, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or pour in the powdered herb mixed with a similar corrosive medicine, and place a sterile cloth over the wound until it is ensured that the abscess has been successfully drained.
And if there is any cause for alarm and the patient's condition is seriously endangered, and you fear an abscess formation, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy that heals that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh which has been affected by this condition.
However, you must ensure that all care of the wound is performed through natural or accidental means, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Chapter 18.
Of collection of blood in the abdomen.
Blood vessels that are tortuous over the abdomen and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the abdomen in length of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the abdomen in which there is blood is strong and in it there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
And if you command the patient to lie on their back and suspend those veins with one or two according to your judgment; and that thread should be of fine double thickness according to this form:
or two threads gradually in a coil according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with fine forceps, with fineness, and wipe them away hour by hour until they are removed from the abdomen and turned back.
And be careful not to damage the abdomen at its extremities; and if your operation on the morning gives light, and you have a motive to stop in your operation that you do not insert those veins.
When you have completed the procedure, then you should apply a cold or hot compress to the affected area to help reduce the inflammation that remains from the injury.
However, if it is not possible to gather all of that at once, then you should apply the entire mixture that relieves the pain and leave it on for several days until the pain is alleviated and the wound is healed to prevent infection.
Then repeat the process over the affected area until it is healed.
And this is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
Of reducing hernias to their place.
When you are treating hernias with cauterization or sharp medicine after the story of the injury has not healed, then do not insert into it but instead cut open the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or discoloration in it, then you should remove it with a tool of this shape:
And if it is known that the hard head, and it is made of iron, and the cap is rounded like the one that is made to be pierced by the needle or the aliscalfati for subtle puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and then rotate it between the toes called, and gently press your hand into it until you know that that corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in the new good flesh and the body is free from the sickness and it has lasted for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the opening to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should find a second bone of iron or sharp medicine, and as soon as it is discovered, then take a tribune in this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its tip should be inserted into the end as many times as possible.
Then place the other one over the bone, and the other one near the lacrimal; and move your hand away from the hollow, and turn your hand towards the tribe that penetrates through the bone, and the patient feels the pain as if a hot iron is passing through it.
Therefore, after restoring the place with stiffening and drying medicines that you have seen.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to the source, so this is more appropriate for the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the hollow.
When the hollow prominence does not cause any harm or reduction in the voiding, then cover the patient, and let it follow, and place many small incisions on the neck for good suction; and place a liniment made of acacia, aloe, earthworms, and sarcocolla on the hollow, and strengthen the plaster on the hollow with powders.
And the way to make the bandages for the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those bandages.
And then place them one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the wound. And then apply strength to those bandages with strong and thick cloth; and repeat the dressings with successive sutures; and after removing the bandages, leave the wound straight for the day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
And after removing the bandages, keep the ligament as we have said for the day and night.
And if you see that the wound has already been reduced, good; but if not, then repeat the ointment on the feet and the bandage until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the beginning of the extension of the uvea.
When the tear in the uvea is disrupted, and it extends out of the eyelids like a thick line, and it takes on the form of a man by that, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you enter the needle into the edge of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and place another needle in the part that is double the thickness of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thickness and pull up that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strength to that.
And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen thread soaked in album of egg and lime, and let the thread go through the eye of the needle.
And then care for that part where the pain is located until it is healed.
And some bandages are gathered from all parts of the cloth and wrapped around the wound in a circular manner, and then pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the base of the wound, and let the albumen moisture descend, and then lower the bandage and insert it quickly.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of wounds.
This disease that is called cataract is not other than a wound which is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
The way to work on it is that the patient should lie down on the prepared bed and spread out, and then take the cup in your hands from two parts and pour that into the wound where you see the wound coming to the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and let the light be, and the wound will see its causes as it usually does.
If it does not come down in the foot, you will know that it is a water retention.
However, if the descent is not prepared in a normal way, then make the patient lie down between your hands and gently take a thin sponge and place it on the cornea (at the edge of the eye), until the pus is removed from the eye.
Then, when the pus is removed, you will distill water with honey in which you have mixed melted honey and water in which you have already made a solution of fenugreek and honey.
And then, treat the other causes until they are cured.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declared, then that one.
Then, make sure you make the patient lie down between your hands on a soft bed and hold their eye closed tightly.
And then place your hand near the eyelid of the sick person, if the water is on the left side; or place your hand directly, if the water is on the right side.
And then take a sponge with your right hand, if the water is on the left side; or take a sponge with your left hand, if the water is on the right side.
And then place the sponge at the end of the sponge near the crown for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eyelid on the side of the lower lacrimal, and then wring out the sponge and turn your hand to that.
And then insert the sponge into the eyelid and feel that the sponge has reached the cause of the swelling.
And you will see that the length of the sponge is equal to the distance between the edge of the pupil and the end of the eyelid; which is the crown of the eyelid, because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth down there, and if the water starts to spread, then lift the patient's head slightly, and approach the cloth to the wound.
And then pause for a moment; if the water starts to spread, then pause the other cloth in front of where it is not soaked.
And then when it is dry and does not spread, then remove the cloth gently, and wipe the wound little by little with your hand, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt crystal in water and apply that to clean the wound; and then place a cotton ball or infused linen soaked in rose-scented oil and album of egg and bandage the wound with that.
We also use those that are from our time, such as egg album.
And if you do not obey the cloth to the instrument of the wound because of its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is hard - then cover that which you take with the spatula, which is called the handle of the instrument:
And then pierce that joint at that location, do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not making a delicate incision.
And then make a second delicate incision as we have said.
And you must complete the work of your patient, who should be prepared for a surgical procedure that is done while they are lying on their back in a dark room, and should be prohibited from all movements.
And place your hand on their chest to make sure their nature is smooth and does not cause any damage to their head or the entire body.
And let the wound heal according to its position by the third day.
And then remove that from that dark room and extract the free fluid, and examine some causes, and then return the wound to the seventh day.
And do not forget that you should do this at the time of the cures or soon after the infusion. Having remembered that you should do this in order for the water to be able to flow more easily and forcefully.
If an abscess occurs, you should lance it with a sharp instrument on the seventh day, and then apply a poultice to that area to help heal the wound.
Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to help them expel phlegm from their lungs, which is often found in the darkest part of the body.
And gradually remove that phlegm from that part and discuss its causes with the patient.
And know that in some cases, the student of medicine is not exempt from certain weaknesses, and then you should be careful with your operation.
And we have heard of some of those things that are in the Arabic, and some say that fire is made in the air to perform a certain operation where water is succeeded.
However, I have not seen such an operation performed in our land, nor have I found it in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can perform those operations that those who do not know them do.
And if the pain is caused by sharp or iron objects properly, and their external parts are like this triangular subtlety, the sharp edge has the same form as that one.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of meat not in the nose.
When in the nose there are different meats adjusted from which some cause is assembled like a scorpion of fish, or a polyp; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish represented. And from there meat cancerous, the pale, of dark color; and from there meat lion not of dark color.
Therefore in those meats lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, cover that you make the patient sneeze between your hands and put it in the sunlight, and pierce the nose of it, and pick out the tumor in those meats. And then extract that from the parts of the foreskin, and then cut off what you have understood from those meats sharp space subtle of one part through which you know that all the meat is already open; because if there is any cause from the qual la abscisio es possibla, then you remove that with one of the subtle instruments am facilitat entrance which from it came with any cause. If the lord has been afflicted with an abscess or post-apostemic carbuncle, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the part where the pus has been drained and all the cavities have been closed.
Then apply a poultice made of charcoal and vinegar or wine to the affected area. If the wound is opened and moisture enters into the mouth, then know that it is healed.
If moisture does not enter after the drainage, then know that there is no flesh in the pus under the bones of the nose to which it has not reached the abscess.
Therefore, after the drainage, if there is any swelling in the place to which it has not reached, and you make a poultice of the same amount of herbs and apply it between each nostril, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose with the ray or another cause that is possible at that time.
And then, when that is done, draw the patient's own odor into their nose, so that it reaches the nostrils, and place it on their golayro, as many troops of children in school do, and this is the likely cause for those who want to do it.
And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose, one on top and the other underneath, and administer salt from meat that is already on the patient's nose, and do this while you know that the meat is already on the patient's nose.
And then remove the patient, and place in their nose the abstraction of honey and vinegar, and do this for three days or more until all that remains of the meat is rotten.
And finally, at the end of the cause, place in their nose a goose quill filled with oil until they are healed.
But if it does not work, use this one instead.
This is the form of the instrument used to purge the nose, which is distilled in oil and medicines:
Make it from silver or from iron, which is similar to a small lamp covered with a small bowl, like this:
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the canula of the instrument used to purge the nose should be flat, open; at which has a handle in the back of it, which you hold when you pour in the oil or the liquid that you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
Chapter 25.
About the nostrils on the outside of the nose.
The nostrils on the outside of the nose are often blocked, and they are magnificent and open on other days when it is not looked at closely.
And for that reason, you should insert a probe into the beginning of the appearance of it, and remove all of it. Then place your hand or cauterizing instrument over the area where the burning medicine was placed.
If the insertion of the probe is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is calcified, hard, black in color and has little sensation, do not touch that iron which is a crusty abscess; because the nostrils are often blocked by the great malice of that which the person had.
And if the abscess is of lion-like appearance and is not black in color, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that medicine with fear, and cure the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26
Of sutures of the nose and lips and of the earlobe when continuity is dissolved by a wound or similar injuries.
You should know that when continuity is lost in one of these cartilages, you should not perform surgery on it, but rather on other men.
Therefore, if you have any reason to consider one of those, whether it is a fresh wound or its scar, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
And if the lips of continuity loss are already separated, and each one is healed, then consider that you should excise each part of its scar within which it does not form a scar. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them powder dragon's blood and three-grained cinnamon, and place a dressing of diachylon plaster or of any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace it with another plaster and leave it until the wounds have healed.
May the needle of the suture be such that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have done and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts divided.
Some boils are found in men in the divided parts of their lower lips, similar to hard abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut each of those hardness in that part, and then fill the abscess with healing herbs until it is strong, and then wash it with very hot water and cure the area with what has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
A large number of boils are attached to the gums, which the ancients called albus, so you should suspend that one or the one you have with the forceps and incise that one at its base, and let the blood run out or the wound heal.
And then place a dry or stimulating powder on the wound location.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
On the reason for iron teeth.
When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scales are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the mouth, and between the gums, they are yellow or green, and through this corruption the teeth become loose.
And therefore you should brush the patient's teeth between their hands and place their head on your knee, and remove those scales that appear similar to sand, and through which no cause of decay has ever occurred, and this is how blackness, yellowness, and other discolorations are caused.
If this is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those teeth every other day and the second and third time until it reaches the desired state.
And you should know that teeth require different shapes and sizes of files and instruments according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you know how the file that is used to shape the part of the tooth that is not cut is different from the file that is used to smooth between the teeth in other shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
That you cure the tooth of all its pain and delay in the entire extraction of it, because there is no cause that should supplement the weight of it when it is extracted, because the substance sublimates within which the extraction is made.
May you also be certain when the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, because the pain deceives the patient and makes him think that it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Therefore, when you need to certify which tooth is hurting, and if you know how to do it, first scrape around the circumference of the tooth with some tool that has some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum in all parts, and then remove that with tweezers or fine forceps, bit by bit until you have removed those.
And then place a large wooden spatula in the patient's strong jaw for good loquacity or to prevent suffocation, and place your hand on the patient's head between their teeth so that they do not bite you, and then remove the tooth straight in a way that does not give them more pain or harm the patient.
And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those tools, and place it there to facilitate and reduce the effort in removing it at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, then make sure to wrap that break and tighten it with a fine wire at its end so that it is not crushed in your construction over that at the jaw.
And you should work carefully on the incision around all part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear that and remain a part of it, and return over the patient for the major pain that is the first pain of him.
And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity in the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for many wounds bring on great illnesses that are much harder than tooth extractions, and the reasons for their success are all, or some of those, or that they extract that with the wounds which we have testified.
And the eradication of him is washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
And if there is a flow of pus through the wound, which also occurs with many wounds, then cut off some amount of zeolite and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that zeolite, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is such that it is praised for its long handle and thin, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
And if there are times of thick handles that when you hold them, they are not bent, they are short extraction tools.
And if they are made of iron from India, they are straight extraction tools, and in their handles, there are teeth of those that one puts into the others and they are held together by a strong constraint, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a stork, which is called ciconia, so it is gripping, and they are of great constraint.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jawbones that are impacted.
When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, it is often caused by some reason, then place your hand over the place where the bone is located for a day or two until that place becomes soft; and then use anesthesia or hold the extraction tools whose shape resembles the beak of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or a chisel.
And if they do not obey your order to open their mouth or let you hold it, then force them to open their mouth and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called the almucia, which is a small hook with this shape:
And if it is short and thick, make it slightly thin, but not too much so that it does not become square.
Therefore, if the mouth is opened, good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramitation with some roughness:
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
And you have already helped with this instrument having two ramps, which is the appropriate shape as follows: And you will need other instruments that I will describe in the removal of teeth; because it is very important to do this instrument, which is similar to an awl, and this is the shape:
From the triangular distal end that is too short or too thick, which should not be too thin to avoid being triangular.
And other wise men say that the instruments of teeth are like the others.
The artists are wise and subtle in the art, and for this reason they use different tools according to what it signifies for each operation and various diseases; because of the different shapes of various species.
If the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are triangular, then it is necessary to be careful with that one in its place according to what is convenient for the tools and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with the handling of which this is the form:
And if there is any thickness little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or enter until the bone of all is completely removed; and then restore the place with appropriate medicines for that.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 32.
About the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course, and especially when they grow towards women, and more so towards revered virgins; therefore, you should consider: if a tooth is not close to another tooth, and it cannot be sawed off or extracted with a linament, then you should remove that tooth; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian iron of extramatted metal for its sharpness.
And if your incision is too deep and it takes several days to heal because of the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if it is necessary to spread it out, then use this Indian iron knife of the following form:
And it should all be made of Indian iron; and the handle should be the same; and it should have many pointed tips like needles, which are used to cut a little at a time in a few days, so that no other tool is needed and becomes dirty. And then draw it along the line, and scrape it with a razor.
And if it is of the kind that one part is soaked and lies on the tongue, then make sure that you scrape that part which has been wetted by that fraction is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Chapter .xxxiii.
Of the restoration of teeth that are damaged by gold or silver.
When accidents occur to the teeth due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have treated them with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then in order that they do not rot in those that are strong by gold and not by silver, because silver turns yellow and becomes porous over time, but gold never changes.
And if the bone is so thin and grooved according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the form of the reaming is that you take the bone and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two twists of the bone between two dirty ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And approach the tying inside the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not dirty.
And your tie should be the one that strengthens the bone from the roots of the teeth that do not escape.
And approach the excess parts of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the dirty one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue. And leave that which is so tight as to be Roman.
If it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another bone in such a way that they are all in their time.
This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straight teeth, such as these often are:
And when a tooth or teeth return to their proper place in the mouth, and are restored as we have recommended, and remain so.
Only skilled craftsmen and wise people can do this.
Some people are prone to certain bone conditions of cows, and it is made from them in the form of teeth, and placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and strengthened as we have said, and remains there for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is located behind the tongue in some people or is natural to them, or accidental and occurs due to a wound that has already healed.
The operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, removing the existing cap from the tooth; and elevating their tongue, and then inserting that nerve ligament according to the latitude before the tongue is re-established in its original position.
If there is any difficulty or stiffness in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of a plague, then you should apply pressure and cut it through the width until it is torn and the stiffness is dissolved.
And be careful not to make a cut in the flesh and that you do not tear the muscle here and cause bleeding of the sinews.
And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from being consolidated again.
If bleeding occurs, place your hand over the wound; if the sinew is torn, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then apply the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Some tongue swellings occur before the tongue, resembling a small pimple that prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not filled with the mouth, it becomes magnified.
And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard and without sensation, then do not touch that which is cranial.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the sponge in it, and insert a sharp needle under it, and cut it from all parts; and if the pus ventures out during your operation, then pause above the three fingers, it is vinegar, until it is restricted.
And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one with the other cure at that time until it is healed.
Chapter 36
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and from those that are in the groin and of other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble wool, which are deformed and called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and are not healed, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch it with a knife because of the risk of infection; leave that inside to mature, and then you either rupture it or let it break by itself.
And if it is of white color, clear, and the pus of it is thin, then that should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether it has already subsided from the abscess with caution completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient is lying on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the server takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the servant takes between his hands the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or aram, and thin like a knife.
Then, when you press the tongue and it shows you the abscess, and catches the pus on that, then take out the cotton and put that in the wound, and pull it from the sides as much as possible. Another thing that you pull from the causes of the tunic, and then approach the incision with this instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing that you pull from the causes of the tunic, and then approach the incision with this instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and thin.
However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then approach the incision with this space of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And once you have incised one wound, then incise the other following this method of incision, and approach the incision to the patient who is guarding against water breakage
If the patient has diarrhea, guard against water from the decoction of senna or of figs and similar to those of the astringent causes that restrict the flow of the diarrhea, and cure it within that time.
And sometimes in the gullet others are pustules or those two wounds, and insert them second by second as I said at the beginning of these two honeyed remedies equally.
And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her gullet, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her gullet, and the woman was breathing very straight, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
And the abscess had pushed so much that it had half a dozen openings between two veins.
So you made an incision carefully and inserted it into one of the openings, and pulled that out, and poured a large portion of it from there, and then you inserted it into another opening, and closed the mouth of it, and pressed her tongue, and then you inserted the other incision into that abscess.
And then you should bring a large amount of blood from him, but do not let any of it run out. Therefore, the absolute cure for that woman, and as soon as she begins to vomit, immediately administer food, and do not cease to incise that abscess with an old knife for a long time, until another abscess forms in its place, which should be incised before it is prolonged.
Therefore, you should apply pressure and cauterize the wound with an old knife, and then apply a poultice; and then walk around and do not let them know what God has done for that patient.
Chapter 37.
On the incision of a wound when it becomes abscessed.
When the catarrh (mucus) descends to the wound, and it becomes abscessed and long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
When the wound is cured with the remedy we have mentioned in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if you see that the abscess has already disappeared from the wound and is thin, then you should incise that which has accumulated around it; and if it is at a distance, and is bloody, of a dark color or black, and is not on the surface, then you should make an incision in the wound, where there is fear over the patient.
When you see the second rib that I mentioned earlier, which is long and white, you should make an incision on the patient's body and take out their tongue with an instrument that fits its shape, and then place the bone in the new place, and pull the other one down and insert it into one of the two instruments called scissors at the beginning of the chapter.
And be careful not to insert it any more than what is adjusted to its natural term, because if you insert it too much, you will damage its speech.
And then make the incision with the instrument that we recommended earlier, and heal it while it is still healthy.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision, then use the instrument in the cauterization of their fear, and the handle of the cautery should only be sharp water, and you should place the patient's head in your lap, and take out their tongue with the instrument that we mentioned earlier, and then take some of the water that we mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and apply it to the wound while it is still alive, and do not press too hard or too delicately, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
The extramatum of the cavity where the medicine is placed should be like the shape of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns their head to one side so that saliva or drool from the mouth of the other does not fall on the wound due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to the wound.
Then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for a period of time until it becomes denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that end of the needle, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the needle through the cloth into a canula over which the cloth adheres so that you can achieve the desired cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four until it dries up.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and after the cauterization remove it from around the wound with a clean cloth in a circular motion, and change that which is inside the circle of the medicine, and wash it with water, and cure it with a warm compress, and give gargling rinses until it is healed.
This type of treatment is more safe than beginning and longer than fear.
Some wounds are cured with this method that is more subtle than cauterization and begins, which is cured by sublimation in this way: take calament, ysop, origan, ruda, scissored Arabic gum, camomile, borage, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a hole in the middle of the bowl where an instrument made of aram according to this method should be placed; it should be made of silver or aram.
And if the tip is inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula on the throat, before the uvula becomes obscured.
And if you repeat this treatment until it dries, and keep in mind that you should not do this treatment at the beginning of the appearance of abscesses, because it would adjust too much to the abscess, and do not let you do this, but declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a cloth of hay on its tip, to prevent the patient's mouth from being suffocated, as the cloth of hay prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres to the wound and other causes.
Fragments adhere to the wound or thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Then cover what you are removing from those that are apparent, over which the sight is placed, rather than using an instrument of silver, so that it can be declared to you what is in the wound.
And what is not apparent and is hidden in the wound, cover it with the patient vomiting when the food is digested in the stomach, because often the cause attached to the wound is removed by vomit; or that the patient swallowed a bone of bread or a piece of raw meat or a bowl of dry bread; or took a sponge of sea sponge and soaked it well with wine, and then placed it on the patient, because as it passes through the place where thorns and are extracted, it is removed. And then take a snake and boil it with a little vinegar, and extract the juice from it; or take a pig's foot and boil it in vinegar, and extract the juice from it.
If you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of this form:
And it should be as large as a small finger, and in its extraction, the cavity where you will insert it into the neck to facilitate.
And the hand is raised up to it, and be careful that the touch of its neck bones, so that it does not hurt it or the spine, or what that doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient feels pain from that insertion, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and what he puts on it, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the quantity that is prepared in him before it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood attached to the liver.
When blood attached to the liver is treated with the medicine we mentioned in the division of the cure and not with a cauterization, consider this: place your hand on the patient's abdomen at noon, as you have understood the instrument that we recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood attached to the liver, extract it with a small needle or a thin instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible to extract it, then take a concave needle and insert it into the patient's abdomen, and place your hand on the concavity of the needle, and hold an ignited iron there (until the attached blood is dead and has come out of the abdomen) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
And then take a full wet cloth and place it in the patient's mouth, and wash the mouth with that; do not let any of that cloth touch any cause and make the patient drink water for an hour, then another on their hand, so that the attached blood feels like water.
If we have not forgotten the remedy we recommended earlier, then currently subfuse the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument we recommended for fumigation of the uvula.
Do that, in four ways.
And another way of operation in fumigation of that is to take an iron rod with burning coals and cover the rod with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then remove it from the fumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, as the lungs quickly absorb.
And if it does not catheterize, then repeat the fumigation after some time, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this diet should be forgotten.
This is the form of the instrument used to treat gout in the great toe when it appears; and it resembles forceps sometimes, but with some curvature. which is placed on the great toe, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which grips, in which a rasp is attached, so that when a cause is found, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the detection and lancing of abscesses.
Abscesses are special masses, like other masses, according to the recollection of them, each in this book.
And they are different in puncture and incision of them by other means, one of which is for the kind of abscesses that contains pus; and because it understands the moisture.
And the second method is for the places where the disease occurs in the body, as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a suitable treatment.
And more about abscesses, some of which are not meant to be pierced until they have reached maturity and their fullness.
And other abscesses that are supposed to be punctured when they are crossed, and not matured according to their fullness, just like abscesses that are directed towards joints, if an abscess is approaching a joint, then extend it into the area around it, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, so that it causes contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is matured, it will damage the principal member; or it is near the anus, so do not puncture this unmatured one, but rather the one that is directed towards the anus, so that it does not spread to the inside of the abscess and be extended to the parts of the anus, and it should be made a fistula, or what is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed. May you know the time of the puncture of the abscess, and do it when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the pain subsides and the fever ceases, and there is a decrease in the inflammation and pulse, and an increase in the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you know that the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from where the pus comes out of the boil.
And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed that the digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, it prolongs the suffering of the patient and causes much pain, and very hard labors for him.
May it be possible to perforate the abscess according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member requires.
And if you administer small perforations, and in large abscesses, a wide or deep cut according to the variation of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, in which you should know that the incision should be made into the cavity and closed, when it is made as follows: with a needle and thread, as has already been mentioned, such as that which occurred in swellings of the throat and groin.
And of those that have incision with three angles; and of those in which it is made as follows: with the shape of a leaf of myrtle, such as the abscesses of the elbows.
And in those in which round and crescent-shaped incisions are made, and similar to those.
May that one who cannot be found as such as the abscesses of lions, you should make a superficial perforation, or just plane it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not stop draining it; take out a piece, and the next day insert it into the other side, and then remove a larger piece, and do this gradually until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, female, pregnant, a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more mature and resolved at the exit of the pus, and the patient is likely to die, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter, and your puncture in which you puncture these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is scarce or flat; then administer water of life or decoction of willow bark; if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are wide, wait until they converge before you proceed.
If a piece of the tendon or a part of it is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, then cover it with old cloth or fabric made of dry cloth, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen it within the third day; and proceed with that and cure it with the same thing that covers the wound until it is healed.
If you have a flow of pus during the operation, then administer cold water and vinegar in those same cloths, and place that over the location of the flow of pus, covered with wet cloths.
If the flow of pus persists, then cover it with bandages and apply the remedies and cures recommended in this book and in other places of our library.
If it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powder and oil caustic, and place those over the locations.
And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and all this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to him whatever is suitable for his cure within the first day.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess should be treated differently according to its type.
Chapter 41.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those that contain glands that are their own; and their specialties are as follows.
And some of them are hard, and those that contain moisture similar to honey. And some of them contain moisture similar to pollen, and those that are like themselves; and some are stony, hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, you do not fear, as you should not make opposition to that archery.
And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument in the shape of which you can approach it, which is called an introducer, as long as you know that it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then divide that instrument in the section according to its length for surface section in this form:
And begin in the section of the line B until the line G. Then, when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any of it for any cause, because too many wounds return, if there is any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian gum, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it until another day, because that which is from that layer will corrode everything that is from it.
And then repeat the second application of the Egyptian remedy thoroughly and carefully, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the disease with the same remedy until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second remedy in this way: with a sharp cutting instrument in the shape of a crochet, and insert it between two lips of the section and scrape all its parts, and exert your skill in extracting that membrane which contains the pus.
But if your instrument causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
And similarly, treat the inflamed abscess with incision and cure according to what we have told you; and if you incise an inflamed abscess, it is better to be less, because it is less painful and less wet.
And some people have such abscesses on their head which are always dry; the cause is that if you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and atrobegui the abscess with a stone as hard, rough, white, which cannot be moistened, and if anyone is hit by that, it will cause harm to that person.
In other head abscesses, this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the golden hairs, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the matter of the sickness is not spread to the lower parts.
Then apply treatment with that which is appropriate for that of healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulous glands that occur in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and those that are caused between them, and all scrofula of those is within their own tunica, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the specific types of these scrofulous swellings are moles, some of which are bony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And in that one which you see to be of good disposition in the Tactile test, the color of which is proper for the color of the gallbladder, and is magnified at all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the diaphragm, and is not indented, but rather you should scrape that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that of all parts, and extend two lips of the gallbladder to the onion, or to the cloves if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small by small.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not scraped.
And the space should not be sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the scrape, or disturb the patient, and that you do not scrape what is not necessary to scrape; because if you were to scrape a vein or diaphragm and prevented you from performing your operation, then pause in the glass of three-pronged or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the wound, and leave that which has paused the acuity of the abscess and is becoming softened and begins to heal. When the tooth is removed.
Then return to your operation before the hour is complete.
And if there is any cause for the other small scrofula, then insert those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the neck of the large vein, cover it immediately that you do not insert that scrofula from its neck. Before covering, make sure it is flat and let it fall by itself when it is no longer harmful.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then care for that.
And if you insert that scrofula entirely, cover it immediately that you adjust the two lips of the wound and press strongly so that there is no excess left.
But if you see that there is excess left due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover it immediately that you insert the neck of that, and remove that and administer sutures and that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula, which contains moisture, make a superficial incision where you see the location of its maturation, and pause the incision at the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
And then administer the incision, using similar instruments and techniques, to remove that which is left of the corruption. And when you see that the wound has been cleaned, then treat the generated flesh within it until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the separation of the pus from the boil due to the inflammation.
The ancients performed this separation in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have swelling, be careful to avoid the extraction of the abscess, because it should not be done in such a way that all the veins and major blood vessels of the patient are cut.
When there are boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the gums, cut away the section of epithelium to prevent the loss that is caused by suffocation.
Therefore, when you want to do that, cut away the epithelium in three circles of the epithelial circles, or four small sections for latitude in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section is in cipher, not on the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for section, where there is no meat and the sinews of the joint are soft.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat upwards, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the gum, but avoid the sinews of the joint if there is any cause from those.
And then cut the cheek second, as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the gum for the flap that is of that and this is the cause that is of it and for the abscess of the tooth.
Let the wound be left open for some time.
Since the time when the piercing is feared has passed, add two strips of bandage to the wound, and leave it alone with the cartilage.
Then administer medicines that help heal the flesh before it is healed.
And as Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is only to view how some of those abscesses have been opened up, and the patient has died, and his spirit has entered him, and they have incised the epiglottis so that he can breathe over the location of the wound for some time, and be saved from death.
And for that commander, let the wound remain open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil of it lasts for three days; and therefore, after that commander, he should treat the wound in such a way, and cure it before it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant puts a spoon in the patient's mouth and inserts a piece of lung cancer into it, and she was called to cure him, and then she blew air into her mouth as if it were the breath of the dead, and then she exposed the wound and then she sprinkled the salt that was on the wound.
Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of vein or guided, and the wind was from the wound, and cure that within which the fire was healed.
And do not harm the servant if he does not resist in the foot, and then return to the better disposition of his conditions.
And now tell you that in the section of the epididymis there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the incision on the abscess which occurs in the groin, and is called groin hernia.
This abscess called groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused by women.
And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one there is no need for cure.
And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar to abscess which is caused by artery blockage, and in that there is fear. And do not attempt to make incisions with a knife unless it is small. And if you find that and investigate it, and if it resembles a gangrenous wound, and is not suspended by any of the veins, then incise it with those that are like the nodes, and extract that which contains the decayed flesh and pus; and if not, then examine the entire area, and apply a dressing where there is a chance of healing before it is healed.
Chapter 45
On the separation of the kinds of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are various species that I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And you should be aware of the difference between a node and an ulcer when making incisions.
Therefore, you say that an ulcer is characterized by heat, fever, and intense pain until the boiling of the superfluous matter ceases; and it is a putrefaction that stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
When there is no heat, fever, or pain, count the pulse of that lion which is in its proper place.
And if the second color of the body is like a cheese and is made in such a way that it is either greater or smaller, and there are two species, one being fat and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you have reached the cure of the pulse, explain that one and inquire about the other at the beginning of the instrument which is called the stethoscope, as it will come to its form in the chapter which is appropriate for this.
And it is useful for the inquiry of abscesses and all swellings, and that you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the pus.
And then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the stethoscope and consider what is in its traces.
If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you scrape it off with a shallow cut as I have mentioned in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the imprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
And you apply a dry cut with this form: as you have been taught, and suspend that one on the hook, and excoriate the codena from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that one and extract that pus from the node.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and then you wait until that one does not remain for any reason.
If it remains for any reason, too much or too little, then the node returns according to the most.
And if you see that some part of it remains small, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that part that is the seat of the abscess carefully, and cure that one from the other treatment until it is healed.
If it is necessary to cut a large part of it, then you should take both lips of it and cure that wound with this ointment.
If the pulse is on the opposite side, or not pulsatil, then you should cover and fill that place with three tinctures that are verdigris and leeches for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation stops; and then return to cutting that which remains to be removed.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and puncture.
Of those that are inserted, and of three kinds, which are large, and of theirs is the largest, and of theirs is the smallest.
The form of the large inserter is this:
The form of the small inserter is this:
It has feet of iron, of brass, and of rounded ends properly, in order to penetrate the instrument into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Beric.
And there are three spices, one of which is great, magnificent, and precious.
The form of the great experiencer, his shape:
The form of the magnificent experiencer, his shape:
The form of the precious experiencer, his shape:
It is suitable for those abscesses, exits, and fistulas, and boils, because they are among the bones and other causes.
And there are made needles, large, lions, such as great golden needles, which are sewn with the sutures, and they are made of gold, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of gold.
And they are made of black lead, which are said to be suitable for those who have open fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflected, that they are reflected by their light on those reflections.
And there are three kinds of them, one long, and the other short, and the third medium-sized, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
The shape of the large plug:
The shape of the small plug:
The shape of the tiny plug:
The shapes of the needles are of special types, one of which is simple, and there are three kinds of them: large, medium-sized, and small.
And there are curved needles, and there are three kinds of them.
And there are needles with two curves, and there are three kinds of them.
And there are needles with three curves, and there are three kinds of them.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The shape of a medium-sized simple needle:
Form of a big snake with two curves: Form of a long snake with two curves: Form of a short snake with two curves:
Form of a big snake with three curves:
Form of a long snake with three curves:
And these are the forms of sharp scalpels that cut and scrape the nodes and abscesses, and they are of three kinds: one large, one long, and one short.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The edges of those that are made with a cut are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but rather they are used in such a way that it is done well in the excoriation of the nodes to avoid the risk of injury to a vein or nerve, and for these they are healed by the patient and at once peace of mind by the application of the excoriation of the abscess.
These are the shapes of amulets, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
These are the shapes of herbs and their similarities to rays, which are made into a tincture.
And it is in the external part, where the spotted ray is hidden and in that place, according to your will, as you see.
The shapes of rays, which are hidden among the mentioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the intestines, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the shapes of those:
The shapes of wings that are cut from the intestinal flux, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; their forms are:
These are the shapes of herbs like citrus, round and some length, and they are subtle.
And you should have great knowledge of these special types of winds, thick and thin, so that for those afflicted with abscesses, you can quickly remove pus with speed in necessity, and later when the first symptoms appear, there is no medicine.
However, do not use these winds to remove pus in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groins, and similar to their fleshy wounds.
Some winds are made from other instruments similar to those used for lancing, according to this form; through which the pus is removed when lancet is performed, or you must insert a needle into a vein or artery.
And some winds are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
About the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to complement their sleep, and then they inflate the breasts, and they assemble the breasts of women, and they are remote, and they are apostates.
And to the one who applies that, cut those same parts of the moon-shaped section according to this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove all the scab, and place the plaster of flesh medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster with its adhesive, and cure that one before it is healed.
But if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its own size, as it often happens with women, then cut it in two at the higher part, into two sections similar to the shape of the moon, of which each contains the end of the other, within which the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then remove the cavity that is between the two lips of the plaster, and scrape off the fatness, and administer that which we have said about the stitches and the powders that are necessary in the healing before it is healed.
If you do not complete the initial step of incising the affected area due to the patient's anxiety or excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster submerged in corrosive ointment and leave the area where the ointment is eating away at the flesh, and then care for that area so it can heal.
Chapter 48.
On the puncturing of abscesses that come from the tip of the tongue.
These abscesses that come from the tip of the tongue are of the type of scrofula, which is hard and contains a pus pocket.
And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised along the lunar line according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all the contents of the abscess are evacuated, then close the wound on the next day.
And then keep the wound closed and treat it with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
If the abscess of the glands in the neck and the scrofula, as we have said in the section on scrofula, is present, then you should incise it as follows.
If the plague is spread in such a way that it cannot be stopped, then you should apply the cautery as we have described in that section.
Chapter 49.
Section on the incision of abscesses that occur due to laceration or vein.
When a laceration is torn, and the cord is consolidated over it, then abscesses and blisters occur due to inflammation and abscess caused by artery or vein: because when abscess is due to laceration, it is longer in the anterior part of the body; and when you press on the abscess, you feel a grating sound in that place.
And the one that is due to vein is located at the back of the body.
Incision of this abscess is harmful, and especially in those that are behind the shoulder blades, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great wound, so you should avoid its treatment, and the one that is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Above the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arkeria, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with scissors and remove the arkeria, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the arkeria with a double fold in two places, â€” which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arkerias which are in the temples.
And then press the place between two limbs with a space inside where it is entirely in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated inside where the limbs fall; and then cure that according to what is appropriate for that until it is healed.
And if the abscess is through the section of the vein, then make sure that you have your hand on that which is at your possible distance from the abscess and the section, and then introduce the needle behind the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double fold inside where you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a thread according to what I told you in the limb of grape4 of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might break, then insert the trustworthy needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess at the middle part of it until you insert what is inside it, and leave that which is left outside.
And then place your hand on the part that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with calendula and tincture until it is healed.
Chapter L of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, when abscesses occur in the joints and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur due to their impact or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made in the most suitable place for the helper or the talon, or in any place where the joints are not affected.
And if it is an abscess that is large and similar in color to the other parts of the body, and it is located in the major joints, and when it is stretched with violence, the patient feels pain similar to that of stupor.
And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left alone, and it is painful all over and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not recommended to be pierced with iron, because it would easily cause contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, it should be left alone. But if it is a small abscess, then do so with the forceps and remove that from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with an incision, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the bandage on it, and cure it inside so that it is healed.
Chapter 51.
Of the drying of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also occurs in the belly.
In men with masses in the abdomen and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal by similarity to those that grow, for which the reason is subtle and the head of which is large; and already their lips are converted, and it is from those that are small, and it is from those that are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in his belly there were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of less reason.
And already their lips were turned and they were deformed, and moisture ran from that time.
Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot thirteen inches long and the other twelve inches long.
And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider this if the patient is humid, and the color of the abscess is white, moist, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a spatula, and keep it in your presence cauterizing it in the fire, because the masses that cause the drying of which are expelled by which is not sound; and if you find the unsound, cauterize it.
If the patient is very weak and afraid, first hold an iron; then take a recent plaster, strengthen that wrist, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the narrow part of the plaster; so do not stop strengthening the large and disfigured wrist until it is cut off and falls on its own.
But if the wrist is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut off the part of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then cure it until it is healed.
And be careful not to cut off the wrist that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly shaped, because that is cancer.
And you will remember the remembrance of cancer.
Chapter 52
Of the cure of an abdominal hernia.
An abdominal hernia is caused by various reasons; either by fissures in the navel which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia protrudes as it does in other ruptures; or by a weakness which allows blood vessels or arteries to protrude as it is called; or by tightness in the abdomen.
If it is caused by a fissure in the navel and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to that of the body; and the pain is sharp, and its appearance varies in different positions. And if it is caused by protrusion of the intestine, then its position is different from that of the body we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press on it, it becomes hidden, and returns; and often it is in the same place, and is a sign of great difficulty to introduce it back, and causes great labor.
If it is caused by moisture, then the pain is sharp and does not disappear when you press on the abdomen, nor is it tightened or hardened.
And if it is for suppuration, then apply these signs to the abscess to make it decline gradually.
But if it is for flesh, then the abscess is large, heavy, and hard, and it remains in place for a certain amount of time.
But if it is for moisture, then the touch of it is like a lion.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to suppuration from an arc, or from a vein, or from moisture; therefore, it is prohibited from the treatment of it, because in that case there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he has said about abscesses from an arc and from a vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on the patient's belly, and then wrap the space around the umbilicus over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the margin of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or soft bandage and the method of tying the bandage.
And then approach the pus that has spread over the wound and insert the pointed instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not done this before or have not guarded it through the wound, then you extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then take that one and scrape off its excess parts.
But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that part and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly into those two fields and push two needles around the wound in a crisscross manner, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and leave them inside the place where the flesh extends and falls down; or scrape off that part which is thin and can be removed, and then care for that wound which covers the mouth and heal it before it becomes infected.
And if the umbilical prominence is made of flesh and nothing else in it or due to moisture, then cover the abscess with what we have said and remove the pus or the moisture, which is found in it, and then care for that wound as we have advised.
Chapter 43.
About the treatment of the neck.
We have said, in the division, of special cases of the neck and how to treat it with medicine, and that it is advisable to use iron in its treatment so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the main and careful treatment of its cure.
The ancients said that some neck wounds are in places where it is possible to eradicate them, such as the neck which is on the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and more so when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not apply yourself to it, as you will not be able to heal it for that or any other, nor have I seen another, nor that it has reached that.
And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding with the patient and leaving them and purging them of black bile for some time, and then sewing it up if there is a clear manifestation of leakage.
And then prepare the patient for the operation by placing them in a position suitable for the procedure, and then prop up their head with pillows; and then examine every part of the body thoroughly without any cause for concern about its reasons. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in the same way, and express the locations, and wipe away the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
But if you have difficulty stopping heavy blood flow from a vein or an artery, then cauterize it while the bleeding is still occurring, and then care for that wound along with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 40.
Of the cure of hydropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, about the species of dropsy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to the species of tempanists or yposarcha, because that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of dropsy tempanistra with medicines and do not compare your treatment, then consider, why if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another dropsy, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
If you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but dropsy alone, and not in children or old people, then the method of operation for this is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give him the exact position of his stomach with his hand, pressing the water to the part behind the penis, and then take a sponge of this form:
It should be of two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather it should be in some small brevity step by step, so that in the operation you do not go through the intestine, and that you do not harm that.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocyst is from the intestines, because it is said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three digits behind, on the right side of it above the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocyst is due to illness of the belly, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not make your section over the side on which you want to turn the patient, because the excesses would flow to that place uncleanly.
And then perforate the instrument completely through the incision, and then insert it into that section, and raise your hand between the instrument and the sponge, and you excise that; and if the quantity of one nail or about.
And then, approach the incision into where it reaches the space at the location of the water. And then, extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of fine iron, with three prongs on each side; two on one side and one on the other; and its tip is sharpened according to the method of the pen, as follows:
And at the tip of the instrument, there is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, it is slightly raised over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident may occur to them.
Do not evacuate too much from that, according to the quantity of the water and according to what means to you the patient's position and the goodness of their body.
And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to pierce through that second way.
And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water each time, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let too much water out.
However, if you are worried about the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that with a burying in sand, and apply moist heat, and wait for a long time under the sun; and cure that with desiccant medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the mouth and the throat as you have previously reported in water that precedes it.
Chapter LV.
About the cure of children who are not born with perforated urinary tracts.
Some children are born without a head from their mother's womb and the head of their placenta is not pierced (or is twisted or not in its place).
Therefore, quickly perform the incision of the placenta as soon as it is born with a very thin knife according to this form:
And then place a thin nail on the twisted part and tie it, and leave it for three days or for four days.
And when he wants to urinate, he should return that.
And if you do not place the nail, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
And that part where the twist is straight should be treated with a thin nail as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
And those in which the twist is not in its place, the cause is that of those who are born without a head, because they cannot urinate to the parts below, until the placenta rises to the mother's hand above; and it is not at the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to the lack of water.
The method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the bone from the patient's left side with great extraction force, and insert the tip of the knife into the second incision of the skin, similar to the shape of a pen, or if you do not make any cuts, so that the patient's head resembles the shape of the bone and the blood flows into the second incision of the skin.
And be careful that in your operation of flushing the blood, four things can go wrong; and pause at that point where you cut the blood, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the whitish substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and corroded, black, and adherent to the prepuce of the head of the penis.
Four things can go wrong with this whitish substance in the penis and its foreskin.
And one is malignant and the other is not.
No-malignant, a remedy that you suspend in an unguent and cut through the entire moon; and then place it on the part that is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then apply that, cure with the ointment that enters and heals.
And if it is malignant, of a black color, then apply a remedy that you administer with a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if it is malignant on the prepuce of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the malignancy is in the foreskin and the other part is deformed, then apply a remedy that you remove the malignancy that is in the foreskin before it consolidates; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be three.
And now, if accidents have occurred in the testicles and the foreskin is black and curled, then apply a remedy that you cover all that which has already been stained and which is about to be corrupted or which has already been corrupted; and then apply linens over that with honey, which is beaten with the flour of scorched millet and three grains of salt and cinnamon.
And then cure that one with the other cure until it is healed.
However, if there is intestinal bleeding, then administer the following silver nitrate cautery in this manner:
where the curved cautery is applied at two positions simultaneously, to stop intestinal bleeding and to the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in the hour, then place a catheter made of soft material into the urethra to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is present, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then excoriate the area with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then excoriate the area around the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then cut the foreskin, which when thin, is easily punctured by its thinness.
And then carefully separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a fine needle, which is already soaked in water to prevent other infections from occurring.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding once it has been consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as with other plagues: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary to assign in that better operation and via pus the lesser peril to salvation.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of those free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience, which is the reason why I have found the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a razor and with a file; and they use a brush with hair and with an ingot.
And I have already practiced all these methods and no better method has been found with forceps, with a loop, or a hook that can remove the foreskin underneath, where the foreskin is attached to two layers of skin, and the layer on top is removed, and for some people it is necessary to start from another incision and cause certain pain. And the method that is done with a scalpel, and it is digital, of which blacksmiths use, it is not safe to make the incision at the end of the male member, because it can easily enter into its cavity.
In the operation, do not use a hook, as it can easily damage your surgical instruments. The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and it can be stretched in such a way that it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
Avoid the circumcision that is done with forceps, with a loop, or a hook, as I have experienced it myself, because the forceps do not make a proportional incision, so the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand on the area, both sharpnesses are proportioned, and the incision is made in one go; and it is a compression of the foreskin that contains the foreskin of the penis in its entirety, and does not make any mistake.
And the first step in the operation is that you should make the child as comfortable as possible, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not make them lie on their side, but rather lie them down on their back, and let them enter the other day.
And then do everything possible to make that child happy in every way that receives their understanding. And then make that child as comfortable as possible, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind their foot, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on their back and blow into the mouth, and pull out whatever is inside the throat, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
This is the shape of the forceps for extraction:
The two prongs should not be sharp and the other two should be sharp, so that the tip of the hook does not damage the intestine, and the length of the blades should be equal to the length of two fingers.
The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to lift the entire or part of the intestine from its natural position.
Therefore, cover that with your hand from your hour and insert it into the abscess of the area and then insert it at the same level.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with tweezers and insert it there.
If they have passed three days, and it is swollen and inflamed behind the ear, then let it out carefully to prevent the abscess from bursting, excoriate that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful of the ear, as it should not be exposed to that.
And then heal that wound with the powders that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted too deeply and you cannot see it, then do not try to remove it.
And then heal that wound when it has become healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retained urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or calcified scar tissue, or by a tumor or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of cure in the division.
And if that does not dissolve the urine, and you see that the cause is very strong, then make sure to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and thin like a lion's tongue, with a small cannula of eagle's beak at the end of it, similar to a palm branch and a mig, to which there should be a thin cannula at the head of it.
And the way to extract the urine from that person is to take a thin, flexible instrument and tie it in the opening of the bladder with wool or cotton for good grip; then insert the ends of the instrument into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any excess causes of the wool, do not introduce it into the cannula with force, but gently. Then suck the urine from the siringua through the border and into a container of water.
And perform surgery on the patient over the table, and apply warm compresses to their body and wounds with olive oil and honey.
And then introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the wound; and then bend the catheter upwards to the part of the abdomen; and then push the catheter into that, and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and then insert it into the patient's body, and then remove it if the patient is not in pain, otherwise leave it in place.
And then slowly pull out the catheter, as the urine flows into the cloth.
And then remove the catheter and perform treatment for urine, using a catheter, do not stop doing that until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of bladder catheterization using the same instruments that are suitable for that.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or if it is constricted by a stone in that area, and you wish to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
but it has an opening on its outside, which is closed. And in that there are three parts: two on one side, as needed.
In the beginning is a container in which that is contained, and if it reaches the second quantity that fills it, then it is added, until when any cause is removed from there, it is also removed, and when it is expelled, that water is also removed, and when it is emptied, the clampcedra is used, which is made of pitch in the battles of sea.
Therefore, when you wish to remove moisture from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the moisture, and draw that water which is contained in the parts above, because the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then introduce the catheter into the urethra after we have recommended it in the penis; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture goes through the bladder, and also to the patient.
The shape of the catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the tip is similar to a small pen, and then the shaft is thin.
And then take the bladder of motion, and place it in the moisture that you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double string, and boil that moisture over the fire.
And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered through the structure descending where the patient feels that the moisture has already reached the bladder.
But if you do not see the bladder, then take a stone of pumice and make it into a circle; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then introduce a strong needle through those tracks, as soon as it is turned; and then attach the circle where it was also attached, so that you can hold in that water that you want to use for the moisture, and squeeze and suck.
And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder through your hand.
Chapter 60.
About the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed in the previous section the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
And you will hear about those that are exposed and abbreviated.
Therefore, it is said that stones that form in the bladder mostly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower abdomen, and they are treated with ointments; and at that time, they feel pain in their lower back.
And this is the cure for children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to treat the elderly. In young people, it is caused by that which is between those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cut along the beginning of that which we call the chrysalis, which removes all the fissure that is in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its inspection.
And then press the patient's feet and squeeze them tightly so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or it jumps out through some fissures.
And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hand of the patient should be placed on his things, so that the bladder is completely made to lean down to the parts behind.
And then approach that and all of that wound.
If you feel a stone in the space, then quickly make an incision on it.
And if you do not catch all of the stone from the left side, then place your left hand on the patient's right shoulder, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are an adult, and insert that into their buttocks. And then approach the stone that is left behind by your hand. And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that with your hand, and expel it through the parts of the wound where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain on the abdomen, which is behind the thighs, in the part of the wound where the incision was made.
And then insert a thin, sharp knife of this shape: And split in that which is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be over that stone and the tool placed in the anus, and make a transverse section, so that the deformed section is wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone is possible to be in the tool, and not more, because it is very important that the tool placed in the anus is not forgotten and its deficiencies.
And know that there is a stone from which some angles and edges are, so that the issue of it is made difficult by that.
And from that which is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same difficult issue.
Therefore, if it is to that which has angles and edges, adjust in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then cover that you engage over that, or that you strain over that with a decent gesture of the end of which is like a razor, and does not escape from it; or that you insert behind it the subtle instrument of curved end.
If you cannot reach that one, then slightly widen the wound a little, and if you want to stop bleeding, cut a strong thread with this three-cornered vitriol.
If the stone is larger than one, then at first push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then insert a little more of that same thing; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is customarily known that you insert this great section, which causes one of two things to happen to the patient: either he dies or he becomes unable to urinate continuously, because the place is not completely solidified.
If you administer the expulsion of it before it is completely forgotten, or if you insert it into the fracture of that one with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with gauze of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that one. Pause over that cloth soaked in oil or rose oil and water-soaked, to prevent the abscess from being too painful.
Then place the patient on their back on the couch, and do not let the bandage come off for three days.
When those auscultations are over, apply hot water and oil to the affected area, and cure it with an ointment made of honey and a poisonous plant until it is healed.
If in the wound there is an abscess that is painful and corrosive, and if it is similar to the one that occurs when the bladder is frozen, and if it is prohibited by the outlet (and this is known as the exit of the bladder through urine), then introduce a probe into the wound and extract that abscess, because it can cause the bladder to rot and decay.
Then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, and with all the ingredients that are suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And cover all the hours of the patient's treatment, adjusting the medications placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that which I previously recommended to reach the point where many troops are said to be successful in this treatment; and I have already done so, and now you should take a needle made of iron, of which this is its form:
of triangular shape, sharp, fixed in wood.
And then take a thin, and place that urethra behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, perforating until the needle reaches that stone. And then rotate the needle in the small stone little by little, and you will perforate that opening until you make the other part penetrate; for urination is immediately released.
And then place your hand on that spot where the stone of the kidney is located, which is often called the bladder, and is pierced by urine, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place a true under the stone and another true above the stone. And then cut into the stone in that bladder between two grooves. And then extract it. And then remove the membrane and clean the wound with salt, which is done in the wound.
It is not necessary to place a true under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other true above should not be, because when the true is removed from the edge of the stone, the cord returns to its place and causes the wound.
And for that reason, when you have removed the true above, you must raise the cord to the parts above, or return it to its original position and cause the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Kidney stones in women are rarely caused.
However, if one of those has a kidney stone, its treatment is difficult, and it is prohibited by many hands.
One of theirs is that the strong woman gives birth.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled in describing whether the doctor is casting spells, or has many husbands.
The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation of the abdomen.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision for kidney stones in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an initial incision, and there is fear.
However, if you need to do so, then you must take a very skilled woman who is rarely found.
However, if you are not in possession of that, then you must seek a wise and subtle man, or present a woman who has been skilled in the work of women, or a woman who has recently left this art.
Then do that presently, and command him to do everything you tell him, from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her vagina with something and remove the stone.
If you find that, cut it off from there and then command him to scrape it off.
If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert something into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compare it with something good.
If you find that, then gradually clean the opening of the bladder from the parts behind it until it reaches the stone at the bottom of the cavity.
Then scrape it off from the bottom of the cavity where the stone is located and place it in a container, and the stone should not remain attached to the scraped-off material.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that you know how much the stone is cut from there.
You should know that the types of stones are round: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that for what you mean by that which you want.
And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in the location of the three-pronged instrument and that from one hour until it is abscinded the sand, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure you prepare your tools from the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want to remove the sand and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the groove that is incised, then you place powder on the location and loosen that with the dust and structure descending, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for if you do, the patient will die. And then cure the wound.
Since the intensity of the pain decreases over days and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
Of incision for hernia.
Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white bag that contains the intestines and is called the peritoneum.
And some of them are in the same abdominal wall that nature has prepared in the part of the intestine, before it becomes another intestine; and this is the septum between the peritoneum that we have said, and this is not other than a membrane.
And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the abdominal wall, which occurs in the intestines, so that this matter accumulates in them, and some occur due to a blow caused by an impact on the intestines.
And this moisture has different colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood, or red, or black, or white, and this is what is most common.
And the symptoms by which one can recognize this aggregation of pus: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess will gradually decline in length, like a figure of a cow, and appear as a genetic, because the humidity comes from all parts.
And if the humidity is in its own pancreatic juice, then the abscess will gradually decline in parts, like a figure of a cow, and it is estimated by some to be another cow.
And if the humidity is between the cord of the testicles and the white phlegm, then it is necessary to cut it.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you extract the color of the humidity from the abscess and compare it with the color that precedes its form; and according to what is found in the footprints of the entromes, judge of that which is in it.
Therefore, when it comes to the cure of this patient, then command that they be bled if it is possible for you, and sometimes examine their chest.
And if it is necessary to place the patient in a supine position on their back for some reason, then place something underneath them.
And if you are to stand on the left side of the patient, command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who then extends their hand at an angle of about one and a half feet to the groin and the part of the abdomen.
And if you take a wide spatula, cut open the groin from the middle down to the pubic bone.
And if you make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that goes down the groin, until it reaches the white bone that covers the pubic bone.
And scrape that, observe it, and guard yourself so that you do not cut into it; your scraping should be like the one done by parting the skin gently and subtly scraping along the incision according to the amount possible.
And if you pierce the pubic bone with a wide hole, extract all the water.
And then, separate between two labias of the section of the joints, and extend the cautery to the parts above; and do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the cautery in that way that is possible for you. And then, incise it to its full extent or in pieces, and more deeply, because if you do not examine the incision carefully, it is not safe that the water will not return.
But if the wound process from that part of its cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cautery, return again, and then adjust the two labias of the cord of the genitals with a suture, and care for that as with the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the wound becomes corrupted by another disease, then cover it with the ways that would support the suspensory, and extract the wound, and then care for that as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts equal, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, incise that part according to what you have done in the other equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then do it.
And then you wipe the wound, and introduce it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two fingers and the belly button; and place over that cloths and powders, and tie those with a cloth that is according to this form:
And then take two cloths and fold them according to this pattern; and make the ends of the ones that are pressed from cloth or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the bandages, and one end of the extremity takes hold of the buttock inside the other, and the second holds the waist part, and two extremities over two thighs, and two more on two knees, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the bandages.
Sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin-bladed cautery and cut the scrotum of the testicles, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be discovered before the white cipher containing the water, and then you take a cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cipher with an incision, and excoriate with an incision, and excoriate with a thin-bladed cautery ignited; and insert that according to what is possible to you before you remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that it does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than natural separation, and better than the operation of castration.
But if you have resistance to the abscess at the time of separation or at the time of cauterization, or during the flow of blood, then cover that which you cure according to what resistance it causes to you by that, and the cure that is appropriate for it according to what is said.
If the patient is weak and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I recommended; and when you are certain that the hernia is incarcerated.
Then make the patient lie on some elevated cushions, and then puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their chest, and pause the puncture according to its length.
And make sure the incision is wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place your hand over that area and hold it there, so that the water continues to flow out. And then care for that area until the infection is healed.
If resistance is encountered during the drainage of that area at that time, then do not puncture it except for a small white cloth in the orifice of the wound, which causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, and then place a pen or an instrument of that form in the opening; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
And you will know that the water returns, and it is diluted with proper medicines or environmental factors; and as it is diluted, then according to that manual, the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
About incision over hernia and its treatment.
You will know that in the incision over this hernia, there is a risk of losing the major organs; therefore, it is necessary to remove it and save it from that danger.
And you should remember the operation in that place and the characteristics of the abscesses.
Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the intestines are contained and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the intestines, or due to impact.
And its color is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And if the abscess has become hardened, of which the color is dark, and does not move to it.
Some wounds are made by the closing of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of veins.
This is known as the spread of the abscess when it comes into contact with the thighs, and does not cover that which is called the touch.
This is not spread by inflammation of veins, but for some reason it compresses the thighs called the touch.
And it is possible that on this special section and on the other flesh; and you should insert the cord of the genetius, and approach the bone to the parts above, and remove that from the white cipher, and remove the suspenders of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all the parts of the bone.
Therefore, if the bone is already attached to those flesh, then cover that which you remove and insert it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the intestine, or between them and the bladder, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a round opening.
But if the flesh is native to the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should incise all of it and remove it as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the cure of hernia that is in the thighs.
The thigh is an abscess wrapped in a covering similar to a bursa caused by the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform any exercise or ambulation on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
However, they call that operation in the second part that they perform first.
And they say that you should lay the patient on a raised cushion; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the spermatic cords and tie them to the base of the penis, which is exposed to the air; and have another assistant hold those, and extend them with great force.
And then insert the sharp, narrow blade across the section of the vessels where the vessels are exposed.
And then remove all the parts that we have mentioned in extraction of arkerias, which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which is faithful double, and tie that in the first of the places where we have caused bleeding, and tie the other one at the end of them. And then insert those in the middle place by straight section according to the length of the body, and extract that which has been added from the moist and corrupted humors.
And then cure the pain and the other pains in which you want to be born by causing the veins that do not carry blood from one of the two genes, because it is not bad for that.
But if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover them with a cloth or bandage to prevent the testicles from being removed or to cover the testicles because of the veins, so that they are deprived of all nutrition at the beginning of the veins, and that they be supported, or that it happens because it is not well for those.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the sides of the miracle of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture come out from any of the intestines.
And this rupture is of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, or by sweat, or by shouting, or by raising something heavy, or by similar things.
When the swelling from that, due to its extent, happens gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, it is an abscess that forms within the intestine because the intestine contains the intestine.
When the swelling from that occurs due to the section of the intestine, where at the beginning it causes severe pain suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears different from the usual appearance, and it is caused by the intestine, and its cause is the pieces of the intestine.
Sometimes it is formed by the intestine itself, and it is called this internal hernia.
Sometimes it is formed by the intestine's movement, and sometimes it occurs in the intestine's hole, and it is held there, and it is caused by great pain of the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided.
And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity, and obey its return, and then place it on his back between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the length; and then place two needles in the second incision as needed to open the incision with those.
And if the incision is of such a quantity that it can be easily closed from that one.
And then excise that tissue which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is completely exposed from each part.
Then insert your finger into that place where the testicle is, in that place between the white tissue, which is below the cord of the wound, and between the tissue second, and remove that adhesion that is in the back part of the wound.
And then approach the patient's scrotum to the divided parts, and apply the white cotton cloth on his left side, and raise the hand on the right side of the section; and command the assistant to extend the hand under him, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And cover the patient's thighs with the white cotton cloth so that there is no cause for the intestine to be wrapped in it. If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
And then cut off the part behind the scrotum by section of the part which runs through and is clean as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage which we have recommended (and some white bandages of the scrotum are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood flow, because those bandages sometimes occur); and leave the bandage until it falls off.
If the patient's breathing is delayed, then apply a warm water enema and place your hand over the area where the second one will fall.
And then treat the wound with the other cure for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflamed hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been found who has been burned by the treatment of it with iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is that you should tie the veins near the section over that with the help of iron; and then dry in the middle place around the pus that forms there, until the veins fall.
And then treat the wound as we said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that is made in the knees.
Some people end up with a break in the knees as we said, and they point to the place.
And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is adjusted in the groin before the hernia returns to the groin; and this occurs due to the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to stretch, and then it becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and swells.
And the treatment of this is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
And some of these wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and that is by placing the patient on their back between your hands, and then removing the area of the inflamed swellings by cutting through the thickness according to the amount of three fingers.
And then strengthen the groin white that is lifted up inside until it is discovered.
And then take the ray and place that on the area of the groin, and press that at the front of the belly.
And then approach the two incisions at the end of the shinbone, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
And then remove the end of the shinbone, and do not incise the shinbone from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then care for that wound in the treatment of ulcers, and as you incise the fields, clean it and restore the ulcer before it is consolidated; because the shinbone contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the ligaments of the testicles.
The ligaments of the testicles are softened in old men because those tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is changed.
Therefore, it is necessary to use someone who has experience in the treatment of that which makes the patient lie on his back, and incise the entire ligament, which is softened over the natural ligament; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, apply three or four layers of softened wax at the beginning and make a firm stitch.
And then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
You should know that castration is forbidden in our law, but by cause it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the physician knows about it when he is questioned about it, who can cure it; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefit, such as donkeys, and bulls, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision and section.
In that case, where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make a cut on the animal's tail until the tendons and ligaments soften and hang down. And then take those parts with your hand inside while they are still resolved and do not appear from the touch.
In castration done by incision and division, make sure you have the animal and take the cord of the testicles with your hand.
And then tie the suspensory ligaments, and incise on each side of one testicle with a cut through which two blood vessels pass.
And then incise those that will be exposed after the scrotum is removed. Do not leave any of those from the epididymis untouched, but cut the delicate one that is over the vessels.
And this method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause for the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
And then cure the pain until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is that it appears where the space between the testicles is located, in the area between two testicles, which has a groove where it is.
And some of these are caused by urine that is in the space between the testicles.
In women, there is a special case: and it is that the groove of the hernia above the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, almost all of them are at the part of the fornix, which has the perineum of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: one from men, and one special kind for women. And it is that you should insert those tissues adjusted inside until it escapes the source of that, and then cure those with the cure of other pains.
In the second species of men, where urine comes from the urethra of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in that place.
Chapter 21.
Of lentil and meat that are particularly abundant in the causes of women.
Lentils are particularly suitable for natural causes, until it is fully stretched and made into a regular food; and some women are magnified in certain women as soon as it is spread with such things as in men and for the intercourse.
Therefore, you should have an excess of lentils with your hand or oil and scraped.
And not in the beginning, mainly in the beginning of the vagina, so that it does not become a flow of blood.
And then cure that with the cure of the plague until it is healed.
Raw meat is meat that has not been in the horrific of the mother until it fills that, and very much is used for the parts deformed second similar to coa (and for that first excuse that is called "malautia caudada"); therefore, you should scrape it with such things as lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not broken, or is a small fracture. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by previous illness, and that is made from meat not well adjusted or from thin or thick salt.
And it is made in the front of the thigh, or on its sides, or in the most prominent part of the thigh, or in the lowest part of the thigh, and it prevents movement and engagement and protrusion, and it strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual cycle, if the swelling is apparent, then you should apply it to the thighs or the knee. However, if it is not apparent, then you should wrap it around those parts or the knee.
However, if the swelling is from thin salt, and it is applied to the two lower lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand over both of his lips, and then gently press the two thumbs against the upper jaw.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread apart, and then gently extend both lips with force until the subtle phallus is broken and the foreskin is opened.
And then take wool and pour oil into it and place that on the wound, and stitch the man with a needle to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated.
But if the phallus is large and thick, then you should stitch it with a wide or thick needle.
But if the foreskin is made of flesh, then suspend it with a thread and stitch it.
And give him the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds due to bites, such as acacia, and blood, and sulfur, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated too quickly.
And keep it for several days and administer some of its oil.
Then let the other treatment of consolidation be applied until it is healed.
Sometimes certain events occur in the main native land of other animals, and later cover them according to this method. But if it is for abscesses in the main native land, then do not make any contradiction against iron in any method.
Chapter 73.
Of the treatment of emorroids, and tail, and red bot fly that occurs in the part of women.
Emorroids are appreciated from the openings of swollen veins within which blood flows continuously; and since emorroids are also formed, they are like that.
And I have already said in the division of those species and their symptoms, and to say whether those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore say that emorroids and their symptoms when they are in the main native land and do not appear to the senses, then in those do not make any treatment with iron.
May those who are on the upper parts of the body, where the cat feels sensation, be cured.
And cover the flesh with a mixture of mild soap and a rough cloth, and scrape those parts with the razor.
And sprinkle powder on those parts from one of the scissible powders, such as mustard and similar to those.
And soak their feet in cold water for an hour, and place that in fresh water.
If the flow of pus persists, then make that poultice from a mixture of barley, salt, and similar substances.
And take flour of orrisroot and mix it with honey and vinegar to make a poultice over the wound.
And if the pus is drained, it is good; otherwise, apply two bandages and make incisions at the breasts for scarification.
And take wool and soak it in the juice of celery or in the juice of garlic or in the juice of guarravier and add vinegar, and apply it to the affected area; and cure the area with ointment until it is healed.
And cure the one who is inside so that they are healed.
Chapter LXXIV.
About the puncture of an accidental wound in the eye.
Special notes about accidental abscesses in the eye, including chancroid and anthrax, ulcers, adhubelat (adhuesion), erpetromens (erpetic urethritis), fistulas, emorroyas (emorrhoids), raguarrias (ragweed), and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and their specialties and symptoms, and their cures in the previous division.
And cover what I say in this treatise about abscess cautery, which is the one that occurs in the eye when it is among the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with iron.
Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp with percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it becomes swollen and if it catches on that sensation, then do not make a puncture in it, and cure it with that which helps to stop the maturation inside before the acuity of the accidents ceases.
And then, place the woman on a bed with two mattresses; and lie down beside her and adjust her feet to the part of the bed closest to the stomach, and her thighs should be spread, and her breasts should be covered with a cloth suitable for that.
And then, the midwife should follow the doctor and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be discussed in those causes that will be mentioned later.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should be on your knees at the major opening of the woman's body, and that which enters into the major opening should not be more than the size of the major opening and should not harm the patient. If the instrument is larger than the major opening, then you should place powders on the surface of the major opening to prevent the instrument from entering completely.
And then, place the spindle that is on top of the instrument of the doctor and have the administrator hold the instrument and rotate the spindle until it is inserted into the major opening.
And when the excretion appears, and it is touched by the hand and the lion's tongue, and it is moistened, then you should separate that devil's head from the patient's body with a broad-bladed knife.
And when the pus is evacuated, then place a cotton swab soaked in rose-scented oil or green oil in it, and place the calyx in the section of the main vein.
And place a clean cloth soaked in water in which wormwood has been built on the patient's back and over the peritoneum.
And after two days, apply the appropriate poultice that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
And some bandages are washed the back and the wound with vinegar and honey, and then apply water in which raspberry or long aristology has been built, and then return to the poultice.
And if the wound is deep in the back bandaged, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach midwives how to best treat ectopic pregnancies when they occur in an unnatural position.
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural position of the fetus from her experience, and when you feel the woman pushing at the parts behind and desire to smell the air, and on that side is the ectopic pregnancy, and quickly feel the uterus, then you will know that this part is the second natural position, and the uterus is over its own head, and the second uterus is suspended or hanging from the umbilicus.
Therefore, when you feel those signs, then you should compress the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus can slightly move forward, and when it moves over its own head, the second uterus is exposed, and these superfluities are removed in a good manner.
If that part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is exposed over its own feet and the woman's back is facing forward, and the woman's hand is on her foot, or on her side, or the fetus is exposed over her head, and it is greatly converted over its own collarbone, and similar to the unnatural figures.
When necessary cause is to the woman who is wise and subtle in all those causes, and she keeps from error and deception.
And she shows all the figure of those, and what engine is in those so that it is significant for that and stands on that.
When it is done, it is applied on her own head for natural dryness, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of it has already been weakened, then do that sweat, or what women had of it, and evaporate the concoction from it with fenugreek coyt and oil of mustard.
And then insert the midwife between her own spread legs and tear that secondina, or dry it with her finger in which she puts that which is in it of moisture. And press the woman's belly until the child comes out.
But if it does not come out, then do that the woman is covered with a mixture of mud and a mixture of fenugreek and mustard powder.
And then approach the patient, approach the crucifix, so that they are comfortable and make them do that snoring sound; and hold their mouth and nose for an hour, so that they fall asleep quickly.
And if the patient's mouth is open at the beginning, then gradually reduce those with that facility little by little. But if they do not obey the instrument, then place a cloth over their face, lift their feet up, and gradually lower the cloth to the ground; and the cloth should be held so that it does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the teeth are not broken and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remnants of the patient's body or place the cloth over their mouth and remove that equality, because that will make them sleep quickly.
When the patient lies on their feet, then gradually push those upwards, and gradually turn the patient small, and gradually make them equal, and gradually take one of their feet and extend them little by little.
When they are lying down between the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and make that extraction with a condition, which will be effective if God wills it.
And if that thing we have recommended does not work, then gradually return the small one back into the second natural figure, which will be effective in a short time.
And if it is completely prohibited to use that thing we have recommended, then take some mustard powder and dissolved gum, and grind it all in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that mixture to the lower part of the woman's belly. And then make that cake in cold water, until it reaches the desired consistency.
And when the parts that were removed from them are softened, then apply the sublimation of mint and sub-pause that to it. And when the sublimation has been applied for an hour, then make that mixture on a plate, and apply that extraction and remove the mouth of it, and lift it from that, and press the lower part of the woman's belly against it, which will be effective soon.
Eyssiment of the patient lying laterally with one of their hands. If possible, gradually reduce the bowels of the patient, but if you cannot reduce them, then raise your hand and do that.
And if the patient cannot move, then perform the Jazzer on the light, and shake the cushions under him vigorously, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for bruises.
And if the child has come, then perform that procedure on the hearth, and study the reduction of the womb, and equalize the figure of the woman according to nature, and make her vomit and command her to know whether she has passed the afterbirth.
The child is on its back, with its hands expanded and the surface of its foot facing downwards at a distance of two fingers from its mother's face. The midwife should hold the woman's hand and gradually turn that little one by little, and equalize it according to ease.
And as it is and how much it is equalized, then pause over the wound of which you have recommended oil and ointments.
And as soon as the woman has given birth to the child, then perform that procedure on the hearth, and command her to be inclined over her right side, and as soon as she is comfortable, make her vomit again. The exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the second finger of the right hand is inserted into the vagina in this manner, consider it, and then insert the second finger under the nail to remove the moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then insert it into the belly button to prevent it from being retained and decaying.
And then gently push the fetus into the lower parts until you reach the second rib, and tell the woman to make some moans, and if the man is not yet ready, God willing.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. You should know that the cries of twins or many fetuses are not natural, and sometimes they can be deceitful and cause trouble; but this is a natural cause, and not a living one.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one by one, and separate them by cipher, distinguishing those within the umbilical cord of each of those, and some moans are not ready as it is a fetus that is naturally alive, and its existence is accompanied by some moans that are not audible as we have recommended.
If it is difficult to remove the child from their mother and they reach the point where we have spoken of the unnatural figures, then you cure them as we have reported.
If the midwife is skilled and performs actions that facilitate and expedite, and delay, and if she has engineering skills according to the figure as it is prepared by the engineer, leading to health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Some pregnancies are formed in the womb, one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is necessary to verify that a woman aborts six times, and another all of them, which cause is made for the glory of the saints.
And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the midwife, which is very useful for that appearance similar to that, and therefore pauses at that which she knows.
Chapter 76.
Of extracting the fetus when it is dead.
When you are treating a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and you find it suitable to use forceps, then consider whether the woman's health is of good virtue and not affected by any accidents for which she is feared to be lost.
Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head raised and her thighs raised.
And the assistant should hold her on both sides or be tied on her left side to prevent the uterus from extending and causing difficulty in extracting the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the uterus with oil and a mixture of althea, fenugreek, and semen of lily.
Then the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand into the uterus to facilitate its opening, and then place her hand over the area where the fingers are in the fetus.
And in the appropriate places: then consider if the patient is prepared to have the needle sent over his head, and then you put the needles in his neck, or on his back, or in his mouth, or in his palate, or under his beard, or on his breastbone, or on the appropriate places of his ribs, or on his hypochondriacs.
If the application is on his feet, then in the arch of his foot, or in the middle of his ribs.
And you should hold the needle with your hand straight, and bend the curve of his body in that place between the fingers of your other hand, and insert your hand to facilitate and put the needle in any of those places until it reaches the cause of the pain.
And then place and hold another needle in the appropriate position of his body, or a third if necessary, so that it is attracted equally, and not stretched according to its straightness only.
And it should be applied to all parts, so that the application of his body is pleasant as it is done in teeth for its eradication.
And cover that area with a warm cloth; if any part of it is held back, then apply the midwife's ointment and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held back.
So if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then move your fingers into the space that is most open; and make an incision so that the entire fetus is removed.
But if the hand is on the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by the pressure of the intestine, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it so that everything is removed, and incise it in the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
And make an incision in the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or an incision is made in the cavity and it is in the top of the water adjustment, then insert between those spines spinous and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come from the shapes of the other instruments in the capital which is appropriate to this.
And similarly, if the fetus is very large by nature: and then you should insert that hook into the uterus, or take hold of it with the forceps as we have said; and then remove it from the bones.
And if the head is protruding and is compressed by the ribs, then it should be cut through where the humidity that is in the chest is collected.
But if it is not complicated, nor overly large, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the other side of the belly is abscessed or is in the hydrocele, then you should pierce it where the humidity that is in it flows.
But if the fetus is above the feet, then the foot of the mother is raised and the direction of the fetus to the mouth of the womb is reversed.
But if it is compressed by the belly and chest, then you should remove that hook which has covered your hand, and pierce the belly and chest where that humidity flows.
If the other members are still intact and the head returns, then the midwife should enter her hand on the right side; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then the midwife should introduce her hand into the position of the chin, and surround the head, and push that hand into the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers.
And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that has affected the child, then do not force it over the abscess; before that, cover it and administer an infusion of heavy humid causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the child is on its left side, then if possible, it should be turned over: and that should be administered which we have said in the living fetus.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised in the feet, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of decay in the second stage.
When you have completed all your operations, then administer the medication we mentioned for treating the abscesses that occur in the major joints.
And if there is a flow of pus, then apply stifling waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another incision was made, and then the dead fetus was removed. An abscess occurred in his abdomen; and when it was inflated inside, he began to move his arm.
And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the wound did not consolidate.
Then I placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for several reasons, and after a while, I removed one bone, and after several days, I removed another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then apply heat to the affected area, and extract from it a small amount of bones, the female existing in her own marrow, which has been prepared in such a manner for a long time, correcting with a small amount of salt.
And do not be afraid to do so, as it is known and helpful for the doctor who is skilled in this art for healing purposes.
Of the forms of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of a spoon in which the handle is placed:
This is the form of a forceps in which the handles are placed, to which the handles are attached, with two spoons at both ends of two feet. But this instrument should be more subtle than a constrictor, and should be made of silver or gold.
And the thickness of each rod should be two inches and the margin of which is one inch; and the length of each is a palm and a little more; and at the middle of the two rods there are two adjustments of that metal rod, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of which is two inches, or a little more.
And these two additions are placed in the mouth of the main character to facilitate the insertion of those when you turn the two prescribed virtues.
Another similar form of that more subtle and less visible:
It should be made from a stick of wood or second-hand iron, depending on the likeness of forceps. But at the end of this addition, there should be sometimes at both ends, and the length of these additions is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to insert those into the main character, then you should make a cushion over her head, with her feet hanging down, and place that which is between her thighs. And then place your hand over the instrument that is similar to forceps, according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the main character's mouth to enter when the midwife makes it.
The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Form of impelling that is pushed by the one who is pushed:
Form of an ointment that contains the main ingredient called le cap gran
And it is shaped like a pair of forceps at the end, sometimes, and sometimes long forceps are made according to this form, sometimes with a pointed end like a sharp instrument that is cut and contained. Form of an ointment containing few ingredients:
Form of an ointment with a spike:
Form of an ointment with two spikes:
Form of a spatula with two ends, where the main ingredient is removed:
Form of two long spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more of that kind are multiplied and their species prepared by the artists, it is easier for their operation and more suitable for the people according to their quantity.
And you should always have those instruments ready, because the need for them is not excused.
Of the extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their tongue, and do so with a strong hand on their mouth and nose, and if it is deformed and does not fit, then it is good.
Otherwise, take a lump of earth and pierce it with a sharp object and place it in the area where the molar teeth are located, along with calamint, rude herbs, anet, camomile, Arabic spices, cassia wood, and saint-john's-wort. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the lump, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cannula of the cannon in the mouth of the patient, and hold that until the vapor comes to the cavity of the tooth.
And then do so with the strong hand as we have said, and the second tooth will be easily extracted at that speed.
If this care is approaching and has not been performed, then command the matron to place her left hand in warm oil or in a mixture of aloe, and then enter it into the wound and massage it, and when she finds the second one, then take it and extend it to the first one, and if it is attached at the beginning of the main vein, then enter her second hand after we have recommended, and when she finds the second one, gradually remove it step by step according to so that the main vein does not catch it violently. It is necessary that the cover be moved to the right and left sides for convenience.
And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted, we have already recommended the care of tracheostomy and the medication of the oil with herbs.
If all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then remember to not apply it on that which is inside of it to the mouth of the main vein, but rather place that which is in the belly of the woman, and then christen it with the oil and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
When the patient is unconscious, raise their head and stomach, and this relieves the patient; then administer appropriate sub-fumigations and medications for that.
Even ancient doctors have used sub-fumigation with nitre and dried figs.
The form of instrument by which the woman is sub-fumigated helps to retain menstruation and prevent miscarriage:
It should be made of copper or iron.
And the thin end should be placed in the fire and the wide end over the flame, and the sub-fumigation should be done over the coals of the fire.
And hold that one while that sub-fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
For the cure of the unpunctured child's anus.
When newborn children and their anuses are not punctured, which are already thin and swollen. Then let the midwife prick that thin part with her needle; otherwise, prick that space quickly and make sure it does not touch the skin.
Then place your hand over that wool soaked in wine and oil; and cure that wound by applying a poultice that is not too hot.
However, if you fear that it may be too hot, then place a catheter in the rectum for a few days, and remove it when the child is ready to defecate.
However, if the heat has been applied to the anus for the consolidation of a wound or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not cut, and apply the same remedy as before with the poultice and the plaster.
For the treatment of fistulas that have occurred previously.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the abdomen and are more numerous, those that occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And if it is a fistula or a fistula.
And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture of a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
And those penetrating parts are known by that which is used for the egress and for ventilation; and some use the patient for egress, and it often comes from those who are strong.
And some of those fistulas are guarded in the penetrating space into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some of those penetrating parts enter the joint of the thigh and into the back of the thigh.
And in which the penetrating fistula is known to enter into the anus and not to penetrate, you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that place, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into the tent until you feel the tent or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or if there is any cause of excretion or worms or turgidity, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of this is that it is urine from that place and prohibition of it so that that location be strengthened by medicine.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and there is pain in the circuit, then it is necessary to insert it here if there is not turgescence into the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is no immediate relief; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it strengthened by ointment.
And in all those fistulas that do not cure completely, and the cure of those is laborious and long, the work of many physicians upon which they are stopped.
If it does not penetrate and is not ancient, cure by iron is recommended according to what you advise, and that which has already been tried and is successful.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands above his shoulders and raises his thighs into them, the cushions are inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a probe of plumbum, or of eram if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know where the probe enters.
If you feel that the patient has a fever around the abdomen, then enter your finger into the abdomen.
And if you feel the tenderness in your finger that has been inserted into the abdomen, or another sign between your finger and the patient's body, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that area, as it is not a healing sign, as we have said.
However, it is said that this is a sign of healing in some people who are sick with fever.
And the medication for which it is hoped to be greatly effective in that case, you should ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the abdomen; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those tissues attached to the fistula have been burned, which resemble a quill of a feather.
And then care for those wounds covered with bandages until all those attached tissues have been scarred, and then care for those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
If the tent enters, and does not penetrate into the anus, which is in the buttocks, and between that and the tent is a thin membrane of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that place, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and see if the tent dries, and if it is inside the fistula when the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and cauterized.
Then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen quill and do not have any cause.
However, if pus flows between you and your operation when you have cleaned those parts, then milk that is and of the other instrument is cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, because a pointed cautery adjusts good doses: it is adhered to those parts adjusted, and abscission of the pus due to the exsiccation of the humidity.
And then carefully remove the cloths or bandages that are wrapped around the affected area until the place where the bone is located, and then carefully remove the hard, raw flesh that has generated and solidified.
And these remedies have the properties of astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
However, if the fistula has already extended into the anus and is prolonged to the surface of the chest, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that area.
And if the tent is inserted and there is a veil of skin or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, then it is not an operation in that area but rather a second way of trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer it in that area in one of three ways: either by cauterizing that which we have said; or by drying out that area so that you can easily insert the instruments and the cure proposed; and do not process any motive for dryness so that you do not pierce the lacert containing the wound, and that any accident occurs on the patient's will; and then carefully remove that which we have said that is very useful for healing; or by elongating that veil and moistening that pus that dries out that area so that it can be easily crusted; and then force yourself to restore the entire area of dryness, and if the orifice does not become consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and is more likely to remain for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wound in this form.
And insert it into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you extract the skin from that fold which you introduce your own finger into the anus; and extract the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more skin is inserted into the flesh, remove those which are between two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate in some way that is suitable for you, but ensure that it is not too sharp to harm the skin; and then apply a suitable remedy to heal it.
The shape of the spina that is used to puncture the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not harm unnecessary parts, as sometimes necessary.
Suturing of hernias in which there is a rupture at the beginning of those.
Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this, or they can be similar to a bag of feces. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the rupture occurs from them immediately and is one, and its causes, and its location on the buttocks, and in their extremities.
However, those that occur on the buttocks due to lack of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small rupture with continuous exudate, and its color depends on the cause.
And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expel what is inside until the belly is empty and the bowels appear to you. Then you sit and hold the patient's arms or whatever you have with your hand, and then cut those parts of their body.
But if the arms are not held in place by their moisture and softness of those parts, then take those parts with cloth or with a cotton swab or with a piece of woolen cloth, and remove those parts with your fingers, and then cut those parts and sprinkle some powdered chalk at the beginning, so that they are in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize those parts according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those parts with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the belly does not obey the exit, then Christianize the patient by marking them with a small bite mark, and then wash them with that water which is in the belly and which helps to facilitate the exit more when the patient is expelled.
If the swollen parts deform the buttocks, the cause is usually excessive fluid, and you should press those parts with your nail or with an auger, scrape them, and then cure them with what we have said before they are healed.
And whoever comes first should administer the second suture in this manner: take a needle and insert it into the swollen part, and then extract the swollen parts from the upper parts, and let the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two extracted parts on the side of the needle, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swollen part to the structure, and then remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess fluid from that one can drain out.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the buttocks; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that area alone; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other medication until they are healed.
And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then apply those to the point of the needle or your nail into which they have been made wet and hold them over those scales of pus that are above, which prevents those from consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
And then apply those to very strong pus that the first one into which it is healed and excoriated; and then cure those that have been healed.
You know that ulcers, it is clear, and not if not red around the body like a claviel, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and those, and it is caused by those pains of the body.
And then cut that which is inside the nail circle, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its capital.
Warts are small, hard, rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and many veins come out of them in children.
And care for that is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And the ant is a small, furry or large fistula on the surface of the body, going through one in the prone position, and when it comes to that place, it is centipede-like in the same way as an ant bite, and it is made around the body.
The treatment of this is that you take a sharp needle made of iron or copper, and it should be strong, and place it on the anthill where it contains the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of bone or iron in this form:
The part of the needle above the canula should be thin, sharp, and not pierced, wrapped with something that is slippery on the surface where it is applied to the patient's skin and the rotation of which causes it to slide.
And if you wish to cauterize the ant according to what is said in the cauterization of althaea in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are used to give crucifixion.
Some nails are made of silver or lead or melted or malleable; and some are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and the crucifixions of those who have foul or painful wounds should be small.
The form of the Christ child great and small:
The head of the catheter of him above in which is the bag should be wide according to this manner; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be like this with sometimes.
And the end of the purse left, which is inserted in the buttocks, should be sharp (if it is not opened) like a lion, behind a subtlety; and on one side of the two slits, and on the other side a slit, and the width of the slit according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
And the bag in which were placed the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of sheep wool, and the reason for it is a palm.
And it should be pierced with sharp needles like this; and if the space between the slits is the largest of the said.
And insert into those slits strong sharp needles of which the size is of the said fields, or around those; and adjust that bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the head of the Christ child between two different strong constraints, and then cristize that one: May the quality of cristizing that one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and guard yourself that it is not too hot nor too cold.
Then the patient should be placed in a supine position on their back, and their thighs raised and supported by a pillow or blanket; and then a cloth soaked in oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek or similar substance is inserted into the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse takes the basin and expresses the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then the patient is turned onto their side.
And if the remedy does not work, hold it for as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to delay the treatment until morning.
But if you cleanse the patient in the morning with an enema and the remedy, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are morbid or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp enema, from among the enemas that children are accustomed to using.
Of the treatment of plagues
It has already been said in the division of the treatment of plagues that such things were suitable for free people, and thus the treatment of those who are not free is said in this way according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what they are made of and where they occur.
And the causes for which certain plagues are made include being caused by a pebble, or an incision with a spit or a dagger, or a blow from a lance, or a stick, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
May the plagues that are in the parts of the body include those that catch on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And I will recount the treatment of some plagues because of that reasoning and rule over other plagues.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, as the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has only been treated with water for a long time and is large and causes great concern about the patient possibly developing an abscess, then you should immediately apply a lancet to the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and remove as much of it as possible, depending on the amount of its virtue, unless some cause prohibits bleeding, especially if the stone that is left from the plague is small.
And if bleeding is the opposite of the affected part, then keep the patient away from eating and drinking coarse foods.
But if there is some cause that prohibits minor action, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And if an abscess forms on the plague, apply a poultice of roasted bread or some other stinging substance.
If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and its pus and air have not changed to powder, then apply a small amount of the following remedy.
And if the air has already changed to pus, then pause over the wound with some healing ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not closed by lips, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their sutures.
If the wound has already been exposed to the bone and flesh, and is not retained by a small suspensor, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and similar things until it is healed.
And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unclean blood can flow, and it is not severed by medicine, then examine the artery, and if you find it unsevered, then incise it with a needle or thread; and if necessity causes that what we have said does not suffice, then cauterize where the unclean blood is being severed.
And if these areas are simple and small, then the cause of their simplicity is likely to be leprosy; in any case, powder this powder over those areas, which will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; grind all of this into a fine powder, and fill the area, and compress it with a good compression so that it adheres to the area and is coagulated by the unclean blood.
Then compress it above with the powders and let it rest there, and do not remove it until it is completely healed, because it cannot be removed by medicine before it is healed.
And sometimes they do that alone, when you are not present and they lack your strength.
And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to keep them straight, and their recent wounds are kept clean, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in summer, then this powder is not applied to those wounds, but instead use what we have mentioned earlier, unless you place it on those wounds with honey and water mixed together; and then cure those wounds with the other treatment until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs and the wound is small, then you remove that which we have mentioned earlier.
And I will describe the treatment of fractures of the head in this poisonous substance.
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs on the neck, then it is not in the difference in medicine, and between the wound of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the neck are severed or the artery, then if it is nerves, do not insert them into the engine but rather avoid curative treatment with that which causes strong hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say that it is vetriol and similar to their quar nozo to the nerves and contract it. And do not place your hand on any cause of the whole forehead, as the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured by false medicines, such as washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, rotten or not, and then when it is washed with warm water and the other stones are minimized according to this manner, and found humidity.
If the wound is large, then administer sutures or cut the lips of it, and then cure that which is inside with powders until it is healed.
If the wound is deep or has accidents in the lowest part of the foot, then pierce it in the most depressed area.
If there is an artery cut in the wound and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry that, or tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
If the ribs of the chest or all have been cut, and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equalize it with the rest, and strengthen it with a proper structure, and leave it for several days until it is healed.
If the wound has already penetrated the bones, then perforate that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the wound heals, and let it be separated and the edges of it be brought together.
If the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you. But if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure it with the oil that will soon come to its head.
If it is a percussion of a lancet or knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider more if the wound has warmth when the patient breathes; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth in the wound and it is recent to its own sinew, then you place powder on it in the first hour, and do not stretch it so that the sinew is not held in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that no one hurts the patient, but place a moist dressing on it, and remove those bandages every day.
And if the mouth is not at your present, then pause in the orifices of the wound to allow the moisture to seep out; and make sure the patient sleeps on their side so that the liquid can drain properly.
If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, trembling of the heart, malice, or stricture, and if other symptoms are improving, then know that the wound is healing; and then treat with compresses and other remedies until it is fully healed.
If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat that by its own capital.
And if the wound is caused by a stab or cut, and is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat that with water that precedes suture, if it is large, or powder, if it is small.
If the wound has previously been treated with poultices on the bone, and it is now cut open, then twist the wound and extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then release the intestines that are causing the pain, as their extraction is beneficial.
And of the other pains that occur in other members, the treatment is the same as we have mentioned.
Of abdominal pains.
The indisposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or variable.
And the disruption of small ones is done difficultly by another method, and if the reduction of them is more difficult, then do not wait to insert them back into their place immediately, because they open and become larger, making the instrument for them difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is variable, because in those it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned.
You should know that a belly suture is done in four ways, but two common ones are suitable for other parts of the body as well.
Two other sutures are specific to other parts of the body, but they are more specific for belly sutures.
I recommend you to each one with exposure and declaration.
Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of two ways: either by disruption as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to cold air.
And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with water and vinegar, and pepper, and spice, and embrocations at that intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
And some ways do it in the one that has stopticity, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this reason it is called the instrument of life and cures many diseases.
And if the instrument of life is applied to this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not inscribed with any markings.
The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it does not dry out and is not occupied with the need to dry it too quickly or too slowly.
Of the instrument, its shape:
One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly rounded end.
And when the plague has spread and the intestine has come out, then return it to its natural shape in its proper place, if possible on top of it, because that is best.
When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then make the patient lie on their side, and place their legs higher than their head; if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and their chest higher than their knees.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the lower parts of the belly, then place your ear and your stethoscope quickly in that area so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
And thus, administer this in large and small doses.
And in small doses, place the remedy you have prepared between your fingers and make sure the administrator holds the disruption completely with their hand and adjusts its lips, and from one to another, if there is a cause, then another.
And this is the common method of suturing: take a needle, or count a needle according to the amount of the wound; and lay it on the edge of the disruption of that ring, and strengthen the needle one, or not to put it in the two ends of the thread, the two ends of the suture that are outside the thread of the parts that are inside, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, and so make four stitches.
And then apply strong pressure around the circumference of the needle, and some stitches in several parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and then leave the larger one and insert another needle in that place; and then hold it with a strong force like the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the needles are all completed through the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to insert into the codex, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size.
And it is not necessary that the needle be inserted at both ends of the codex, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
And they should not be extended too much in stitching, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place powdered sulfur on the sutured wounds from all parts, which held the tips of the needles; and leave those in until you know that the plague has been consolidated.
And these types of sutures with needles in a careful manner are most suitable for small wounds, where in their suture there is one needle or two or around those.
The second suture is similar: and it is that you administer the four tips of the needle, two of the cord and two of the thread, in a way, with a needle that is as fine as its thickness and size.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the correct retracting cord of the part that rises above the wound, so that the suture is the second suture of strong cloth.
Pause between each suture the amount of the thick part of the mentioned bandage.
This suture is for women.
This suture is used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced with a knife, and it was the rupture of the major plate of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine of the middle member; and then I reduced it because the intestine had been exposed for twenty-four hours.
The wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and it was treated and healed; and then I used this ointment for many years, and it was useful to him.
Other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, which I did not cure with that ointment, because the place where the ointment was not at all or any medicine, but only covered over the wound for two days and frequently bathed in honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two special types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
And if you begin with the suture of the cord, enter the needle from the front side to the back side.
And so, as the needle penetrates the cord and the other threads are placed correctly and in a straight line along the entire length, and leave the end of the cord in which you have inserted the needle; and make the other needle penetrate from the back side to the front side in the other end of the thread.
And so, as you have made that one penetrate, then make the other needle penetrate in another direction at the other end of the thread of the back side to the front side; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the thread from the front side to the back side.
And make the other needle penetrate in the direction that makes that one penetrate in the cord at the end of the mirror, which is in the part of it where all that penetrates.
And then, approaching from this position and placing the other at the end that is on the other side of the cyst, extract the needle from the cyst and place it in that cyst's end that is on this side; and extract the other from the cyst.
And do this again and again, and do this again near another example until you have done all that is deformed according to that example.
And the sum of this suturing method is that you place a sutura of pellicies on which you place the flesh, so that you suture the cyst one stitch from the part of the end of the needle, and let the other stitch complete.
The second special suture called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each case, is that you place that second semilunar on which the doctors place that one, so that they add all of its part to its corresponding part to nature; and apply the end of another to it and the end of the mirror to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, close to your own part of the body, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that side, and leave two extremities of the cypres; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from one side to the other two extremities of the cypres.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the part of the body through two other extremities of the mirror on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common liga and is the suture described in the previous remembrance.
This is the word of Guilial
And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert one into each of them and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you have to do, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those which equal the hearts.
When disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, the sutures there are more difficult than those of other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of medicine for plague is judgment of the other plagues.
The reason is that when you get the plague recently, the first thing to do is to deny that the air has altered it, and reduce the intestine and clean it from there and prepare it decently, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment that is present and makes hard and heals the wounds, and is consolidated and clear; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it a mustard plaster, as soon as it begins to heat up, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply a cloth soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected area.
If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply this remedy, which is a black stiptic root, and if the putrefaction reaches the intestine, make an incision penetrating into its cavity.
You should know that the pus from large intestines is less dangerous than the pus in small intestines.
It is difficult to cure the intestine known as â€œgegunuâ€ from plague that has spread throughout it; this is due to the large number of veins in it, its size, and its subtle nature, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If the plague process is on the skin, and you manage to remove it, then reduce it according to your correctness, which also reduces the intestines equally.
If the space has already been opened and it is now white or black, then place your finger on the location where the discoloration is, to prevent blood flow from coming out, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
And then insert the other thread, and place both ends of your finger hanging from the edge of the wound, so that the attraction of the thread is from the wound's depth and emission of the thread from the wound.
Remembrance of wounds that have occurred in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen a person who was wounded in their stomach by a lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and they managed to restore it and its function.
Then they continued the treatment of it as if it was not confirmed in its healing, but they stopped gradually when it became healthy and the location was consolidated.
And if you see that the location has already been consolidated, then apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent further injury; and do not attempt any action for that injury and remain in place, eating and drinking as usual, and then continue with bathing and exercise as prescribed.
And it has been said by experienced people that when the intestine is punctured and small, then follow this method: and you take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place a needle from those that have the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; then when you take those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the head of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have placed needles one by one according to the size of the entire wound.
Then return that and close the wound; and leave those needles in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp object that is added to it, as it is made of thin tissue; and you should grasp the end of these thin pieces of intestine, which is very delicate, and wrap the end of the intestine in them, wrapping it with a sharp instrument and covering it with a cloth, and then reduce it to its disruption.
And this method of stitching is only the second way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up but only drained, and not healed from all of it.
Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
You know that any wound and abscess when it becomes indurated and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal completely and does not disappear, then, in whatever member it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
And in reality, a fistula is a burrowed, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and has the same cavity as a penis; and to name it, call it a penis, that is, a penis.
And in moist men, the wound heals quickly; and if the humidity is removed in a few hours. And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is scarce, thick, and thin, and subtle.
Now that all those causes have been shown, and their symptoms and cures in the appropriate medical division.
And here is how you should perform the cure of a fistula, which is caused by surgery.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spleen, or the intestine, or the bladder, or one of the ribs, or one of the vertebrae of the back, or one of the joints composed as mentioned above.
And of these fistulas that follow this method are among the difficult-to-cure diseases, and do not receive treatment, and require much labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas has such depth that it does not reach the mentioned locations, and you expect and trust in its cure, and you want to gain knowledge of it, then take an iron or a needle, and if the fistula follows the correct path, and you find it, then apply it.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate that thin probe, as the thin probe lifts the weight of their body and straightens the twist.
And if the fistula is very difficult to reach, it may not be possible to use that probe on it.
Then insert the catheter through its openings, as the moisture you use to clean it also cleans the other openings and comes from there.
And then carefully examine, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or protruding fistula is its cavity, or it is a fistula with many openings that is completely above your strength, your perplexity, the patient's pain, and the invention of the cause of the abscess.
And when you have considered all these causes, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have told you.
Then dry the fistula after it has been drained, and remove any material that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and any material that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all rotten flesh; and administer cotton soaked in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal it after we have recommended, if you do not prevent any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member present as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which the corruption covers completely; and cure that part with the same that the flesh inside is healed.
And if it does not heal and the bone breaks as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you expose it again in the second place and carefully make the reason of it and the purification of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
And then if it is healed, good; and if not, know that that corruption is in the deep far part of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you do not enter into that but leave it alone.
And if the broken bone is small, or you are able to pull it back into place, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that weakens your strength.
But if you encounter any resistance due to moisture, and there is no fear or error at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation to extract bones from your own hour, then place that which can harden that area over those bones of flesh and ligaments, and keep the area from becoming consolidated and strengthened the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you are afraid, place that which is submerged in the supertar trissat oil, or submerged in Egyptian anguent, or in any of the verdant oils, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, the dislocation is alleviated.
If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has experience and assistance over your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts that are corrupted on the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and that is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
And then he extended the time with that until the abscess was formed, and after that matter moved, and his cure was not paused until the thigh was fistulated, and in those wounds all the pus was drained and the moisture of the body.
And then the cure was taught to many doctors around two years, and not in those times but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of the patient and the matters that flowed from him to those orifices by great veins; and his condition was completely stable and the color of his blood was yellowish.
And then I inserted the needle into one of those orifices and reached the needle to the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the orifices and found that they were open from all parts of the bed.
And then I guided and inserted into one of the orifices those that described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that it was rotten and corrupted, and already decayed and corrupted; and a part of the bed had already been penetrated by the meat.
And then I prepared that which was discovered from the bone.
And I saw that it was not in the bone but that corruption which had been cut and prepared, and it had already been discarded.
And then, by means of medical consolidating remedies for a long time, the wound does not consolidate.
And then, by repeatedly examining and discovering the second bone under the first, the corruption continues in the bone.
And then, by repairing that which appears to be corrupted from it, and by making a fair cure for it and restoring it, it is not restored.
And then, by discovering another method and not ceasing to gradually incise the small parts of it, the restoration of it is not restored until around half of it is incised, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and by repairing it with medicines, it is consolidated again and healed.
And it is not necessary to repeat the operation of cutting and sectioning it, but by the arrangement of its bones and by the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, because in all hours, due to excessive evacuation, bad sinews occur.
And therefore, the healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is well positioned in its own body and returns its virtue; and it is converted in its positions and does not do harm to it in ambulation or in any cause.
If there is an eminent bone in the body that has been broken, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong that at the end of that eminent bone, and command anyone to extend that over; and place that wool thicker than the first bandage; and put it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
And place the table under the bone properly, because when you do that it is not forbidden to sew so that the stitch does not rot the flesh.
And make the stitch on the rotten part little by little, because if it is in the hollow of the rotten bone and does not appear at its surface to the touch, and force the stitch of it another way.
When the bone is decayed and not broken into pieces, if it is found in one continuous piece from one end to the other, and the decay is in the middle or in a separate piece, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and then place a dressing, and then suture the first piece where the decay is before continuing the suturing of the other piece.
And if the suturing is in the location of the decay, then it should be a little, as we have said.
And if the decay is at the joint, incise that decayed joint, and suture the bone where it continues from the other piece.
And if the decay is in the continuation of two joints, then it should not be in the ratio but rather in a gentle manner.
And if the decay is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the decay and remove it in whatever manner it appears to you, and wash it with each possible disposition, and when no contrary venous or nerve comes out, it should be corrected to you.
And you should know what are the saws and files to cut these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and variety of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you can prepare all kinds of tools suitable for that operation.
And you should know that for that operation, the special tool that is needed depends on your skill and long experience in this art, and knowledge of the ways of illnesses, because you have already learned how to apply all the tools suitable for each disease.
And you should know that at the end of this chapter, the number of tools that you will use simply and those that you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience over the others. Saw shape:
Another saw shape:
Another large saw shape:
The form of a ray: The second part of this ray should be in the shape of a starry crown, and its points should be in the shape of steel pins.
It is not appropriate to apply them only when the joints are damaged or the mouth is very wide open.
The form of a smaller razor:
The form of a wide razor:
The form of another well-made saw: make the arc of it as round and sharp as a steel blade, and the handle of it should be made of wood. The form of it:
The form of a razor with concavity:
The form of another delicate razor:
The form of another curved-end razor:
The form of a small razor resembling a tent stake:
Form of a smaller surgical instrument:
Form of another instrument; this resembles a saw, and its end is shaped like a blade, and it is used in various places in the region of the bones:
Form of a saw that suits the region where bones are pierced:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a coating that all the causes we have mentioned for saws and surgical instruments and blades.
From the beginning of its ends and the cutting of bones.
The ends may be sharp or due to an intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption must leave the member that is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound to prevent the patient from dying or suffering from a greater evil that is more harmful to the member.
When the member of the patient who has suffered, is blackened by fire or pored over with boiling lead, or if the burn is near the member that enters into that one and spreads throughout the body; then cover it with a cloth.
Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as a scorpion's bite or of a viper or of a rattle snake and similar.
And if the corruption or poisoning is at the end of that member, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
Similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the root of the fire and not give space to the corruption until it is in the fire of the arm.
And if you have inserted that, then insert the arm into the hole at the joint.
And if another corruption passes around the hole, then the patient will die; and in the treatment of that quantity of virtue, give another cause.
And similarly, if decay has caused the nail to fall off, then you should insert that into one of the knuckles.
And if it is taken from the sole of the foot, then you should insert the entire foot. But if it can enter the ankle, then you should insert the cushion into the joint of the ankle.
And if decay has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and leave the patient to die.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the membrane at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another membrane over the area; and extend the minister a membrane to the parts behind, and extend the minister another membrane on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two membranes at a distance of about an inch apart so that the entire flesh is revealed; and then insert or cut.
And cover it with cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and pus adjusted and covered.
If there is bleeding when working, then you should cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
And then place the affected member in a suitable position, and cure it before it is healed.
And you should also recommend to that person who has such an accident in his foot, this method that you and I have recommended, which is likely to occur to him because of the black color in his foot due to burning that was similar to a fireburn.
And that corruption occurs first in his great toe before it affects the entire foot.
And then that person prepared for such severe pain and burning of the member that he could not bear it, and the insensitive foot entered into the joint, and it was healed.
For a long time, that same corruption occurs in the great toe of the right foot.
And then it happened to me, and I was able to reflect on that excess in the water used for medicines, approaching the purification of that member; and the excess was not reflected, and it started to go to the other foot where it began.
And he asked me to incise the abdomen of the patient, but I did not want to do so without considering the risk of such a superfluous procedure, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the patient's condition was critical.
And since he left me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised the entire abdomen of the patient, and was cured.
And I have not related this story except to be helpful in this case of illness, and to indicate the meaning by which it is signified and the second in which it is done.
Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in a hollow member, the space of the abscess extends until it collects pus, and it is then ruptured and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place where it was becomes like a vessel, and the code that covers it is thin cloth, and it does not reach back to corruption, and it is not impressed into bone or nerve or tissue, it is called sinus, and it is not named fistula.
When the space is extended before corruption occurs in any member, it is then called a fistula and not an abscess.
The cure for it is to insert that entire coat as it is revolved, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and to ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the coat sticks and that that corruption has not been achieved due to subsequent consequences, and if there is a hole in the coat, then you treat it with ointment.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and if the liquid that comes out has an unpleasant odor, then you treat it with Egyptian ointment which is made of oil, wine, and honey, and equal parts are placed in a vessel and covered over the fire until the medicament turns red and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take that water that is necessary and dissolve it with the vinegar and honey; and treat the sinus with that, strengthen the orifices of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then gradually remove that dirty cloth; and do so for several days until the wound is cleansed and remains moist.
Some wounds are cleaned with ash water, when this medicament is not present; and you take the ashes of vine, put them on the water; and then apply that cloth to it and cleanse the wound with it until you confirm that the wound has healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then cleanse that cloth with water and honey mixed with a third part of wine, and cleanse the wound with honey, because honey cleans and moistens, and it makes the wound stick together, and more so when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness in the wound.
And when you do that for some wounds and confirm that the wound has healed, then cleanse that cloth with water that makes the flesh in it.
And you should take some dentifrice and dissolve that oily substance and apply a stinging ointment; or you should make a clyster of some medicines and other oils that have the properties to heal, as I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow and do not receive the clyster needle, then you should gradually enlarge them with a small iron until it is wide enough, and wrap them in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment.
Similarly, if the orifices are wide, then you should add some sutures to the edges of the ointment and leave enough quantity so that the clyster can be added inside.
And if the orifice of the intestine from which the intestine protrudes is elevated to the parts above, then dry that place in the lower part where the intestine passes through, because when the intestine is constricted at the sinus opening, the flesh will be in the lower part.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the environment of the lower jaw as you wish, then prepare the limb for the procedure by applying a bandage according to your preference and ensuring that there is no cause for retention of the bandage.
And the one that is on the opening of the sinus should remain in place for the entire hour to ensure that what is applied to the jaw remains there. And so that you know whether that which flows from the arm is much or little, or digested, or undigested.
And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is exuded over the opening of the sinus already adhering, or it begins to adhere, then you should remove it or remove it on the third day, and when you remove the pus, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
But if from the sinus there is an approach of subtle viruses, then do not despair of the adherence of it, because the healing of it will approach, because in some people in which it takes a long time for flesh to grow in those pus-filled places, and in those in which it is done the opposite of that.
And if from the sinus there is an approach of undigested matter for several days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and it is the cause of prolonged treatment, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as with a poultice when they are adjusted with excess of salt.
And the most distant part that is cured, you should take some duck fat and dissolve it in warm oil, and place it on top of the wound like its substance, and then comfort that part with it, and use it.
And you do the same thing in that action, when there is no bone, duck fat, when it is thickened, and use it; or take mirror, aloe, and honey, and grind everything together and powder it over the wound when it is on top of the fire, and then apply that to a cloth and strengthen that on the wound; and apply that which you have ground inside where it is thickened, and powder it over a cloth.
And some wounds are treated with the long-lasting and strong lily of the valley (and that is the lily of the valley) and flour of almonds, centaury, and use those simple or adjusted remedies, grind those and crush them and powder them over the wound which I have recommended; and use it.
If the sinus persists and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the front of the patient, and already examine the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then treat it with fistular cure, as mentioned above.
Of the treatment of nails and toes worn out and with incision of the finger and section.
Nails and toes are abscesses that do not come out from under the nail of the big toe or foot, and often they come out in the other mentioned ones, and if it persists and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and often it penetrates into the bone before the smell of decay, and it is made at the end of the said toe, and its color is made dark.
And when you have that which we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then you should cut with a knife all the excess that is left of the nail and then cauterize the wound with a cautery, because the cautery is useful in this case.
If the bone is broken and the finger is healed, and the surrounding tissues of the finger have already expanded to cover the parts divided by the bone, and the pain and swelling have subsided, then you should gently place your hand on the angle of the finger that is causing pain, and push it towards the affected area, and insert it into the flesh with ease, and pause over that which remains of the flesh of the medicines that were burning corrosively until it is completely healed; and then cure it with ointment until it is completely healed.
If the corruption has already spread to the bone, then you should insert the bone and remove it, because there is no time that can heal what is corrupted in the bone.
And if the corrosion and corruption spread to that part, then you should insert it into one of the bones according to what is remembered, and cure it until it is healed.
If the finger has percussion or atrophy, and there is severe pain in that part, then you should first lance the patient, and then dry the finger with a sharp transverse cut above it, and be careful that the cut does not reach into the flesh that is behind the finger, for if you do, you will cause the patient severe pain and unnecessary damage to the adjusted flesh in that location; and then cure that place with something that relieves pain.
May this be adjusted, which is not in the muscles of most men, but is very fleshy overall, and is very fleshy in the bones, or very fleshy in the nails.
And it is not in the root of the joint, or it is the origin of it in other people's bones. But that which is not in the bones of the said person, and this which is not in the joints, is very bad.
And of those that are not fleshy, the section is thinner, and it is that you incise that devil's root with a thin blade.
But of those that are not in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful with its incision.
But in that which is not in the said devil's root, you should incise at the beginning of the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those suitable needles into it, and cure it while it is healing.
When the consolidation occurs between the mentioned bones, either due to birth defects of the person who was born that way, or due to consolidation of plague, or due to burning by fire, or due to similar reasons, then it is necessary for that consolidation to be removed before those bones return to their natural form.
And then place cloth between their clothes to prevent the humors from infiltrating, and separate those, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated, according to what happens.
Similarly, if consolidation occurs in the palm of those hands, then you should remove that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
From the beginning of vice, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of superfluous melancholic humors that come from the limbs of the body, and the greatest occurrence of them is in the buttocks, and especially in the buttocks of travelers and workers and carriers.
Then, in order to administer a purge of the body for black cholera, some strong expelling agents are used, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
The cure of their arm is done in two ways: one way is to cut it and pour the black bile out, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The sectioning of the arm is done in this way: first, apply heat to the thigh to make the black bile flow quickly, which is abundant in the thigh, and then gently massage the patient's arm to a higher position than the cushion, and then tie it with a band at the part where the arm joins the body, and dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections, and then elevate the black bile above the patient's elbow into their arm, and then below it, until the desired amount and number of times have been reached, which the patient can tolerate.
And approach that one, and command them to refrain from foods causing black bile generation.
Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is not noticed by the patient.
Raise their leg in this manner: if there are mottled spots on the patient's thigh, and you place it in hot water and rub the leg with an elbow-length cauda until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if that is not possible, within which the member is scalded.
And then cut the ligament on the side of the vein in the long or back part of the leg, or at the bottom of the thigh, or at the top of the foot.
And then open the ligament with a lancet and scrape the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and that is the indication of which time that question declines to black.
And then with the lancet you will see that white thread that is the cord.
And then you place your hand behind that one which is raised and held by the chain, and hang that one with the open orifice of the lion.
And then approach another section close to that section for three times, and then remove the chain from the part above the vein where it appeared.
And then lift that one and insert it into the other section behind the calf, and then remove it and place it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
And do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or farthest from all sections, where everything is inserted; and then insert it there.
And if you do not obey to extract and raise it, then insert a sharp needle with a strong double thread and tie it there and remove it, or insert it behind the chain and rotate your hand in all parts where it is tangled. And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that one and it comes over the patient for that harm.
When the whole area around the wound has been cleaned, then pause over the location of the wound, which is submerged in vinegar and oil, both rotten and not rotten, and cure that which is unhealthy.
And if the vein is twisted and has a winding shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut across all parts of the tortuosity of it and the locations of its covering, and suspend them together with a needle in those that lift the whole.
And be careful not to cut the vein and not to press that area, for it is difficult to lift that; and use your prudence in that.
The shape of the incision made on the vein:
It is not like those that are sharp at the end so that it does not cut the vein; and it should be of great flexibility, lion, for if it were too thin, it would cut the vein by its thinness; having too much thickness as we have said.
Of vein extraction from the leg.
This vein is born in the buttocks, in lowlands like Ategi in Arabic lands and in dry and arid lowlands with little vegetation, where there is no herb or abundance.
And it is also born in other parts of the body besides the buttocks.
And the action of this vein is due to putrefaction that leaves the wound like venom that poisons the body, snakes, and worms that generate between the wound and flesh.
And the susceptibility of this vein to its occurrence is due to the fact that it happens in the buttock, inflammation is very strong; and at the location, it is blistered; and as soon as the vein is removed from the location of that blister, it seems to be of plant origin.
And when it appears, cover it with a cloth of lead that is the weight of a dragon, within two drachms, and tie that to it and leave the lead suspended from the buttock.
And so many times when some cause is unknown to the parts affected, wrap that in cloth and bandage it. And if the pain is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and wrap it around; do not incise that of the skin until it is outside and dry, because if you incise that, it will contract and go into the flesh and cause an abscess and pus in the area and ulcer.
So that it can be treated properly and removed little by little, until it is extracted from the back of it and there is no cause left in the body.
And from this vein, it is said to have been extracted in some men who were in their length of 20 palms and has reached me that it was 1 of 20 palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the wound and pierce that through the long track to the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes causes pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it brings pain to that orifice, and it is thought to be from that orifice.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine illness.
This disease is not named in any land, but it is called bovine illness because of the many veins that enter the beasts and it is a worm that is not between the flesh and the skin, and it goes through all the body and descends, and it is shown at the sensation of its own member in member until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
And its generation is by putrefaction of some humors like what happens to worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its evil, because when it enters the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then it strongly inflames in the brain and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many veins.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first assess its appearance and position relative to the senses, and then strengthen what is above it and what is below it with a loose and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is located in the flesh and not on the surface, then place a pointed cautery over the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the surrounding area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen above the supercilium with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use remedies that evacuate bad humors and putrid substances, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
From section over pain.
This disease is not called by our land gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
I have already seen the second thing that I will tell you. He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm, and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and as it had been there for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away as if worms were moving in this, but more slowly than it should be, like silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain went away from that place and remained in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body before reaching the other arm.
And then I told him that it was turning over throughout his body, and he was amazed at the change of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen that happening in the same way with other people, but I had not seen such words that make pain to be changed from member to member. But I have not seen that happening in the same way with women.
And I did not think it was that because of the woman being old, having dry skin and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of warmth was reversed.
And it is necessary that this second reversal does not appear in those who are delicate and have warm bodies with constricted veins.
And as you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply it to the healthy skin with the same method as we have said, but strengthen it over him and gently press on that area where the warmth is covered, and cauterize the location.
But if you do not see the veins, then cure that from the exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and give those who are fetid and those that are made of serapi and similar ones.
From the extraction of sage.
Sage is diverse according to the species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and deaf ones, and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have astelas.
When symptoms occur in the second part of the servant and pass through the bone, and are above the skull, which is on top of the brain, because of very strong soda, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the joints, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great weakness is removed from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is above the location of the wound, white humidity similar to pus, and yellowish like the consistency of flesh.
And if you are not able to perform the cure and extraction of the splinter, then do not attempt it.
When the splinter is lodged in the heart, and it is close to the right breast, and it causes pain similar to that caused by a hard object, but not by a sharp one; and the movement of the splinter resembles the movement of the limbs, and it causes dark bile, and this frigidity of the extremities, and sweating, and trembling; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
And when the splinter has pierced the lung completely with black bile from the bile, and the veins that are close to the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily, and demand air frequently; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes a great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the limbs of the muscles; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
If the patient's stomach is filled with food, it may cause great pain and vomiting of undigested food.
If the food remains in the stomach and causes pain or vomiting, it may be due to a tear in the stomach lining, intestine, or hernia, which is not expected to heal with its removal.
If the food is in the bladder and causes discoloration of urine, it may be due to some cause of the parts, and if the pain is severe on the patient, it is likely to be fatal.
The other parts of the body, such as the face, neck, chest, shoulders, arms, ribs, backbone, and intestines, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when food does not block veins or arteries and is not poisonous.
I will recommend this to you who have seen these foods, so that you know what it means for the treatment of this condition.
The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal canal of his eye through the corner of his nose, and it is extracted from there to the other side, beyond the gray matter of his eyeball, and he is cured, and no harm is done to his eye.
And another sharp object was extracted from a Jew, which entered his eye through the gray matter of his eyeball, beyond his upper eyelid, and the object had already been hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his eyeball, and it was a very sharp object like those of the Turks, made of iron without any gold.
The Jew was cured, and no harm was done to his eye.
And another sharp object was extracted from a Christian man, which had been inserted into his stomach, and it was an Arabic object, and it was this one that entered his eye; and then he inserted two small needles over it, and it was already submerged in his stomach; and then he carefully removed it, and the Christian man was cured.
And another sage was extracted from a man who had fallen into his own belly, and it was thought that he would die from that; and since it had passed thirty days and nothing changed on him due to his conditions, it was inserted into the wound and covered over it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
And another man was seen in whom a wound had occurred on his back, and the wound had become infected over him, and after seven years, the wound healed in the center of the cushion.
And a woman was seen in whom a wound had occurred in her belly, and the wound had become infected inside of it, and she was not moved from her conditions at all, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural activities.
And another man was seen in whom a wound had occurred on his face, and the wound had become infected and rotted, and he did not experience much pain, and similar to these.
And the wound was extracted from the prince of the king who had fallen into his own nose and had already declined to the straight part, and the entire wound was hidden.
And I was called to treat him near the chamber of the sage within three days.
And then I again examined the wound of the sage; and then I inquired about that woman with subtle torture, and she did not feel it; but he felt the pricking under her ear, and then I suspected that that prick was at the end of the sage.
And I applied the ointment in which is the active and digestive virtue, believing that this place would help me to find the location of the sage, so that it could be removed from her.
And no accident occurred in that significant location where the sage had achieved that place; and I continued to apply the ointment on her for several days without any accident; and the wound remained stable during that time, and the patient's condition improved over several days until one day the sage felt pain in her nose and told me about it.
And then I applied sharp and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until fire was inserted, and with the test I removed that, and again examined the end of the sage subtly, which adhered to the wood.
And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until I see its end through my visibility, and pass it through the spaces of time within four months.
And then approach and increase the wound, and focus on inserting the forceps into it, and remove that, and do not neglect to continue subtly and ingeniously over that with various methods of engineering until one day you can hang that with forceps descented made, according to the shape of those at the end of the chapter, until you extract that; and then restore that wound.
And then doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no need in it in any case.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some sagetas for that you can apply this rule and meaning on it that I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration nor understood those freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare one thing with another; and they know what is present where it is absent; and they must acquire new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when an accident occurs.
And so they say that wisdom is not removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite side.
And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or proceeds in a fleshy location, and is attracted and removed.
And if it does not obey the instruction of the hour in which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and attract it and its exit.
Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey your instruction, then wait for several days and repeat that with attraction and motion on each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not obey your superior's command to approach those days, then carefully pierce the circle of the spine in that bone of all parts with a subtle needle until that place is widened by the spine, and then extract it.
If the patient's breath has already been trapped in the body, and it is also obscured from sensation, then you should ask for that tool, and if you feel it, then you should direct it towards the patient with appropriate instruments.
And if you cannot reach the patient due to the crowding of the crowd and the length of the prone position, and there are no nerves or veins nearby, then you should perform on the body where it is possible to extract the breath.
And if you have the tools that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts of the body with all the force you can; and use those tools to dislodge the flesh from the fracture of the ribs and the twisting of those bones until they obediently yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the breath in each place where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts until it forms that obedience; and subtly use the subtlety that the breath is not broken and that it is formed according to your difficult access to the patient and the extraction.
If you cannot do it immediately, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be separated, and then repeat that which was previously done. But if you encounter resistance from the patient's blood flow, then administer the remedy we have mentioned for treatment in its capital.
And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve or cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to facilitate and quiet and delay and close it as much as possible with ease and according to your recommendation.
And therefore, make the patient resist against the vein so that the patient is according to the figure by which you should heat the opening of the vein in him, which is more advantageous. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But if the veins that are out of reach by the resistance of the other part or that have already been connected to some part in him, or if the external exit of the vein is impeded by the feeling of the part below the proposed code and then again, then you should secure it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
If it is held in the bone, then twist the second contrary direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen the opening, and remove that.
If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat that until it comes out.
And if the saw is in that, then push that against the bone.
If it has fallen off and you want to administer an impact, then insert that into the bone, if it is hollow, use a probe to make sure that the hollow of it enters the blade of the saw and then push that against the bone.
If the saw is hollow, then push that against the strong probe as it enters into that, because the saw is guided by that.
And if the saw is poisoned, then make sure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible to do so, and then cure that with something appropriate.
And if the saw catches in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful not to injure any veins or nerves, and then remove that, and afterwards clean the wound if necessary, and cure that before it becomes healthy.
Form of forceps used to grasp the jaws:
With their extremities bent like the beak of an eagle, which are made like a claw when placed on the jaw to prevent it from being lost:
And from those, special types of motors are made, large, few and varied, according to the size of the jaw and its width, and the breadth of the wound, and the construction of it:
Bent like the ray to prevent the instrument from slipping in it and being pushed by that one:
Of vein puncture.
The veins of phlebotomy of which the blood is usually drawn from, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are called temporalis; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in two lacrimal glands that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic â€”; and there are two veins that are left the tongue. May the veins that are cut in the arms be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thyme; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and the people name it "the vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and the common people call it "the vein of the belly"; and the funis of the arm, and it is paused over the fire, and it is the one in which it is cut, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the little ear and the smallest, and it is in the two grooves.
And in the foot and leg there are three veins; one of them is called the curvature of the knee of the wild thigh; and the second is sophena, and its location is under the buttock of the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is under the buttock of the wild thigh; and in the buttock there are other veins similar to those.
The inflammation of the veins that approach the ears is due to ancient and recurrent catarrhs, phlegm, and old ulcers on the head.
The quality of the treatment for those is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to bathe the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are abundant with a thick cloth and good friction; then strongly massage the patient's neck between the two places where the veins appear and their locations near the ears; and if you feel pain in those places, here is an attempt.
Then you take the surgical lancet, and it is the one that punctures, and then you introduce it behind the vein into the groove where the bleboteum comes to the bone. Then lift your hand with the vein and the groove above and puncture the vein at the beginning of the incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers or about that; and make it deeper as much as you want.
And then apply strong herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, I indicated those and their cautery.
The veins and arteries that are at the temples, which is the basis of phlebotomy, is an ancient and wicked and tiresome and corrosive excessive effusion to the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is as follows: strengthen the patient with their own hand, where the veins appear at the sensation by manifest perception and show the color of their blood, and then you should try it.
And then you lift the coda over the vein at the parts indicated by your hand, and insert the phlebotomist behind, and raise the vein up; and insert it there as you have done in other veins; and make it bleed according to the quantity of your need.
And then leave the patient's bandage off, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place over that cushion and herbs and apply strong pressure on that with great constraint, and leave it inside to be healed.
And before the remembrance of their names, and of those who began it, and its attachment to the beginning of the book.
And the complaint of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is approached by the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and emigration, and rotten and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that you recommended to me; so it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a band in which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is this form of it:
Pause the puncta eminent which is at the top of the fossor above that vein and strike on it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that through which it is healed.
And some veins are opened with phlebotomy laterally, however it is not recommended that the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, in front of the lateral extremity, and phlebotomize that according to the transverse, where the bones are properly placed and strongly trenched in that when it is subtle.
The inflammation of the two veins that are near the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to a skin rash and sores in the eyes, and facial maladies.
The quality of the laryngoscopy is that the patient should tilt their head back, and then you place the laryngoscope in those, and you stand over their head.
If the laryngoscopy is done horizontally a little bit to the side where there is no flesh; and if the laryngoscope is thin, then the tip of it is broken off.
And then run warm water over those wounds as much as is necessary, and place your hand over them, and stretch them out for a moment, and then remove them.
The laryngoscopy of the nasal vein is compared to acute fever and violent soda, and facial maladies and migraine and sores that occur on the face, and especially when it is old.
The quality of the laryngoscopy is that the patient should tilt their head back and then you place their left hand on their own nose, and take a thin laryngoscope and place it in that location at the right side of the forehead of the nose straight, where the vein does not appear here, and where the wound begins to bleed soon.
When you have finished massaging the patient's glans bit by bit and removing the sand as needed; then apply that to a cloth, which is then restored properly.
The swelling of the glans from the previous treatment should be reduced by applying leeches, starting from the base and treating various malignancies and skin conditions, such as herpes.
The quality of the glans massage is that the patient should lie down on their back with a cloth; and the artist should be positioned on top of the patient's head, and the patient should be lying on a bed.
Then massage the vein along its length with wide glans bit by bit; and remove sand as needed, in appropriate quantities or as needed; and do the same for the other vein.
Then remove the cloth and stretch the two veins with gentle pressure to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
And the use of the trocar for veins, compared to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the trocar for those is that it pierces the patient from you, and strengthens the neck of it with a bend, and then rotates the lips of it and looks at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that is more so in the area around those small black veins; and therefore incise each from the beginning.
But if doubt is from you, and you do not know which of those is, then first you understand the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the lips above.
It is also customary to use the lingual tonsil as a prefocal point for the cephalic vein, which is located in the pharynx, and for the patient's uvula and other oral cavity abnormalities.
The quality of performing this procedure is that the patient should lie between your hands facing upwards, and raise their tongue, and observe from behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and on the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then perform the lingual tonsillectomy on each side; and be careful not to damage your hand in performing this procedure near those, as they are arteries.
And your veins that have been lingual tonsillectomized in the cavity are the same as those found in all men, and the lingual tonsillectomy is performed in two ways, either by placing a small, pointed tool or an olive-shaped tool that declines; or by cutting with a scalpel, and applying pressure to stop the bleeding, and this is the form of the tool:
And if the disease is present, it is considered to be of an opening nature and it is appropriate to open the concave veins that are full and proceeding from large, rough surfaces, and to those that contain thick, heavy masses.
And this influenza is of lesser magnitude and more subtle ending, and it is appropriate for the opening of thin veins that contain thin, subtle masses.
And the main benefit of the opening of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that it extracts the mass of diseases that are left in the abdomen and the chest, and from that which goes to the chest and the belly.
And it is appropriate for the vein-opener, when opening that vein, to guard against that and have fear in that, where there is an artery, and if it goes wrong and is adjusted in the puncture of the vein-opening, it will cut that artery and cause the flow of masses, so that one does not open that vein with a vein-opener that is sharp, but rather with a sharp knife as for the disease.
And if the basilica does not appear due to a manifest reason, then let it be left there and move to the other, or encircle some of its parts; or use a hook in place of its end, which is manifest; and close it with a hook as we have said.
However, if you want to use the bleeding lancet of the vein, then first note the structure of the arm where you are working, and place your hand over it; and hold the arm and close the concave section of the vein with the hook as we have said; and be careful not to strike the artery.
And when you see, with strength, the ligament, inflate in the place where you have placed your hand, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the bleeding lancet as thin as the gold of an infant, and the blood is subtle, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then take and place your hand over it for a long time; and if the blood is abscinded, because many veins are abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave it.
And guard the patient from the cold, and be vigilant over them and do not neglect them until they are healed.
However, if the abscess is not drained, and sometimes when there is no medicine available for that, then you inscribe the artery, as it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is drained; or you take a lancet and puncture it, and then take the other end and strengthen it over the location of the vein with stricture descending below the skin and into the other side.
And if the abscess is drained, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which it was preceded in the remembrance of the location of the powders for draining the flow of pus.
And the drainage of the abscess from that location is difficult due to its small size and the possibility of the skin of the arm.
However, if the vein is dark, the fleubotomy is very useful for extracting the pus from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the chest; because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And approach the phlebotomist who is most skilled in the phlebotomy of the patient, as it is over a vein; and then adjust the needle in the puncture of the phlebotomist and avoid the vein, causing great pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal him, and often he is not healed at all. And this vein appears to the senses; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then approach the phlebotomist with the needle that you used for the section of the artery, and avoid the vein with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein in its length.
The sign of the phlebotomy of the vein of the head is that it draws the cure from the head and compares to the evils of the eyes.
And approach this properly, if you want the phlebotomist to puncture with an olive or a fir needle; because it is the safest of all veins, as it is not over the artery or nerve.
However, if the abscess is in some men, when not laryngoscopied in the first percussion, it should not be touched again at that abscess.
The first of these is that you know that laryngoscopy should not be administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that laryngoscopy should be performed on one of the veins that are in the code, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that laryngoscopy should be performed at the beginning of primaveyra, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when there are signs of replenishment.
And perform a phlebotomy at three in the afternoon, after three hours have passed since the beginning of the day.
More phlebotomy is administered when it is necessary and convenient for that patient, whether at night or during the day, at every hour and at all times.
And it is not recommended to perform phlebotomy on someone who has not reached the age of fourteen, and a woman should not be given bloodletting except in the fourth month until she reaches the age of seven, and those who have passed sixty years should not be subjected to bloodletting.
And if anyone wants to be bloodlet for any reason, it is recommended that they have their intestines checked by a physician before the phlebotomy, if there is a movement in them, so that the veins do not release excess blood during the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure and do not cause harm to the main members.
And those who are not bloodlet should not be given bloodletting if they have nausea, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor for hydropsy, and more that bloodletting is used appropriately with colic pain and vomiting, and abdominal, and multiple cases of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and all causes that dissolve the virtue, whether physical or animal.
And then consider the elimination of humors that cause this condition, if the abdomen is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then, if there is no cause to prevent it, or if it is exercised by some exercise to thin out the abdomen.
And pause the flebotomy of it in the chest, around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And perforate that the chest of that person is guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, such as labor and excessive pain, and joy, and similar things to them.
And to its seat, make it present the causes in the use of which customarily men have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to their quantity of possibility.
And follow the flebotomist on a cushion that is put under or that of that person who should be flebotomized.
And then remove their arm, and make an incision with the flageolet cautery on that area; and then tighten the bandage around it and wrap those wounds.
And if the stricture is cold, as it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prevent the flow of pus from the wound; or if it is a softening, and then prevent the body from moving completely.
And then remove the stricture, so that the one who should be flageolet-cut makes an incision between their fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the feeling.
And then the flageolet-cutter holds the flageolet-knife with a small amount of old oil properly; and places their hand on the index finger of the other arm over that vein, where the incision is to be made, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that the veins are like a cord fleeing from the incision, and those that are full of blood when the flageolet-cutter pauses on that one, they are contracted by the flageolet-cutter, and if he does not touch the vein, and if he touches it, that is tight.
And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and investigated in all these causes.
And then, if the vein is punctured in one place, you should apply pressure there; and if not, repeat this procedure in another location nearby, or on the affected area, if the location is not bleeding.
And if the location is abscessed, or the patient becomes worse, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not apply any compresses, because forcing an abscess to open can cause more harm, or it may not be infected at all.
And then repeat the flagellation if necessary.
And if the puncture is small and blood flows slowly, and you fear that it may not be enough of the desired amount, then repeat the flagellation in that area again, directly and accurately, and apply pressure on the puncture, because the location becomes abscessed in some people due to the application of compresses.
If the patient is still in bed, do not touch them, as they may have a cause for not allowing it; and pause over that certain part of the oil bandage, which would help the body of the sick. It is best in this place to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer an oil bandage in all phlebotomy, which veins doctors prohibit from the body of the sick, and they make it with Tyrian silk and satin when placed over the one of those on the spot, where the sick is thinned and rotated when it is large.
And if a large abscess is generated in the place of phlebotomy, which occurs due to bad luck, and more so to that one who has not been bled but only with that blood, or in the insertion of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and pause over the spot with a sponge infused in water and salt, a slightly burnt one, and strengthen it for an hour, where it dissolves.
And it should be done close to the incision of that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do it; and if you want, place some cause of aloe and of myrrh dissolved, or some cause of sugar or honey or something similar to it.
And move the vegetable tumors and swellings that occur after lancing the abscess of the base.
And place your hand over that, and if you then apply softness to that, that swelling is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something similar to it over that, which will greatly flow from the vein.
And make an astringent in that place, so that the area is toughened, and then cure it with the other cure before it is healed.
And it should be taken out from the wound to all people according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains over the wound after it appears.
If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it is roasted; and similarly if you see it large, then leave it inside until it is thinned out; and similarly if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
And if it is a case that is large and strong and has the need for extraction of bone in a prolonged period, then amplify the phlebotomy of the vein and the phlebotomist should be left-handed.
And in that which is thin, do the opposite of that, and have it extracted in short periods, and let the wound be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy saves from bone flow and from injury to nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second latitude and length.
And in that which usually occurs syncope during phlebotomy, and have it treated with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or of simple oximel; extract from the bone in three or four periods.
And if there is a complexity of the face, then take a nostrum called fleubotomia to infuse in an essence of myrrh or in an essence of honey aromatized with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in an aromatized essence and a pleasant odor.
And if the nostrum fleubotomia causes sincopation, and its cause is due to a lack of one thing, then take some bread soaked in an essence of honey and a subtle odor; use aromaticity with an ale, and let it lie on his chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopation for elimination.
And who wants to bring his arm and dissolve his second sin, then take the nostrum fleubotomia for elimination, as its virtue is free, which evacuates the small sins little by little, so it is according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
When one wants to perform the surgery on their arm, and they are lying on their left side, and their chest is strong, then do so around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
When one wants to remove the intestine from the opposite side of the body where it declines, then do so on the second or third day.
When that chest in which the intestine has already been removed and is inflamed and causing high fever, then lie it on one side and place a great quantity of cold cloths on it, and increase the perception of the flebotomy; and place your hand over the thighs of the intestine, so that it does not die in the location of the syncope, for this is what happens when the flebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do so when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second intestine, as long as the orifices of the vein have not been closed and it has been difficult to remove from the intestine, that you push against this with great force and extend it too much, for this is very bad.
Having the left arm ready to be punctured secondly; or remain with that amount of acuity in the fleubotomi that is coagulated from the blood into the orifice of the vein; or pause over that of tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress it lightly until the blood is out and stopped.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone until the inflammation is sedated.
And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then draw it from that location or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when it is not discovered or hidden, which are composed of those.
The quality of the puncture in that vein is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the puncture becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
And then apply strong pressure on that part of the bandage that is near the stricture; and then use a bistoury second the transverse small one, not latitudinally or according to the length.
And then make your incision wide and use your bistoury on that joint where you have made the incision.
And if it is forbidden to let the sanctioned substance flow, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the sanctioned substance run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should be excused from immersing your hand in cold water, and instead place the body of the sanctioned substance in cold water in the winter time.
And the incision of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, since it does not have a pulse or nerves.
And the incision of the heel of the foot is comparable to the maladies of the leg.
And the quality of the fleam used on them is that you strengthen your hand or your arm, because you should hold it firmly, while the vein is inflated and demonstrated at once; and then apply the fleam transversely; and if you insert it too deeply, you will not feel anything in return.
And do not let your hand remain on the fleam, because it will cause damage to the nerves of those dissected parts of flesh.
And then repeat your hand in the blood flow and let the blood run out in that place, because if you do not repeat it in the blood flow, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then place salt and oil on the vein opening, so that it does not consolidate constantly; similarly, do the same in all straight lines.
The smell of the fleam used on that of your right hand is similar to that of the melon.
And do the same in the clyster procedure as you did in the other.
And the advantage of the vein of the thigh in clyster is for those who have diseases in the part behind the groin, as well as diseases of the uterus and retention of menstruation, and diseases of ronhs and ulcers of thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
And the quality of the clyster in this case is that the patient puts his foot in warm water and makes pressure on the friction where the veins appear; and then he ties it above the ankle joint; and the place of the vein is apparent from the foot, and from there its branches extend to the surface of the foot.
And then clyster the widest branch or behind the leg from the foot to the knee, which is better and more healthy.
And if you clyster on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are behind that on the surface of the foot, and place your clyster above the one you would like to insert, as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the bleeding stop.
However, if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you should wash the patient's foot in warm water and let the pus flow out through that opening which is to be evacuated.
And if the incision for the bleeding is made in the first stage, then wash the patient's foot in warm water and apply a poultice on that area which is salted; and do not fear the bad smell, but take care of the nerves as we have mentioned.
And similarly, make the poultice on the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the area is as we have mentioned, it is behind the calf of the thigh.
And the benefit of the incision for bleeding is at the pain in the buttocks when it is for draining pus.
And the quality of the incision for bleeding is that the patient enters into warm water, and quickly and strongly applies the bandage of the buttocks from the side of the thigh above the calf, which does not appear except by that.
When it appears, then you should use the second needle of each type that is at your disposal and according to the transverse line, which is better; or incise it from the beginning or cut it from the side, where the location of the patient is healthy.
It is often found in men and not in women; and if you find it, and it does not appear all at once, then use the second needle to pierce some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot near the inner ear and the annular.
And be careful of the nerves, and make the bone bleed as much as you want.
Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the location of the needle insertion and strengthen the location, where it is usually healed.
Of the indications and quality of using those.
Indications are of four kinds, of corn, or of warts, or of a berry.
Indications are made in two ways: one of them is by incision and removal of bone, and the other is by incision only.
And this incision that is made for scarification is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the incisions that are made for scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which one is in the place where the incisions are placed, and the last part is on the crown; and the middle part is from two sides of the neck; and incisions below the mandible, behind the mouth; and incisions with spoons; and incisions with a lancet, and it is above the hollow of the buttocks; and incisions with two knives; and incisions with two forks; and incisions with two cauteries; and incisions with two cauteries.
And the incision does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the meat, and for that reason, the value is not obtained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor is there any concern that the incision should be made with fire or without fire in any malady caused by inflammation within the body.
If necessary, cause vomiting due to illness or continuously, administer it at all hours of the day and night, at the beginning and end of the month, and at some time during the month.
And therefore when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a blister to be made as soon as possible, preferably within two or three hours.
However, if the blister is on the back of the neck, it is because when that occurs, it causes great pressure on the head and leads to that which is spilled at the temples; but more importantly, it indicates a need for complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this blister is in the location of the great toe of the foot.
And it is not recommended to use that which is of complex origin, or in which there is a catarrh, as it gives great harm.
And therefore, it is not recommended to use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
But rather, it is recommended to use that which is continuously on the blister; and for that reason, it is advised that you command the blister maker to place a small piece of cotton over the parts behind, in order to prevent the generation of oblivion.
May the vapor of alcohol be used in place of fleam for venipuncture of the femoral vein and basilic: and for that cause it confers asthma, and constriction of the chest, and separation of the sternum, and cough, and tumor.
And if the alcohol vapor is applied in a small amount, and it is paused there, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the vapor of alcohol confers the accidental pains in the head, and obtunds them, and prevents preoccupation, and pains in the teeth; and it is used for venipuncture of the basilic.
And if you command the one who applies the vapor not to press their hand during incision so that the artery is not injured and blood does not flow.
And vapor applied to the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is used for venipuncture of the artery that is in the lower lips.
When a warm compress is made on the two flat spoons and applied to the back, it is done for the purpose of heat retention.
And the warm compress made from the two flat spoons is greatly applied to the puncture of three veins, namely the basilic, femoral, and cephalic veins, which are all the main veins that run through the flesh, and those smaller veins that branch off from the other larger veins until they reach the attraction to the three veins.
And command the warm compress not to proceed in incision, as the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave the nerves and arteries there.
And it is a warm compress that is applied to the buttocks and applied to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers that are left behind.
And make sure that the warm compress is very large and made of wool, as the area requires strong drainage; and it should be soft and subtle, and it should be incised during incision.
When the bedding is too soft and allows the body to sink in, it pulls the spine out of alignment, causing pain in the back, hips, and bladder; it provokes menstrual cramps, and causes pain in the buttocks and abdomen; it is similar to a lumbar puncture, a cystoscopy, and a cavitron.
However, if the bedding is too hard and causes the entire body to become misaligned, it can lead to scoliosis in men.
And from the hard bedding, the body is pulled towards the soft bedding of other cushions.
The quality of the bedding position is that it allows the body to be supported at the beginning and gradually adjusted for comfort, and do not prolong the bedding position, but rather pause it occasionally, and keep it comfortable, so that the humors can come to the location equally. And do not cease doing that and continue until you see the location already red and swollen, and when the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and scrape the skin layer by layer, and then consider the position of the body.
For that person who has thin skin, cover the area with a wound dressing and do not let it be exposed to the air, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the breather to blow air and make a layer, and facilitate the skin removal.
And if the sinus is too thick, cover it with two wound dressings, because in the first layer, the path of subtilization to the sinus and its moisture are found. And in the second layer, the acquired knowledge of the thick sinus extraction is found.
And if the sinus is too foul, make a thorough skin removal in the third layer to get rid of it.
And finally, when we want to extract the sinus layer by layer or a small amount, provide us with a skin removal.
And if we want to extract a large sinus, make a thorough skin removal; and if we know that the sinus is thick, cover it with a prepared skin removal.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the throat is only.
And if the person whose throat is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the locations of the wounds should be more smooth, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violent or olive oil of damask roses, or olive oil of chicken manure; and if it is in the winter, then use olive oil of nutmeg, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camomile, or of sandalwood, and similar.
And if the excess is thick, foul, then use the oil of amber, or olive oil of balsamita, or olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of anethi, and similar.
But if the ventozador is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the locations of the wounds should be washed with warm water or with fresh water of sulphur, or with water of chicken manure, or similar.
And of the one whose skin is of great moisture, wash his armpits with warm water or with a solution of myrtle and sumac and similar to those.
And of the one whose excess is thick, wash his armpits with warm water or with a solution of sage, lavender, anise, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And let the armpit be kept clean after the bath; having hands that it be administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and let it be covered nearby the armpit.
What is it that must be done before phlebotomy to prepare for bleeding?
Let it be considered at the beginning: if the person to be bled or the one who will bleed is irritable and sweats on his skin sharp and inflamed, then let causes of cooling be taken, such as vinegar, warm water, lotion, julep, and similar things.
And place their food and meat with a sharp knife, and chicken pieces, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
Of that which has a bad complexion, take a tablespoon of bay leaves or bay leaves from the sea, and sumac, and mix it with some fragrant wine between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little water and food, and place their food and meat, canary, pigeon, small birds, and dove.
And it is recommended that on the day of ventozacio and fleubotomia, the water should be greater than the food.
And it is recommended that some water be given to certain people at certain times with alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or near, so that their main members are comforted and that their sickliness is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
When the incisions that are made for bleeding are placed on the forearm, over the heart and gout, over the navel, in the places of the joints, and on the broad part of the ankle, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but to draw blood from the limb, such as a bloodletting cup on the breast in the case of intestinal bleeding; and we use that which dissolves the viscous fluid inside the member, such as a cloth over the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and draws out the blood that resolves the viscosity.
And it is already placed on the ribs when they occur in their inflammation or pneumonia, because by the virtue of bloodletting greatly relieves the inflammation and eradicates the pneumonia from its location.
And similarly, when it is placed on the forearm and heart in those who are closed.
And these incisions are administered with a sharp instrument alone; and some wounds are administered with fire.
Some waters are administered full of tepid water in the diseases of the horse.
And that is why the windpipe is filled and becomes larger, it is either water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled appropriately.
The form of water administered by heat: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the quantity of the drug is the length of one palm; and it is in the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the thread should be small according to the quantity that enters into it with a needle.
It should be made of wax or citron, of large margins, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the member in its position on it.
And it should be at the side of it, a transverse wax or iron, on which is placed the candle by the fire.
And this water should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the smaller amount of it according to the diseases and the state of that who uses it with that.
And the winds of infants are different from the winds of young people and fat women.
The quality of applying this wind to the member is that it extends the muscle with a good amount of wood fire decently by a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the longitudinal vertebra in the middle of the location of the wind, so that the fire is lit around the part to prevent the body of the patient from being burned.
Then place it on the member of the patient and say the word we mentioned, as long as when we have the winds and do not need to open the door and let the steam pass over that tract, then the wind will soon be dissolved.
And then massage the muscle according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary.
In the wind that is administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no longitudinal vertebra or tract, and it is not administered but filled with water, and placed on the member only.
And this is how it looks: And this winding, the more it is long, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members where it is not possible to position windings, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting in the waters of dirty baths.
And then lay them down in the day and at night in dirty water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bleeding and windings; and then rub the patient's member before it becomes red; and then place cushions over it.
And when they are full and case.
And if it is possible to apply the winding to the place, it is better in young people.
If not, then wash the area with warm water and a lot of it; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the body is prolonged and the blood vessels are exposed, then place a cloth soaked in cold water over it and place your hand on top to absorb the runoff.
And if the wound is multiplying, then powder it with tri-sulfate of vitriol or similar substances according to the causes of styptics until the wound is opened; or place the most crushed fava beans on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then open the wound.
And if necessary, change the blood vessels when possible.
And if the blood vessels are prohibited from suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be drawn; and place your hand on top to prevent blood from flowing out.
And when you want them to vomit, sprinkle some powdered aloe trimmings, salt, or ashes on those parts, and they will soon vomit.
Now begins the text of the fourth part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and of accidental displacement of bones.
Oh son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and laymen and those who do not regularly read the books of the ancients or understand one letter of them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I do not have it at present, but I have been obliged to do so at some time; and I have not admitted anything that follows, but only after a long reading of the books of the ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And therefore direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which includes the main knowledge and the best experiment; because it is used to improve your understanding and to relieve you of the burden of prolongation; and it is used to conclude the improvement; and it is shown in the end of the declaration; and it is formed into several forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two preceding chapters.
First Chapter.
Summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from those of which previous mention is necessary before we begin the remembrance of the broken and varied limbs of each one. So that we can say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the chapters to which they refer, for which in the beginning it is said by the craftsmen and at the station on the truth of those; so it is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
And so it is said that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or twist or hernia, it is customary at the beginning to apply leeches or leeching to that place, or any other means, if no cause prevents, as long as they do not weaken the effectiveness of the treatment, or if the one who is affected is elderly and weak, or if it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and small pieces of meat from pigeons and crab; and avoid large pieces of meat and filling up on foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of preventing an abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their usual diet first, which is customary for them.
And so when the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed on nutritious foods that are heavy and thick in them, such as bread made from wheat flour, water, rice, beans, cheese, fresh meat, and similar heavy foods, and this regimen is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and longer.
When bones are broken in men who are in their prime and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
However, nature adjusts and absorbs over the broken bone from all parts, similar to glue in which it swells and strengthens that part which is thus conglutinated and united, until the end of fortitude and firmness, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent its work.
For this reason, it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as we have said.
And you should know that the types of fracture vary according to the difference of the members, for a fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the ribs is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
Great variety of fractures in itself. And the types of fracture of the bone are varied in their own way; for some fractures are made curved another than those that happen in the stars; and some are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the leg, star, and addition proceeding and not proceeding, as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is in the plate and disruption in the skull, and the small fissure.
And to each type there is a proper torture in the restoration of it according to what will come to memory of it in its own places.
Great swelling of a bone fracture. For that reason, this is known as a bone fracture: the deformity of it, and from that prominence to the sensation, and when you feel that at your hand.
Therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not done by touching the bone with your finger when you touch the patient's agitation and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is deformity or a small crack, and you do not know if your hand is touching that or the compression of all; place something over it from the medicines of which you remember at that moment that is appropriate to the location; and make it straight by subtle restriction.
And you will know that the location when it is bent and not split into two or another thing like that does not occur in its entirety, as it remains all the part of the body; therefore, place something over it from your hour to rectify the deformity that occurs after it.
If an abscess occurs at that location, leave it open for several days until the abscess ceases; then apply a poultice made of equal parts of linen and mustard according to your ability and discretion.
You should know that the healing of the wound and its suppuration is less urgent than the treatment of the underlying condition that caused it.
Then apply a strong poultice when the memory of the wound returns.
If the underlying condition is severe, then it may be necessary to extend the affected member by two parts, such as the thigh or foot; or use a splint if the member is small; or use two cords or one cord and a splint.
And place your hand in the position that you use to hold the member in its natural location, while the extended parts of the member are supported, then perforate those additions with a needle and sew them according to your ability and discretion.
And be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation or any injury; and perforate according to your strength so that you apply the bandage evenly on both sides in the best forms.
And if at that hour you touch your hand to that place, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and balance it with the amount of your skill.
And if you apply excessive extension and compression, as foolish surgeons do when they move too much, it can cause the formation of an abscess due to their operation, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen due to their excessive movements.
And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on what I recommend; since you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance, size, and shape.
And for those that are small like the arm and the finger and similar to those, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
But those that are large like the cushion or the back, cover them with a thick and durable cloth, because the thinness of the cloth connects the large limb and strengthens it equally, in order that no macula be introduced.
And then begin, with your equal evacuation, place a bandage conveniently on that fracture, above the location of the break, with three or four layers after the limb has bled; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
And then go to the most stable part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it as much as possible without breaking your structure that you have strengthened the location of the fracture. And then approach the location of the fracture with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you take out a large piece from the location.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the location with the first bandage, and approach the bandages to the part that is farthest from the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place your hand between the bandages of a lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand in it for any reason.
And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gradually equalize it over these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or abscess in the location; and then place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and that which reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen it over those.
And if the cane's handles are made of laurel wood, and be formed skillfully; or of pi; or of palm ramps; and let the width of each handle be according to this form and figure:
However, make sure that the handle placed over that fracture is fatter and longer than the other handles, and let the length of the handle according to how it is placed on the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the other end of the handle with another band according to your first structure; and let the other end be placed above the field decently according to what we have said about the structure, and that your structure is according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
And make sure that the threads are made of thick and thin silk, and they should be of gold; and if the threads are thick, use them as I have seen in the operation of alcus fols placing the long threads of cord of gold twisted, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
It is not advisable to use very thin needles, as you will not be able to hold them properly and may cause damage between one thread and another, and it is not desirable that there be any gap in the space between them.
If the patient is lying on the extremities of the stakes near the restriction in those places, then place a soft cloth or woolen cloth over that area to prevent it from causing harm.
Some fractures are accompanied by bruising, and sometimes disruption in the spine, and you will find memory in that one in the second singularity of the capital.
And you should know that all broken bones do not need to be straightened on the first day; this is because the bone, when it is large, does not need to have anything placed over it for several days or seven or more, according to your security of the occurrence of an abscess.
This is the method of the plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsion.
Handmade device for the treatment of fractures, convenient for various complexities and mainly for women and children, which is placed over the affected area: do not apply heat or friction: take powder from ground wheat, and it is the flour that prevents the movement of the bone in the parts of the mill.
And if it is like that, do not apply the bandage to the affected area, but crumble the charcoal from the fire, and place the compresses of the non-specific or subtle; and then use that.
Another device for the treatment of fractures and dislocations and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapis lazuli, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one-third millet flour, of all ants' eggs. x; of mugwort and aloe vera ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all its crushed and ground and mixed with water or with charcoal from the fire if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this bandage, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more gently, and confers to many people.
Another method of applying a plaster that helps with fractures and twists: take equal parts of mallow, marshmallow, acacia, and Armenian bole, and mix them together.
All of these are ground in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders are mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Method of applying a plaster to joints and separated bones at those locations, and for pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take some linen cloth and immerse it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the location.
In this plaster, there is no virtue of restoration, but rather for drawing out abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Another method of applying a plaster that restores the broken: take some fig tree leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of applying a plaster that is opened and administered for the restoration of broken bones and when you want to resolve the long-standing abscess: take some powdered aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of eggs, all mixed together; grind them all and their powders with water, if the limb is not scalded.
If it is bleeding, then apply a moist cloth or a wet cloth from it and use it.
Another way of making a more effective plaster for the recovery of the member: take the roots of althea and semen of lily, balm, melliot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all equal parts and ground; all is mixed with a moist or dry or weak wine, according to the quality of the member and the color of it.
If you do not have wine in its free form that should be placed on the sixth member for its recovery, but a wax and oil cream is made; and it is recommended that it be melted between thickness and thinness.
If it is seen that it should be placed on the sixth member for its recovery and the causes in which the dryness of little heat is similar to mirra, enses and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Hand plaster that comforts the injury and pain: recipe equal parts of honey, of cheese, of peeled man's skins or penis of a rabbit, and of aloe, and of salt; three handfuls of flour and two of beaten egg shells and its covering, and make it into a plaster.
The amount should be according to the type of wound that is being treated and appropriately disinfected; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation and if the bone is not broken, then do not leave it for more than a few days. And if pain, inflammation or swelling occurs at the site, then remove it in that hour and place the plaster on it.
And take a cloth and marine sponge of lion's humid sea, and submerge it in warm water, and let that wash the wound until the swelling stops and the pain is eased; then leave the member to rest for an hour; and place a poultice made of linen soaked in hot oil and rose oil on it, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the abscess being healed, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and that the pain of it is eased.
And then gently apply that thin structure and apply a small and not too strong bandage for your first constraint, and gently heal the area inside.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need to apply bandages and constraints, then you should do so as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some wait until twenty days after you have appeared by the dislocation of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust it according to the increase of the food of the patient, after the reminder of it.
But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become very hard, then know that the food should not reach that; and therefore apply that area with a thin cloth soaked in warm water for the entire duration that you have removed it; and this is all three days; and increase the constraint a little, and for this operation the food reaches the member, and it heals better.
When those who call themselves bone setters of the broken limb when it is not restored to its original position, according to their custom, and when it is restored according to its curvature, they err in their operation, causing great fear, and if this is done incorrectly, it increases the ancient injuries and prolongs the time for healing.
I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable to assume that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of space, which penetrates the skull, which is located behind the bones, just like it does in the bone, and for this reason, this type is called "ascial"; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it without passing through the skin, and this type of fracture is called "absolute elevation".
And the extent of these two fractures is great or small, and whether the fracture is contracted or displaced; and the cause of this is a blow with a stick or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the extent of these two fractures is great or small.
And whether the fracture is displaced in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special type of fracture is called capillary.
And if the fracture is caused by a fall or a blow with a stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some bone fragments to enter the bone parts, and it is made in the concave place where the same thing happened to the ribs when they were hit and their fragments entered the bone parts.
This is especially done in the bones of humans, such as their skulls.
And all these special fractures are caused by pressure from sharp objects, such as stakes separated. And you will find the cause of everything in that place.
And you will recognize all these special fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their attempts and the rotten flesh that is on them.
And this special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that it means manifestly by fever, such as vomiting of choler, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, sincope, acute fever, and inflammation of the glands and swelling of those, and similar to their symptoms in major dispositions, these are not cured.
And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to your health, then you should begin the treatment of it.
When this cause occurs, if it has come to your hand in the beginning as it is usually done and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the preparation of the bone during the day on the fourteenth, completely prepared.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should prepare the bone on the seventh day, having that which has been left behind the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents may occur due to the incidents we have encountered.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas, covering the brain, and is small and atrophied, then you should incise the divided and atrophied part, according to what I have encountered.
And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should stop at the patient's side and that which has been left behind, and that you fill the place of cloths infused with vinegar and olive oil, and make a new covering of the wound until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert the needle straight through, and this is the form of it: And then administer another needle a bit wider than the first; and this is the form of it:
And then widen the needle more than the second.
And you should have different needles of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease for percussion on the needle to prevent the head from hitting and breaking it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then make sure to pierce it in the circumference of it, giving that you administer the needles with the shallow-prongs, which are called taravells not-deepening.
And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone from where it is approached, so that the taravel has a rounded extremity or margin over it, similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these needles a large number of those that suit each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, the end of which should be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity according to the quantity of this test.
And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of perforating around the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it along the cracks until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the bone or around that area.
And then insert the thinnest scissors you can find between each crack of the bone, and do it as gently as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause to damage the things that have appeared at that point, such as fine forceps.
And be sure to guard against any cause that the scissors touch the brain.
And so, after you have circumnavigated the bones and separated the flesh if it continues to be attached, extract that, covering it with a cloth that is rough and uneven like the roughness of those bones, but rather more thin and more delicate than other scissors.
And if there is any small fracture of the bones, then take that which you have from the instruments; and apply it to the wound to cure the wound with linens and find those that we have mentioned.
The other method of operation is long and frightening, which is said to be very dangerous; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you at the beginning that you discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed it behind the end of this slow and light scissors, which is the form:
And it is that the rounded part is lion and does not cut into any cause, and the sharp part is of the same length as the other, as often; because the rounded part should be adjusted to the flesh with the face of the sharp part cutting into the bone.
And then, approach the incision with a small blunt instrument until you have completely cut through the bone, and make sure the intestine does not fall into the wound that you are afraid of in any way, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he was asleep.
If there is any cause attached to the intestine in those places of the bone, then cut that one with the lens-shaped instrument at the end of the incision, and release that one with ease, which is released from its damage and its fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the intestine, and that which is cut or stuck to the bone is the surface of it, and is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with a fine razor that you have prepared from various quantities so that you can administer them in the most convenient place for them and the right one of those second that you lost your operation on that bone broken and the figure of it.
And you should administer the most dilute of those remedies, which you used at the beginning, and then use it gradually from the least subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest of all those remedies.
In all other small fractures of the bones and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to what you have lost for its correction.
And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in large fractures.
And if the wound is closed when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the same amount as the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and soak it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, doing this as gently as possible without causing pain to the patient, and then administer a thin layer of liniment, and do not press it except for the amount that the wound has, only until it is healed.
And leave that patient in the care of this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's safety; and then remove it and then administer medicines that are excessively dry, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of earthworms and aristolochia, and similar to those.
And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that it is to remove and not bite.
And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not net; and it is not in the surdity of eggs or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the pannicula of the brain, corromp that and poorly that, and accideys on the patient that malice maligna.
And accideys in the cavity of the head, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is thinned the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and then consider that if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic.
If no black magic occurs but rather medical treatment that is placed above, and it is due to the power of that treatment that causes the black magic, then cover that part with melted honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place a cloth on those lines, and place that over the affected area; and cure that with the specific cures that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the repair of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts but rather four parts, somewhat similar, or one of those some veins, because in it there are two bones, the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and it does not affect it only the atrocity and tortuosity and sinus.
If one of the two parts of it is broken, then cover that part with the same small bone in its nose, and equalize that fracture by using the same indicating instrument, and the same pointed instrument, until it returns to its natural shape. And do this for your own convenience, and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during the operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not allow for a proper view, then cover that part with a small bandage.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And cover the wound with a bandage on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, apply the seventh or tenth degree of the healing ointment.
And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and it should be large enough to fill the nostril.
And tell the ancient healers that the splints should be covered in bandage, and they should be changed every day, but I have not seen this; however, it is recommended that the piece should be covered with a piece of cloth soaked in honey and powdered mold; and after the bone is set and the cartilage is strengthened.
Sometimes, a tube should be inserted into the nose, in place of the throat, without any other cloth than a piece of linen from the lion; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent, and the patient is not prohibited from inspiring.
And this cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to do it, do so.
And if another tube accidentally sticks to the nose, apply a plaster made of cerate or of a decoction of willow bark and rose oil, or of diachylon.
However, if no tube accidentally sticks to the nose, then cover it with a plaster made of powdered sizami and powdered chalk from the album of cow's milk; and place your hand over the lion's mouth, and do not let the nose be touched by any cause.
However, if the bones of the nose are fractured slightly or crushed, then cover them with a plaster made of powdered sizami and powdered chalk from the album of cow's milk; and extract those with instruments that are suitable for those; and apply this plaster to the wound, and heal it with what encases and consolidates, and with what plasters are suitable.
If the patient has difficulty breathing due to a blockage in their nose, then apply pressure and administer a tube of medicine through it to clear the obstruction.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
If the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, then check if the fracture is only deformed and not completely separated or bent at the angles, in which case it can be straightened.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, then introduce the index finger on the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce the index finger on the right side of the patient's mouth; and push against that softness of the fracture with your other hand from the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize it.
If the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then strengthen those that you hope will remain as gold or silver or cloth; and place a piece of cloth over the broken jaw, and place a doubled-over cloth over it, and place a large sturdy sheet carefully made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold it above the second according to what you have prepared the ligature of it and what is appropriate for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be at ease, and place a cooling drink for their feverish lions (thirst).
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day, take it off and remove that; and correct what was already altered from it and apply this to the powder of moli, album of egg, or flour of cheese, before you have removed the cotton from it, and place a lion's wool over the application.
And then when that paste is applied and the bone's position is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; because this fracture takes three weeks to heal.
And if another incident occurs to the abscess, then administer that which we have said in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that abscess remain.
And if the fracture is displaced, then consider whether the bone is separated or just shifted; then you should thinly apply that which is appropriate for removing those from the instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then you should enlarge them with a bistoury according to your need.
And when you have removed those shifted parts, and if any remain, then if the wound openings are wide, close them; but if not, place one of the appropriate pastes on it and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter 5.
On the restoration of the scapula when it is dislocated.
The scapula is broken at the part where it meets the ribs, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When it is broken, separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are any mismatches in the matching, it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is completely healed.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is completely healed, is that you make two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken scapula, and the other stretches the neck to that part.
Then equalize the fracture with the ribs until it is in the second shape of its original form, and not in the prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and its size should be according to the amount of your needs; extend and elevate the scapula and tie the bandage inside your hand until the fracture is in its original form.
If you cannot pull the tip of the scapula to the parts forward, in order to reach the prostate, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion over their chest.
And the assistant lifts the muscle of the chest to the parts behind, until the bone of the scapula is raised to where it is in the prostate, and then you straighten the fracture and level it with the two ribs called the first.
However, if you feel any sharpness or pain in the scapula and its surrounding area, then do so over that and remove those sharpnesses to relieve the pain.
And if it is held in the bone, then you should make an incision in that area with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, after having removed the scapula the instrument that serves as a cipher; and this instrument is made of wood or iron, and this is the shape of it:
And it is similar to a spoon, the concavity of which is like this; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the thickness of it.
The length of the operation should be as long as possible; there should be two extremities present, with one being wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone from the shoulder is wide, and it is safe to sew it up, then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear infection, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if infection occurs, then apply a poultice with vinegar and oil on it, and place it over the affected area.
And even if the bone above the broken bone is not displaced; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you remove the splint, then you straighten it again and strengthen the ligament.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow behind their back to support their back when they are lying down in bed; so that the helper can be raised to the side of the patient, and thus the fracture of the furcula is raised by elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of the helper.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess in the place or after twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that time, and adjust it in the structure and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the furcula has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some weeks are made in men of that time.
Chapter 6.
Of the Restoration of a Broken Shoulder Joint.
A splint is broken in the wrong place and not at the fracture site, but on its edges.
And when the place of the fracture is broken â€” and it is broken in the wrong place â€” and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way that is possible for you.
And then place powdered chalk and starch on the fracture site; and then place duplicated cloth pads; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the splint or more.
If the layer is concave in any of the places of the splint, then you should level that concavity with starch, and then place the layer according to equality.
And then apply strength above the wound with a bandage of reasonable length and firmly hold the layer until it does not move from its place.
And consider the cord in each day; and all the while it is softening, apply another bandage and tighten it as necessary to keep it in its place.
And turn the patient on their left side.
The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the bandage, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and put it under the skin, then you should cut on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of apostema caut if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in some places of it and that remains; but the extremities of it are not fractured and are crushed and comminuted.
And when the foot is broken, it bends towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe pain; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the foot is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; then press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the ribs of the foot to the position of two fists, and gradually perform the operation of the foot and its equilibrium according to all possible and appropriate methods until it returns to its original shape.
Then place a poultice and bandage over the injured area on a soft cloth or bandage and cover it with a cloth; then gradually apply this to the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and when the swelling has subsided, strengthen the fracture with a splint; and consider the swelling throughout the day, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
If it is necessary to remove the scab or purulent matter, pain, or abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should take and remove that, and eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred due to that hand's method of healing; and if you see that it is ready to be healed, then return the plaster, if necessary.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the larger parts where they are located; and at their extremities, which are near the ribs, they do not occur except for those that are cartilaginous. And you should not be afraid of the pain of the patient, but rather examine it with the mentioned methods.
And the restoration should be as equal to the fracture as possible, according to the method mentioned, until it is completely healed, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that.
And if the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing felt by those who have coughed, and for that reason the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in handling, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And the ancients were skilled in that method with great care.
And they said: cover the patient with blankets that generate inflammation and heat, so that the belly is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
We should not do that in order to avoid causing an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it already occurs, then we help with that.
And they said to those who are above the wound that they should be covered with warmth and that they should suck out the strong; and it seems like reasoning, but however it is feared that the warmth will bring excess fluids to the area due to weakness.
And they said to the patient: "Cover that place with wool that has been submerged in warm oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, as if you were wrapping them again after the second reddening; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe compression that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, place a covering over the patient, then cut open the wound, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that keeps the cyphac, the rememoration of which is preceded, and cut through the bone to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs, then cover and insert powder in warm oil and place it over the wound, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him be placed on his left side while he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter Nine.
Of the Restoration of Fracture of the Sacrum and Coccyx.
Sometimes, fractures occur in the vertebrae of the neck, and they are often accompanied by their attachment, and similarly to the sacrum and coccyx. And when such an accident happens to someone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if their bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot be made firm again nor extended nor strengthened, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
And if they feel pain in them when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
If you see the spines of the neck like that and want to know if they are healed or not, then consider their feet.
If you see that they have already become soft, and if something happens to them in the groin, and when they lie on their back, they are unable to urinate and defecate, and some people turn over on their stomach and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat them.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of them is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a lancet dipped in warm oil or honey; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the plasters that are comforting and existing, and strengthen it on that spot; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until they are healed.
If the wound on the bone has separated from it or for some other reason, then cover it with a bandage and keep that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
If the back of the bone is broken and it is at the end of the spine, then insert your finger into the anus on the other side of the body, and align the broken bone as much as possible; and then place a bandage and splint on it, if necessary, and strengthen that.
If you feel that the bone has been broken in it, then treat that wound and keep it; and care for that wound until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the wide.
The bones of the ribs are attached to each other, and if they break, the fracture is only in the extremities of those and are inserted in the length and decline to the parts below; and if the patient feels pain in that location and puncture, and the bed is surprised when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over the area that is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you equalize the second that is apparent to you by equality over the area that is similar to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is in the long or that has already declined to the parts behind, then you make the patient lie on their belly above the area prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have equalized it, place a bandage on it, and place your hand on that star of the fust or of the codena, and press firmly on the area where you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity with that which is placed in the area where that takes the splint according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or their back.
But if an abscess occurs, then you cease from extending it and the restoration of it until the abscess is sedated, and place on it that which was previously prepared; and then return to the restoration of it, and press firmly on that which is covered.
If the bones in the spine are fractured or crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you grip it at the point where the meat is thickest according to this form:
And if it is attached in two extremities of two pieces, then raise the location and hang it there.
And place the patient on a bed; and then remove the broken arm from the place where it meets the shoulder until it reaches the tip of the bone in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
And then hang some heavy object or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor places the fracture together again, until the fracture returns as it was before.
And the other hand is that the patient be placed on their back and support their head with a pillow; and then command two assistants that one of them holds what is above the fracture, and the other holds the pus behind the patient; and each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be even stronger, then strengthen it on the fracture with the pillow and on the other pillow, and each of the two assistants extends their part.
And therefore if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the pillow on the cushion and the other behind the fracture in the hollow.
And similarly if the fracture is in the hollow, then place the pillow on that place and in that hollow.
And equal to that with ease and work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and how it is applied well, then strengthen it if there is no risk of abscess.
If a pustule occurs, leave the stricture in place until the seventh day, and place a soft bandage over it to keep it clean and dry until it heals, and then apply a new one.
The method of applying the bandage is to place plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; then adjust the arm on the support, and place your hand on the affected muscle.
Then place the cloth and bandage on the arm support to keep the arm in its proper position, unless there is any reason to prevent it from being broken.
And then use splints.
And place the splint that is most close and strong among the others over the fracture; and place the width of the splint between each one, and make the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three digits of each part.
And then apply bandage over the splints and the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is important that your structure over the location of the fracture is very straight. And if the fracture is more curved, then the structure is less straight.
And so if you see the position of the splints and the structure as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its position, then do this.
And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and the splints inside for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the limb in all its parts for three days so that it does not occur in the location properly or inflamed; or it is prohibited for food to come to the member because of the disposition of excessive structure; and therefore, correct all this according to what we have said.
But if you are sure that none of these causes will occur, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands be above their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant's full belly, filled with wool equally, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, so correct that entirely with your skill.
And place the food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is too strong in the beginning before it begins to strengthen; and later cover that food with a cloth.
According to custom of the assistant and the nurse of the patient, it is that they should be strengthened in fourteen days; and later cover that food with a cloth, and wash it and administer it and medicate it with the remedies that correct that.
And if the fracture is not healed after that time, then do not remove from that ligament and those splints within the days or within two months.
Chapter 12.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two branches; one is small, and that is the one that is attached to the shoulder, and the other is large and that is the one that is attached behind the small one, from the part that is left.
And if the large or small intestine is punctured alone, or both are punctured together.
And when the small intestine is punctured above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is more delayed.
And when the intestine is punctured below the fracture, its repair is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is even worse when two bones are punctured together.
Therefore, if the bone that is punctured is the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its repair by placing a small extension in place as soon as possible.
But if the large intestine is that which is punctured, then it is necessary to place a more forceful extension.
And if both intestines are punctured together, then it is necessary to place a much stronger extension.
And it is necessary to place the extension of the hand over a cushion, and the palm of the hand above, and the fingers below, more than all the others mentioned, and the ear should be lower than the others mentioned, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
And place a cushion under their head or shoulder to prevent them from falling.
And the assistant should extend their arm on the side farthest from the injured hand or arm, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
And the doctor should set the bone back into place according to the best figure that can be found.
If there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the splinters to their original place with your skill.
If there is a separate fracture that cannot be reunited by your hope of restoration, then do as described above.
But if the fracture is in a place that has already been treated, then take care of that treatment.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then apply a cloth soaked in rose oil and white wax, and make it thin yet strong, and place it over the subtle structure until the abscess is healed; and afterwards remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster of powdered myrrh and clay, and place it on the strongest part of the fracture.
And you should know that the number of ribs in the arm is variable, either it is broken into one piece or two pieces together.
And then place your hand on the location of the fracture as strongly and forcefully as possible, and when more of the restriction is above the fracture or below it, place the restriction a little softer than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened to be just right between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close to these days. And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that happens to the member, and then you should ensure that you place the member in a straight position before it stops that problem.
And do not hold the member too tightly until it recovers, and then return the restriction.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has reunited and is like those, then straighten everything with your skill.
And if nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually loosen that one and lay it aside for several days until it can receive nutrition, and strengthen it.
But if the patient does not suffer from any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be removed within approximately 20 days or around those.
And have the patient's hand suspended by their skill of moving it, and let them sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 24 days, or the strong one is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the condition of the complications and the dispositions of skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of fracture of the wrist and those mentioned.
Know that the pinch of the knee and the knuckles of the fingers are prone to fracture, and do not occur except due to slight trauma.
When the patient has a fracture or slight trauma, have them lie down with their legs evenly extended, and place your hand on top of that extended leg.
And the assistant extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that are misaligned with good alignment.
And then have them place a poultice and bandage, unless there is no risk of abscess; and place your hand on top of that according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the wound is in the parts of the hand, and then make a similar shape of cloth, and command the patient to press that on their palm wound; and have it pressed firmly against the cloth.
And have the cloth with the meat on it be lifted, so that the meat is applied to the palm; and press that according to what is suitable.
If the fracture is at the parts deformed, then place your hand above and below the part, so that the wound is opened and straightened; and then place the structure, as if it is being rolled between the mentioned blades.
And if the fracture occurs at one of the nuts of the mentioned bones, then if it is possible, secondly, place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small wedge to elevate the fracture and not make it crooked.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned bones, such as in the middle one, or in the index, or in the ear, or in the ring, then place your hand on the mentioned bone; or all of them continuously, and it is better; or place a small wedge above, as we have said in the wrist.
And consider, in your restoration, and place it, the disposition of abscess careful and opposite â€” to that operation â€” to that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is related about it.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of the bone fracture of the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be second-degree when they are converted to the part that is most painful.
And the restoration of it is done by applying a bandage over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
And then the healer extends the bandage to its full length according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is proposed to the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the part of the femur, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is proposed to the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the front, and the extension to the parts behind.
And then the doctor should place his hand under the affected bone and gently push it back into its natural position, so that it is joined by a good joint; then apply a poultice and bandage, unless the member has an abscess. But if the abscess is in that member, then leave it for several days until the abscess has drained, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage for that member should be made like this: cover the fracture with a hard bend, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; then place the cushion under the calf and the back of the thigh.
And introduce a long, thin piece of cloth between the thigh and the cushion, and let the ends of the cloth go through the two parts on the side that is more accessible; then roll it over the cushion and thigh to cover any excess from the bandage.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a splint on the bone of the cushion.
And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
And then begin the strong contraction from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as much as you extend the layer of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and looser and wetter.
And then extend both ends of the strip to the parts that reach the cavity of the foot, and strengthen the other end of the strip with the other part in order that the layer does not remain in its own location.
And then lay the contraction over that, so that none of those things happen to the member: corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar things; and if any of those things happen, then count yourself as undone from it, and rectify what happened immediately, according to what we have said above.
But if there is a bone that presses on the bone that you are putting in place, then try to equalize it as much as possible; and if not, do so on it and return it, and cure what follows from the memory of when it was healed.
Some splints are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh bone, which are adjusted to its shape, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of this fracture, do not cause the patient to become paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied on the other leg, as it is necessary for him to quickly regain movement.
And you should know that the thigh bone is strengthened in 10 days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus bone.
You should know that the fracture of the humerus bone occurs in the arm, but it does not affect the surrounding muscles.
And if it does affect the fracture, it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is a minor or major injury, and over this, everything is based on sensation.
And the restoration of it should be equal to what was broken from the parts of it with the mentioned enterings that are aggregated and joined as much as possible for equality, ease, and convenience and making.
Then place a poultice and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen above the stricture to that convenience.
Then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, including the abscess cautery and similar to those so that it is opposed to all accidents that are convenient for that one until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called the name of the rib; and the other is thin, and it is called the clavicle.
And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that one, the restoration of it is made equally, and the operation of it is one.
If two bones are fractured together, the cushion is turned to all parts.
And if the more delicate bone is fractured, the cushion is turned to the denant parts.
And if the larger bone is fractured, then leave that one behind, and those are causes that you have not yet understood.
And then administer extension, equality, and ligature of the splints according to that equality.
However, if the fracture of the bone is not healing due to lack of strength, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the arm, there is a cause for operation when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then take weights of lead that are placed behind the causes that are placed on the palms; attach them to those that are small groceries, and not from the hands, and be the longest of those according to the longest of the arm, and the one closest to the elbow.
And then wrap each in two blankets of appropriate length, and place one over the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and the end under the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three blankets in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, so that this structure prevents the bed from tilting to the right and left, and it is well-positioned.
And then a wooden board of appropriate length is placed on the bed; and it is placed under the bed to support it.
And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And then consider the bed each day and study it for any signs of worsening, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens that indicates that it is not healing, then stop doing what you are doing until it is healed.
Chapter 17
Of the fracture of the talus bone and the bones of the foot and those mentioned.
The talus bone does not always have fracture; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and in those mentioned, few fractures occur, and they do not happen to them but only in certain positions.
And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above themselves between them, then place the patient on his back prepared on the ground as if he were walking.
And then place one foot on top of that which is lifted above those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under the belly of the patient with two flat surfaces.
And then strengthen that bandage to the leg structure below, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
And if three or four days pass, then you will remove the bandage, where you will find the bones equalized, or they are broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows.
If the patient's toes are curled, straighten them and place them in a natural position, and then gently stretch them and guide them back to their original position. Then place your hand along the length of the curled toe, and put a bandage on it; then move the table with this one that you have recommended, and tighten the bandage properly.
If the toe is curled more than two or three, then place your hand on each of these toes, wrapped in a lion-skin cloth, and tighten the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the ends of the table over the belly of the foot so that it holds well.
And it is important for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that were told to you in other cases of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at any accident that occurs.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the nose of the woman and the bone of the shinbone and the ankle of the man.
When the woman's cervix is trapped, then perform a cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the back of the belly, and hold it there.
And then the midwife should pull the woman's cervix out, and do so with great care; and then the woman should be shaken, and her back raised little by little, until all of that is done carefully and the trapped bone returns.
And then place powder on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently turn her on her side and remove the urine, and then return her to her original position, and replace the first powder.
Do this for seven days or around that time, until it is restored.
And if you wish, take an ox's bladder and strengthen it over the wound of the woman with a catheter; and inflate the entire bladder into the woman's womb, and then gently blow into the catheter until the bladder is fully inflated inside the womb, because the fracture returns.
And if it is necessary to fill it with cotton and linen for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
When the bones of the fingers of a man or woman are fractured, then apply in the restoration and drilling of that which we have recommended for the bone of the leg.
And that which is drilled should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that does not occur, especially to him who has some study and uses and understands this my free hand; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via drilling in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
In the wound of the man when it is fractured, take guarguamela of gold, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and wrap it, and let it be laid for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture, and especially if the bone is large and as big as the bone of the thigh or the forearm, or similar to that, which you should be careful and use forceps as soon as the conditions for forceps are present.
And if the fracture is not complete, you should be careful to retain it in place, unless you powder it with three grains of sugar, if there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
However, if an abscess occurs carefully, you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before it has passed, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harm.
However, if the fractured bone is projecting above the knee, you should be careful to reduce it, and equalize it with your hands, at your discretion and with as little extension as possible.
If the extension is not to your liking and the equilibrium of it does not match the size of your hands, then you reduce that to the size of your hands with this tool; which is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight inches, and the width of which is according to the extent of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses these three or four to match the amount that is needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
And it should be round, and it should be in the shape of the part to be treated, so that it is not folded during the operation.
And it should have a sharp edge at which there is a margin on both ends; and the underside of it should be thick and the top of it should go into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labra volentz atelarem", so this is the name of the tool.
Because of which, it should be supported by a pillow at the end of its sharp edge, raised above the end of the prominent bone.
And push that one into a narrow space where the bone returns, and let it be equal to some balance.
And then force the extremities of the fracture together between them, and if the extremity of that bone is thin, and you do not take it with the instrument for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone into the place where the instrument has power.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all that we have recommended, then insert that part which should be with the scissors that we have mentioned; or saw that part in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those parts that remain in the bone of sharpness and small cuts.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences great pain after the reduction, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you confer upon the patient with great benefit.
When your restoration is completed, which you do for the bone, and then submerge dressing in a tight black stiptic, and especially if it is in summer, and you do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause more pain and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of the bone's complementary restoration, and leave the wound open so that the bent part can be inserted with forceps and wrapped according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to tear the wound over the fracture, as this was done by some doctors, and they caused harm on their patients' legs, making them dead or worse. This is dangerous. And if the wound is larger, soft, and different from the fracture of other bones.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and cause pain in that place, then do not place stitches over those stitches, but rather apply that bandage of hard cloth in place of stitches and press on those parts.
And when the wound begins to close after a day or two, which in that place generates pus, then remove the cloth that you placed over that and administer poultices, using those that we usually use as medicine for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain in each day that matters and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member in such a way that the swelling runs from it to the parts behind to facilitate.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or discharged from it, then know that here are the remedies for the small ones to cover and seek the pain in order to test. And of those remedies, those that remain separated and extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and make it painful, perforate you to insert those second that to you is possible.
And if the pain becomes purulent or putrid, it is a different kind of corruption and putrefaction, then cover that with one of those that are suitable for that cure which is preceded by the story in its own chapter.
And of that in which you cover that the best service and you make present your foot: when the large ones are cut off, emerge over the member that is there with the bones of the body and the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor the extraction of it that many things have happened per aquo the death; having left that inside which is greasy, because strong it will be for if you approach xx days or xxx; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not leave that.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of a fracture.
Nodes often occur at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and are shaped like a member; and they strongly prevent the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore consider if the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stoptic properties such as aloe, senes, mirbane, serpacollo, acrassia, and similar to those; or you take some or all of them, and confirms those as a stoptic, or album of honey, or vinegar, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it over the node for good compression.
And do not apply too much pressure that it does not dislodge the node for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen on that layer of lead descentment, which lead has the property of retaining all that is applied in the limbs.
If the joint has already become hard and narrow and necessarily causes pain in that way, then cut it along the most prominent part of it, and scrape off the excess and inflamed parts, or remove those with a sharp instrument before they become ulcerated; and cure it within the time that it becomes healed.
Chapter 21.
When a fracture is restored and brought back to its original shape, but the member does not return to its natural position.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the member returns to its original shape, but it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligaments and tendons of that part, made not according to its natural course; or because there is an excess of stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the member; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debility.
And the treatment for this is to make the patient lie down on their back and keep them there until the swelling has subsided; and administer baths, and apply compresses of figs and lettuce on it.
And then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws out any remaining nourishment, or continues to bring warm water through it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of broken bones that have been restored improperly and prevent surgery on them for this reason.
When an injury occurs to a member that has already been restored, it is necessary to correct the deformity and swelling of the broken bone and its nodosity, and to shape it into the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, at that time you should not receive the word of that person who exists that that member is newly broken.
But if many foolish doctors and restorers have done this on our earth; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear to the patient, which is mortal.
If the limping and stiffness are recent, then it is recommended to apply a softening lotion containing the mollifying herbs such as elderflowers and rue, and melilot, and similar ones; and this should be made into an ointment like diascoral well prepared; or it should be made of the pounded root of elderflower and be mixed with grey gualine or oil of camphor, and this should be applied to the affected area; or it should be made of soft fatty substances and be rubbed into the skin of a columbine, and similar ones like those of medicines that are named consolidation.
And some vinegar is dissolved in light friction with the wettest ones, and this should be administered to move the member in all parts at all hours.
If the twisting has already become severe and is made strong and converted into a stone and provokes the need for treatment with iron, then it is recommended to apply the pus under the skin and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and to scrape off any excess from the stiffness of that meat with subtle surgical knives, and this should be administered to facilitate movement in that area.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and great injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs in a dislocation, it is immediately necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not to delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in that case, reducing the dislocation is difficult.
And to prevent this, it is necessary that the limb not be overstretched or extended in the hour of inflammation, because swelling causes spasms and slow pain.
When that happens, it is necessary to approach the patient's bedside and allow the swelling to subside before reducing the joint; then apply heat to the limb with hot water and oil, and reduce the joint as easily as possible.
And all the limb should be treated with the oil that will bring its memory back to its place.
And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the hip bone, enter into the part that was just left.
Chapter 24:
Cure for dislocation of the jaw.
So dislocated jaws that are not tart; and the dislocation of the other is made in one of two ways: either they are reinserted into their places by a little removal, and are slightly molded; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out, and they cannot hold that nor close their mouth, and the tongue of them is wrapped in their palate.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then return to the greater positions as if by a slight cause.
When the dislocation is complete and completed, then cover that it be administered reduction of it more slowly, and not be delayed for too long.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's finger in the patient's mouth, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, inside the patient's mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers equally, and command the patient to stop their jaws and release those that are in each part; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until it is easy to reduce both and does not delay the reduction of both, as we have said.
And when they are reduced and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place something soft on those wounds with wax, and make it from cera and oil, to facilitate movement of the jaw.
And the patient's body should be lying on their side, with the head between two pillows, so that it does not press against the back or left side; and do not force any cause; having the same view, use a lion's tongue, until when the pain is relieved and the jaws are unlocked, then turn them to their will.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food, drink, and breathing, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any hour and they are not converted to their usual places, then apply cold compresses and frequent fever, and strong heat is applied to the patient's belly, and strong heat and vomiting pure bile.
And when you see that, know that it is fatal; and those who have that happen to them die within a few days.
Chapter 25.
The reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula is not dislocated from the back due to its connection with the chest; and some vertebrae are dislocated at the front, and that is felt as pain.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the area with your hand using strong pressure, and it will return.
Then place a poultice and powders on that area and strengthen it.
The extremity of that which is connected to the body and continues with that, is not dislocated on any day; however, it should be reduced and splinted according to what we have said and according to what is available to you.
Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that area, and command the patient to remain at rest until it is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the elbow to the opposite side.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front of the nerves.
And it is more commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck at the parts behind the elbow, and especially in those in which the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those in which there are many muscles, it is stuck out with difficulty.
And many people often suffer from contusion or bruising, and the muscle of which is inflamed with abscess, and it is known that it has been dislocated.
Therefore, you should know that you are overburdened with it, and then proceed to the treatment of it.
When it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are devastated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you notice differences between them; and you feel in the head of the muscle concavity and behind the devastation, touching the head of the muscle like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you must press or pull, and you should feel a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of this is that the practitioner raises the patient's hand above the parts behind; and places their fingers under the devastation of the patient, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner raises the patient's hand, and extends it in front; and places it back gently.
But if it does not return, and from the beginning of what caused the dislocation, several days later, the patient should be given an embrocation that softens and melts like if they were made of aloe, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported underneath by a pillow made of wool that is equally between elevation and restriction, and the doctor places their hand on the sacrum, elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not hang down, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not hang down, because at that moment they return to their place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert their muscle behind the titillus of the patient and lift the titillus of them to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly. But if the patient is heavier, then cover them with something else that another cause should be suspended, so that it does not burden the other, because the dislocation returns quickly.
When reduced alone by another method: place a long wooden stick on the ground, shaped like a mortar, not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then cover the patient's head with cloth lions, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other part's limbs for strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
If it is difficult to reduce the joint by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a stick of the length of two spans, and its width of four fingers, and its thickness at the end of the handle in the form of a button:
and then place a cloth lion on the head to prevent the stick from entering the patient.
and then place the stick under the patient's elbow, and extend the hand or arm over the stick between the parts behind; and tie the stick to the assistant and the arm and the end of the hand.
And then place one arm on a scale of the second level according to its height, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other thing should be suspended from the other part, as the joint is soon affected.
And if the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible manner, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and prepare an ointment of powdered myrrh and egg white on all the muscle, as it is rolled over, and then place the bandage behind the joint, as it is stretched decently; and roll the bandage over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it be, and do not press the hand of the patient for seven days.
And cover the food of the patient little by little, as soon as the member is comfortable, because it is more beneficial for its cure.
And then the food should be given more frequently in seven or five days and should be exercised with a movement; and if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already cured.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has accumulated in it or for another reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
And if everything has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced due to some swelling, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot be raised to the parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the top of the muscle, which have been incised or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
From the dislocation of which is made, the hand and arm or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And the other splint is applied in that place, and cure it within the time it is healed.
And if the healing is slow in the member and delayed in its movement, then use hot compresses until that gravity is alleviated and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part nearest to the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when it is found behind the clothing or behind the touch according to any figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is not adjusted, that is your declaration manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And if you see that the shoulder is dislocated, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to the abscess cautery, because if you see the abscess cautery, the reduction is difficult, and not all is healed; and especially when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocations, and more painful, and more dangerous than the others, and can cause death.
And the restoration of the foot, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended in two directions, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the side and below, and the finger should be applied to the joint at the base of the palm where it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it as if you were bending your arm at the elbow, until you strike the chest at the base of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
And if two assistants are extending the arm, then hold it firmly with two assistants to prevent it from moving during extension.
Then rotate the arm in all directions, so that it is wrapped in a rolled cloth or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint at the base of the palm, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubricity of the joint and facilitate its return.
And then approach the reduction of the uterus that should be placed on that pad where there is astringency and execution with egg white, and it should be extracted from the stricture descending, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and it should be left for several days.
And then it should be dislocated; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you should dislocate the ligament of it and leave it there.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then you should reapply the plaster and ligament, and leave it there for several days until it is extracted; and then dislocate it.
But if an accident occurs to the joint during reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or pause on the moved joint with a greasy cloth; and then it should be laid down, and left there for several days. And then place that there, and put that in the bath; and when dry, then you should rub the joint with a cool friction, and then repeat on the moved joint with a warm cloth, one day, and the second, and the third. When using a medicinal bath, ensure it is not too hot.
And if you wish, place your hand on the wound of a wet and scalded cow and apply a strong pressure; then make some incisions, as that wound is moist and reduce it to its proper position.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
The shoulder of the chest has sometimes been dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, but rather than causing harm to other joints, it is important to have speed in reducing it at the time of the dislocation, because the joint may become abscessed or something may happen in that abscess.
And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the doctor extends the arm of that person, and the surgeon places his hand or his palm on the immediate vicinity of the joint, and pushes it back to its proper position.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already on the patient's abdomen, then place the patient's hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the patient's hand should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is near the joint.
And if he returns soon, good; and if not, then immediately apply the ointment to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, it will not be softened or cured before the days pass.
However, the joint may be twisted; and the patient does not know any cause, but the hand is softened and cannot bear any cause; then you should know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and then do not put it in the joint but apply a pointed cautery to the surface of the joint and firmly press on that.
And when the abscess has returned, then place it on the ointment that we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of that should be exercised.
If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity in it, then apply cold water and friction to some parts of the body until they are relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of the aforementioned dislocations.
Some parts are dislocated in these aforementioned cases.
And when one of those parts is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then press the dislocated part and push it back to its place until it returns.
And then support the head of the dislocated part, suspend the weight of that part to which it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
And when it is not straight, apply the second method according to that description, and do not stop removing it on that day and exercising its movement, and apply the second method at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
If the patient's abdomen is also dislocated, and that part is attached to that part, then perform the first operation, which is to enter and heal it before it is healed.
And similarly, do the same when other parts are also dislocated.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and the remaining vertebrae of those places remain motionless, then there is no cure, as death approaches the patient.
And in such cases, the patient's excretion is forced by his will, and he cannot retain it; and the other muscles or ribs or arms or legs of the patient, or one of those, or if one of the vertebrae of that place remains motionless, then the other muscles are softened and the removal of those is made in four directions.
Then it is already removed to the back parts and is called lumbar.
If the patient's condition is such that you should consider whether the cause is impotence, because in that case neither cure nor healing of any kind is possible.
However, in cases where it is seen through tapping or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure for such speech prolixity, which most returns to profit; however, I have already opened and enlarged from that one of which few people escape the excess of it, because of its proximity to understanding and explanation, which he has exposed and formed from various instruments of that kind, which will show you that and explain it to you.
And of those, there is no cure except for that which occurs naturally in the back, which I will recommend to you.
And it is that the patient should be extended on his face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and should be extended behind that instrument moistened with something so that the chest of the patient is not compressed.
And then place a stick straight under them, leaning it against the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the bed.
The first servant holds the stick, and should not be stationary in the pit; and another servant holds the other one according to that form.
And then wrap the patient's head with a cloth and leave the lion-tailed whip firmly in place; extend the end of the whip to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other strap over their legs, under their legs, and support their chest; and then adjust all the straps and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
And then the servant should extend the strap to the part of the stick where it is placed, and should not leave the two sticks and the straps in their places as they were placed, but should not be stationary there as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the spine, strong enough to return, or places one hand on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table before returning.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three brasses, and lean it against the wall where we said the patient should be placed between the end of the table. And place the other end of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches inward until the spine is enclosed and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the back of the table that is rotating around the middle; and you should stand on the ground with the patient's head in the rear of the two sticks, the length of which is about an arm, and the patient's head in the rear of the other two sticks; and the length between each stick should be a palm, and it has been done in each stick through which the back turns, and each should be firmly held on the ground so that it does not sag.
And there should be a rod made of wood in which the bone is broken, and it should be rolled in the two spaces between the two rods.
And at the end of it there is a space in which the rod is made, the length of which is one palm and is rolled like that; and in the other two rods, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the bands that you have strung in the chest of the patient in the space where the head is, and the bands that you have strung in the thighs of the patient in the rod that is to be placed under his feet.
And then place one minister at each rod and have him twist the rod with his hand, as the surgeon has told us.
And after the spine is returned and the wound is closed, then apply an adhesive bandage made of egg albumin, and stop; and place a flat plate on top of it, the width of which is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the quantity that took up the wound, and on the part of the spine, it is.
And then use the bandage we have mentioned, and feed the patient with subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any inflammation in the area at the end of the healing process, then apply medicines that are moilific and line-clearing, and follow the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is administered in that place a plaster.
And some vaginals occur in the back of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already exists for that reason should not be done to you at this time, because it will do great harm to you.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also occur at those joints which are removed and concave.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, because it is dislocated at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inside parts, or at the outside parts.
And mainly it is dislocated at the joints behind, and sometimes at the joints in front or at the joints behind.
And when you adjust the cushion of the healthy person to the sick person, it is longer and the knee is more bent than in the healthy one, and the sick person cannot straighten their leg, and this is the place where if they lie down, an abscess may form, so that the head of the cushion has already reached there.
And when this happens to the person who experiences dislocation, it is at the front joints, because those accidents of his are opposite to this accident.
And when this happens to the person who experiences dislocation at the front joints, it is by extending the other leg secondarily, but not bending that one which has the pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go and cannot be carried there; and the urine of that person is retained and the swelling of that person forms an abscess, and you must carry that person on a stretcher.
And it is often the case that the person to whom such dislocation occurs at the back parts does not extend the elbow, nor can they bend the arm that bends the elbow, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that place.
The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been cured by having it close to you, then administer reduction according to its arrangement, but not in that curative method; and therefore do not expect that in that there be any preliminary.
If it is of the person in whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should apply that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and the front parts, and also to the right and left, whereby it returns strongly and does not require any other cure.
However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare a strong and extend the cushion of the part farthest from the joint, or the hand of the patient, or the cloth that is laid over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that places the hands behind the breasts of the patient; and then strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the cloth.
And if the extension is from the neck to the shoulder, or from the back to the waist.
And if the extension is of all those in a row, when the patient is raised by his own head and hangs down.
This type of extension is particularly common in all four cases.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for each special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient supine on his back; and place your hand on the ribs in that place where the head of the ribs meets the loc which is left hanging down; and extend the ligament towards the angle to the most distant part of the furcula.
And another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's arms, and press the large part of the patient's back and extend towards the parts below by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
And this special method is the most effective cure for this member, which is reduced more than other methods.
However, if it is excused from you and you do not obey the entrance of this healing method, then it is necessary to bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, light rope, above their ankles and below their knees.
And the length of each should be equal to four times the quantity, and the patient's chest should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
And then the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to twice the quantity of two arms.
And then order a strong young man to traction the head of the cushion, and another young man should be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should pull the cushion with great force, so that the joint returns to its place at speed.
However, in the proper reduction, when the dislocation occurs at the front part, then order the patient to lie on their back as soon as we have recommended in the having frozen; and strengthen the bandage over the chest of the patient properly and over their chest.
And then place two boards under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the board under their chest, on which they will be wrapped in warm cloth, so that the patient is not suffocated by the board being between their thighs, so you must extend the parts behind them without pulling.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the joints, then make sure that the board is extended more widely, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the affected joint, and the other hand covers it, and at that covering pause the one who is extending the parts behind them at the part of the elbow.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; having a pillow under their head, as if they were lying on a bed, if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated at the front parts, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and it is over their face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it should be administered compression with an ointment on the place where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what has been said, and the splint of the reduction of the patient is not removed from you, and you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see that those are equal and the patient extends their other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member, according to what has been said, returns; and then you adjust two things and press and extend the band where the limb is not sore in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and the other under the other.
Then, if you see those joints in place, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and remove it again according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again in a splint for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, namely, it is dislocated forward, backward, and to the side; and it is not dislocated outward.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place his cushion on the side; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient on their side, so that they can be supported; place your face close to theirs, and place their foot between your feet; and then make sure their hand is held firmly against the back of their neck, and another minister extends their leg inside so that it returns to its place.
And the support of their back is done by placing a cushion under them that does not labor.
And then place that plaster on it and make the back adhere to the cushion, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient's bed for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of them to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the ligaments of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Chapter thirty-three.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Sometimes the talus is dislocated by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated at an angle, and the dislocation of it is made either to the inside or to the outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus inflates and protrudes from the part to which it is dislocated.
The cure of its dislocation is a difficult task, and it is that it should be extended by the ease of the hands and should be equalized within the time when it returns.
And in the cure of it when it is dislocated at an angle, one should make the patient lie on his back, and hold that one a strong and capable servant from the part behind his back in the middle position of it.
And then you should take your right hand and draw the foot of the most raised part, and your left hand from the part behind the foot in the position of the calf.
And then approach the foot to your right hand, and approach the left hand with two fingers, and extend the left hand; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
And make those two fingers as you have counted.
And then push the chest of the foot towards the third side of the bed, and you are at the back.
So if you return in one or two ways using this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation until it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it by this method, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and place something between the cushions of the patient, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or towards the band that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their part, and the pillow should be extended between the cushions of the patient so that the body of the patient is not pulled to the parts behind its extension.
And the doctor then realigns the dislocation at its place, and another assistant holds the clean cloth to the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and your health is declared after its reduction, then apply a strong bandage to it, and tie the foot to the bed.
And be careful not to press the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not harm it.
And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third or fourth day, and forbid the patient to walk for ten days. But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation has completely dissolved and healed, as that would not help with the cure.
And if the abscess bursts, then be careful to administer in its cavity what we have described in our previous narrative, in another place for healing and soaking, until it is regenerated.
Chapter 34.
Of the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations of the feet.
That which is dislocated should be stretched out as much as possible; and this is not difficult, if done in front of the patient.
If the dislocation is in the ankle of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be there with them as if you were going to continue.
And then you should stand by the patient's foot, and place their foot on what is near the joints, and then step on that with your foot to bring it back into its original position, and so that you see that it is as good as new and does not appear in the prominent position.
And then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, and has two covers, and then strengthen that with a structure that is decent and firm for three days; and then remove it and let it rest for several days, until it is restored and assured to be as good as new.
Chapter 35.
On the specific types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other way.
When any of these causes occur, and you perform the cure and restoration of that, then certain complications may lead to death.
And for that reason, do not assume that the cure of that is known to you from long use, mercy and pity, but rather be patient, not hasty or presumptuous; and use in the beginning of medicines that cure tumors carefully, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for relief from the illness, and in which some hope appears. And therefore, as soon as possible, try to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, giving that it engenders a tumor carefully.
And therefore, if the member returns after they want it, then administer a regimen that cures tumors carefully and heals the pain by means of drying substances that are suitable for it.
If dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones that are separated, then you should perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple injuries of that kind in the places of those.
And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what has preceded my preaching; because that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own time. Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed. Amen.
