Oh, students, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion and because of its explanations and because of its declarations, I believe that I have completed what I promised to you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of amputation has been completely absent from our region and from our time, until quite recently when the science of it was rediscovered, and its proof was established; and no one knew about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were mostly lost and led to those errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was established and its length was extended and its art.
And I believe that I have lived up to the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation.
If the reason why one is not a good artist in their own craft in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and that it requires one to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which was recently rediscovered by Galen who knew the important parts of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their emissions.
And for that reason, called Hippocrates, who said that one name is not enough, but more so in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
Moreover, we have already said about him in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, they will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When I saw a doctor who was folly and had incurred an abscess called hydrocephalus in the head of a woman, and had incised some arteries of the head so that great pus flowed into it, causing the woman to die among her companions.
And I saw another doctor who almost choked on a stone from a man who had swallowed it in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and tried to remove that stone with a thin tube, so that that man died on the third day.
And I had already called for help to extract that one, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was known that he would die.
And I saw another doctor who took a fee from a duke of our land for surgery, and went to a very skilled blacksmith who was needed for the fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pliers and strong structures, and did not let the wound breathe.
Approach the dressing according to his wishes, and approach the bandage, and approach the ointment for several days and give orders that it be removed; and during this time, the dressing and the foot will become infected, and reach a critical state.
And you are called to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and achieve calmness and ease of his pain.
But the decay was already confirmed in the member, so it could not be stopped and did not cease to spread the decay in the member until the patient died.
And another doctor came who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated soon, until the fire magnified the evil of him and he died.
The reason is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so it does not allow it to reach him with all iron, but rather the member that suffers from all should be held.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to operate in two different ways: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is performed in the major dispositions.
And I have already seen that in this book, wherever there is an operation involving error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the other, so that the fools do not come to speak to you and dishonor you.
And then take your weapons with solicitude and protection from God, and your patients with patience and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God for their salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible illnesses that cannot be cured, and keep your weapons from that which causes you to fear, so that your faith remains in you and does not abandon you: because more will remain to your glory, and more in the world and after to your sanctity.
I have also discussed some of these things in other books: Do not treat a bad patient, because evil doctors will not be remembered.
And I have already dedicated this book to three chapters.
Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first section. The first chapter ordered within the book, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on ventouses, and on plasters, and on the extraction of sage and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered from the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar things to those; chapter ordered within the book, and from the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those points of that cautery and of its nozzles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore, the speech about the quality of the cauterizing needle and its handle is long and elaborate, and subtle for the knowledgeable, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about wisdoms, and they have been disagreed upon, and a little of their speeches remains with me, due to length.
And therefore it is said that the cauterizing needle corresponds to the entire comprehensive material or its materials, except for two materials, which are tail materials.
In the tail material, they disagree; for one said that the cauterizing needle is beneficial for it, and the others said the opposite of that, which is not convenient in illness because of its quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is not convenient that illness be cured with that which is cauterized and dried.
And they said that one who said the opposite of that, which is beneficial for cauterizing in all illness tail material that exists in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the comprehensive material of fire, the body of a man is pierced.
And I heard from that person's mouth that he had experienced this some time ago.
But he may not know that this has been extracted and exercised in the capital of cautery by previous practice, and has recognized the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the time span of those.
But in other compositions, do not be afraid of you, and especially in wet diseases, since all doctors have been agreed on those, and they do not differ in the recommendation for cautery in those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness, since it is used in medicine as a burning agent, is because the fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member that is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it unless by a small harm.
But the action of medicine as a burning agent does not reach to that in the members which are attached to it, and therefore it is difficult for the disease to come into the affected member and it is rarely used.
May the fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, not do anything but superfluously; and we already know this through experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason he is excused from the length of the speech. If not for that, it would not have been read to you in this pause secretly by the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstrative sermon, which would be sharpened in your minds.
Know, children, that they should not be separated from the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and pause at the best time of primaveyra.
And you say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by the time accident is submerged in the benefit of that which is thrown with the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because they fear those that come from evil, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
And do not catheters in your feet, or sons, that is only estimated by the general people and foolish doctors, because that disease which is cured by cauterization is not always necessary, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not always there that they fear for that, because cauterization is only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of why the pain comes.
But however, cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his disease returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his disease, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in his body from the accumulation of excess in him, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the disease in which cauterization is administered is a subtle disease in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar to that, possible it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small.
And more commonly spoken language is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and rightly so, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved by means of medicine or any other cause that would require cautery.
And the cause is in the opposite; and they understand that cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer homeopathic cautery, and it works for that. And from here it is understood that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not as they believe the common people and too many doctors think.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cautery, and they did not say so only because of the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not hurt, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that there are those who say that it only works in some bodies and not in others, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery; but however when you do gold cautery with fire, it is not up to you, as it depends on the amount of gold that you want according to the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the heat; and if you place it over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some pieces are created for the craftsman to use for that purpose.
And for that purpose, we should use a pointed cautery made of iron, lighter and more conveniently placed at the right angle for the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those in the foot, so that when he asks for what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery applies to the cold and moisture that cause this accidental condition, which is the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the arms and legs, and many sleep disturbances, and toothache and stomachache, and generally all illnesses that come from cold, such as paralysis, drowsiness, and apoplexy, and similar in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to empty his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's ability and age and custom.
And then command the one who shaves his own head to hold the mirror between your hands and place your hands on his chest, holding them there.
And then place the razor blade of your palm against the nose between his nostrils. However, as soon as you feel the location of the wound, mark that spot and then ignite the olive oil cautery of which this is the shape:
And then place that on the location well-aimed, so that it slowly descends, and you gradually tighten the bandage, and you rotate it.
And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see any quantity of bone exposed, as much as the quantity of grain, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another of those, if it is cooled, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small pinch of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave that for three days.
And then place your hand on the flat side of the shovel and hold that over the entrance to prevent the embers from being destroyed. And then apply the four-ingredient ointment into the wound to make it heal.
And they say that as soon as the plague is opened, the arm becomes more painful and less useful.
And they say that the armpit should be cauterized into the bone, and the cautery should be held there until some piece of the bone is attached.
And then remove that which has been attached to the bone, and then heal it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the back, until it breaks through the bone strongly before the bone rots, and this is the way to make a small incision: And they estimate that from that wound, the fumes of the head come out.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it becomes solidified.
I have not seen these two types of cautery used in all men, except in those who are second in line for fear; and let that one, I advise you, be better for their salvation when it is, because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of it with which we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is naturally free.
The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, you should choose the other work for salvation.
Second chapter.
Of the head cautery.
When in the whole head there is chronic and long-lasting pain, and that is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlics and of cochias and of capipurges and of emplaustres and of guatz and of cadels and of gualinas and of semblantz, and especially if it has already been cauterized by a cautery that they have and not appropriated to it any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not free and atroba mot gran freg, then that cauterizer should use another cautery instead of that one. And then apply the pointed cautery on the surface of the head, entering through where the bone is broken. Cut the bone and discover the amount of the bone that we have found, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the part behind the head in the place where the sponge is placed. And lift your hand away, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other head cauterizations.
And I will direct you to this location, because the pointed cautery that is used to cauterize the bones of the head and the occiput is more subtle than the one that is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the shape of it.
Third chapter.
Of the ancient non-antique cauterization of the pineal gland.
When pain is felt in the part of the head, or pain spreads inside the skull, and other treatments have been administered and have not helped, then cauterization should be performed in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
May a pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to remove a splinter from the hand, and then clean it with water and cover its extremities with ointment. And then incise the wound area on the temple with a blade that is entered into the place where it was made, until it is hidden.
And then apply strength to the stopped wound by pressing constantly, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the bandage and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place a poultice on the side submerged in boiled water until the wound is healed.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And if you wish, do so with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
May the cauterization be done in this manner: light the cautery of which this is the shape:
and it is called a clawed cautery, because its head is shaped like a carnation in which there is some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small pinpoint.
And place your hand over the painful area, and rotate the small iron at high speed.
And if the amount of tissue that is stuck by the stick's sharpness is too much, lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck, so that no blood flows out.
And apply a salted water bandage to that area, and leave it for three days; then apply a soft bandage, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife with a pointed cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this way.
Chapter Four
Of the cauterization of an old wound.
When you treat an old wound with the previous cure and the cure mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the cure does not improve it, and sometimes due to the disease that does not allow you to use the first pointed cautery or the fire cauterizer, then wait until the cauterizer becomes hot, as it means to place it over the painful area along a long line of the same length, or another; then place your hand firmly and strongly on that area where you are about to incise the skin and penetrate into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be held tightly and the nerve that causes pain in that area, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the custody and care of blood flow from the artery that is abscessed, which is feared in its abscission, and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not skilled; and leave the operation in him at the beginning.
And if you want to remember the regimen of blood flow from the artery after an accident, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and sees the patient's body tolerable, cauterize that in the middle of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a two-pronged cautery, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery for treating gout pains.
When pain in the big toe occurs due to infiltration and is cured by laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, but the pain persists, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one without punctures, of which this is the form:
And then bring the punctures close to the flame, and place them around the entire big toe as if it were a wheel, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. Along with the cautery, gently apply it to the tip of the big toe as needed without hurting the area.
And if the cautery of the points in the entire big toe is used, and it is found to be helpful, then cure the areas before they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cautery for treating torture.
Torture that is cured and cannot be treated by cauterization except for the specific ones that come from flexion, as we have mentioned in the sections on diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the specific area that causes dryness or spasms of the nerves.
When you treat that area of torture with tinctures and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs on the healthy side.
And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cauteries at the edge of the earlobe, a little above the top of the cap, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said point, and place your hand over the cauteries until the amount of the majority of the specific area of the code is burned.
And this is the form of the cauteries, and it is specific to the lancet, the shape of which is given in the table. May it still be less subtle than that one has with vessels; and cover that which is in the excess of grease with a cloth.
And then cure the place where that process has taken place until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is cured with that which we have said and does not conflict with your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that place with four cauteries: over all of his head; and with a cauterizer and in the back of his head, as we have said; and with a cauterizer on his neck. And the method of the cauterizer is made according to what has been said.
And it has already been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and further back; and then cure that which has taken place.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of memory loss caused by a stroke.
When the patient first begins to show signs of illness, give them large doses of medicine that will help them feel better.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster made of the following description in the treatise on plasters.
And place some of those, which are the handle of the cautery. Do that second, as you have already described.
And if those remedies are effective; and if not, then make three points on the back part of their head, which should be placed in the most superficial part of the head towards the back, and the least deep part of the head towards the neck. And place the largest part of the above between each point, and then cure the pointed cautery as you have already described.
But if you also feel it and the patient is able to bear it, then make the point in the middle location; and if you feel more pain, then apply the pointed cautery over the two toes.
Approach the wound that needs to be healed; and use the pointed cautery according to the shape given.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the entire body.
You have already processed in the softening of the head and that which we have said; and approach the head of the patient, and then cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle part of the head, and cauterize over all the bones of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauterizations over the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's softening of the body of three such and those who can tolerate them, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards cauterize through where the codena mot of it is located, and raise the tieua ma. And approach the wound that needs to be healed; and this pointed cautery should be used according to the shape given.
Chapter 10.
Of the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by humor.
And therefore you should modify his brain at the beginning of his illness with hot and cold remedies, which we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer gargarisms and mustard plasters to the same person who modifies him, giving that for several days, good nutrition.
And then remove the patient's hair, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer in the middle of his head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the back of his head, and on each ear of his head. And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spinous processes of the neck and the spinous processes of the back.
And use an olive-wood cautery as necessary.
If the patient is a child, then use a thin cautery gently like this.
Chapter XI.
Of cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted by humid and flatulent humors, then cauterize those parts that we have mentioned in the book.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give them that which purifies their brain according to that which has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a circular incision in an appropriate place on their head, and place your hand in the middle of that location.
And the patient should be lying down and held by all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is more worthy of being used as an ancient remedy for sheep. And warm that one over the fire, appropriately measured, which the suffering one says is enough when it is in them. And then place that one at the middle of their head, in a circle, and let it melt into them.
And do that for the patient every week, following another regimen of food until they are healed; or if you want, make small points with the most appropriate cautery, but always have your hand on a cautery that is properly ordered: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And then place that one on a soft cloth or in grayish wool.
Chapter XII.
Of the application of cold water to the skin.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of cold water on the skin, as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to the patient water that will make their head cool, and keep that one from all humidity.
And let that person bathe in warm water for several days.
And then order that person to shave their head, and cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle of their head; and then cauterize that pointed cautery with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of a headache in two hairlines, or with one if it is the beginning of a headache in one hairline.
Cut all the veins and arteries that are left behind the neck; and place those cauteries in that long area near the temples.
And watch out for blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from it, stop the pointed cautery with some medicine that is possible for you.
And bring some remedy that is in the extraction of arteries and the opening of those and the prevention of blood flow.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones with two cauteries previously produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of ancient cautery of tears.
When the tears from the joints are very old and flow through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the location of the forehead and it is verified that this is excessive and fluctuating, then cautery that we have mentioned at the beginning of the chapter about water cascading in the joints, and cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck below two temples, and two cauteries on the neck below two bones. And if it is necessary to add, then cautery that one in the entire length of the hair on the end of the forehead with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of ancient cautery of the nose.
When you treat that one who we have mentioned in the division and have not yet healed, then you should prepare and give to the patient the snuff for three nights; and then remove the head of it, and cautery with the middle cautery or olive oil cautery. And then, using that pointed cautery, carefully cauterize the two points on the two upper corners just below the hairline.
And be careful not to burn that one.
This is the shape of the pointed cautery.
Chapter 15.
Of the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
And if you want to cauterize it above the two upper corners a little, and then lengthen them from the temples. The length of each cautery should be according to the height of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter 16.
When the pointed cautery is used on the eyelid when the eyelashes are converted to the parts inside and prick the eyelid.
When the eyelashes are converted to the parts inside and prick the eyelid, the pointed cautery is used in two ways, either as a surgical instrument or as a medical tool that burns.
If the pointed cautery is used as a fire, command the patient to close their eyes and turn their eyelashes inward with those that clean them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if pricking that causes harm to their eyesight, then hold the eyelids of the patient with one bandage so that it is not damaged until their eyelashes have grown back.
When they have grown back and are equal, then place the head of the patient on their chest, and apply a bandage over the eyelid of the patient with a tent, which should be shaped like a mourning veil, and its beginning should be near the eyelashes.
And place a warm compress on the affected area, using alum or a poultice of poppy seeds.
And remove the heated cautery from this position.
And cauterize the shape that has been marked, little by little, in spiral motions, until the surface of the skin is burned, which should appear like a blister, entirely.
And to prevent the wound from becoming infected, it is necessary that the eyelid of the eye has already been lowered and the eyelashes of the eye have been raised from the point of the wound.
And raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place a warm compress on the area until the wound is healed. And then care for that area until it is healed.
But if the eyelashes return to their original position and the eyelid is softened, then do another point on that area as you did previously.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize them where they are raised to their natural place and equalized so that the hairs do not poke the eye.
If the cautery is made of medicinal combustion, command the patient to pull out the hairs where they are stretched and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a fan of myrtle.
And then take some dry sawdust and fresh charcoal, and mix those with the ashes, and make that into a paste so that it is not scattered; and spread that paste on the paper that is made like a fan of myrtle, and place that over the wound; and place the other side of the wound in album of honey, and the head of the patient should be in the highest position.
And place the other side of the medicine on the wound and press it slightly but not too much until the patient feels the burning sensation of the medicine, which is like a fire.
And therefore, when the persistent gnawing pain ceases, then remove the medicine and apply a new one; and afterwards consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it was when washed with warm water or with cold water, for that is good; and if not, return to the previous medicine and apply it to the place where the medicine has not been applied and does not disintegrate until your operation is complete and it is contrary to the wound.
And then place your hand over the wound to prevent the pus from coming out until it is completely eradicated and heal it with the ointment of definition or another until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep a watchful eye on your operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes softened and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid becomes softened, and usually do as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
This is the method of extracting bile.
And you know that the bellies of men are varied according to their size and condition, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
And do not cover the right way to that one who is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
Of the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the belly.
When you cure a fistula with that which we have said in the divisions of diseases, do not compare your cure, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place his head on your lap, and hold his head between your hands in such a way that it is not too loose or shaken.
And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the belly of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which should be rounded, like a cane or a pen of the vulva, at one end of which is made the cautery.
If you see, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want to come out with a probe.
But the one that is concave is better for the work of the toe.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain the pus from it and dry it out. And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from it.
And then place your hand over the area where the heated cautery is, and hold the patient's hand or the doctor's hand on the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient's hand does not move, and then place the cautery in the gray matter of the brain and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the toe, the cautery goes through to the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be for three days, and then place your hand over that area and pour some drying agent into it until it is healed.
If it has passed several days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and then scrape it according to what is convenient in its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula that was previously said: enter the place of the fistula and make a small hole in that fissure, which is the shape of the lead; and put in it the amount of one ounce of lead founded; and with your hand am well retained, and do not let the patient suffer because the lead does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that you are on the edge of the fistula with oil or water, which lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a draft of nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose as soon as it comes to its proper place.
Chapter 18.
On the cauterization of the wound in the foot.
Moths often occur as fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not apply your cure, then ignite the small cauterizing iron of this form:
And the cavity of it according to the thickness of the spoon.
Then place that carefully in those fissures until the cauterizing iron reaches the edge of the fissures.
And then cure it with that wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess occurs and swells up, and then it bursts, and then it becomes inflamed, and then it is filled with pus, and a fistula forms, and then you cure it without applying your cure, then you should ignite the cauterizing iron according to the amount that has been reabsorbed in the fistula, and then place that ignited iron in the mouth of the fistula, and then your hand enters until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then make a small incision or two; and then cure it with that remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
And if the bone is broken and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the extraction of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, treat those wounds with medicines and do not confuse them, place the patient's head in a high position, and then ignite the cautery in the shape that will come to you, without you placing the cup on the tooth and inserting it into that cautery burning fiercely, and then quickly remove it so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth when the wound is reached.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that when the loose tooth is closed and the softened jaw is strengthened and the moisture corrupted is dried.
Chapter 21
About the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by cold, or there is frost or worms in it, and the treatment with medicine does not work, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with fire.
With the cautery made of cow's horn, you take the horn and blow into it, then take a coat and wrap it around the end of the probe, and then quickly insert the burning cautery into the tooth that is causing pain until it is melted.
And then repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak some wool or cloth in the horn above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place the burning iron on top of that until the iron reaches the end of the cavity of the tooth.
However, the cauterization with fire is that you wait for the whistle of wool or iron, and if there is some noise in it and the power of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, and place that on the tooth and your hand inside to ensure the cautery is not broken; and do this a few times so that the pain remains or on that day or on another day.
And cover that the patient opens his own mouth with good border and holds it for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize whatever you think is best according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of extravasations.
When extravasations are from injury and infiltration of humors and are not obedient to digestion by medicines and you want to make them more liquid, then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, having two ends prepared so that the smoke from the cautery can be expelled through the other end, and place that ignited on the abscess a few times, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the peak of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place over it a poultice made from bread soaked in boiled water until it has been burned by the fire.
And then care for that wound and apply bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cauterization of a wound in the mouth and the binding of the jaw.
When the humors come over the throat of the lung, and especially when that is accompanied by fever, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that part of the throat in the affected area.
And be careful not to apply the cautery to the throat or burn the tongue of the patient, but a little.
And cauterize that part with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the patient. The pointed cautery should be held in the same way as before.
And then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization of a patient's lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that part with two cautery needles on the sternum in the areas where the ribs meet, and also with another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and hold the cautery needle as before.
And if you wish, your cauterization should be made with the pointed cautery needle, whose form is described in the previous section on joint pain.
And let those points enter into those places; and then care for that part which was previously inserted until it is healed.
And now the cautery should have three points because cauterization is done in this way:
Chapter 25
Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is a helpful remedy.
When the remedy is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and does not stop at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that place, and with a small movement, it is displaced as needed, as we have testified, so first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and then elevate the codeine which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
And then ignite the cautery which has two ends; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the codeine until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four ends:
And some of these charms are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery of eight.
And then place your hand on the cauterized area with salt, and make the patient comfortable and not suffer for any time until they are comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and below, then make that, and cauterize on the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cautery of the stomach.
When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that is not part of its composition and multiplies in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then it is likely that the patient will be over the supine position, and extend their hands and their things, and then cauterize that with three cautery: one cautery on the chest for the length of a pointed cautery, and two cautery on the back of the cautery, in the shape of a triangular cautery; and stretch between those that are not adjusted to make a perforation.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two layers of the patella's cartilage.
And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then add it. And if you want to, use a large cautery on the middle part of the stomach in this form; and this is a cauteri in the form of a circle in this form:
And if the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to how much you want to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then care for that which is preceded by the healing before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot.
When pain in the foot occurs due to cold or moisture or heavy air before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with what we have said and does not compare, then place the patient on their back, and do not test three cauteries in this form and this quantity over the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a person.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the width of the aforementioned one, and the cautery according to the length of the body straightened.
Do not touch the patient with the pointed cautery.
And if the amount of that which is applied to the quantity of the middle of the knee joint is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then extend his legs and raise his arms.
And it is possible for you to use this pointed cautery when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overdo the cauterization, and apply the substance of the whole knee joint so that it covers the entire body and reaches inside the intestines, as the knee is delicate; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing an abscess in the foot with a pointed cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the foot and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in its membrane, if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient feels increased weight and pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the foot, the pain is very intense and often causes fatigue to doctors in treating it.
Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then use a cautery that looks like a needle, the shape of which has been described in the previous page. And cauterize it with that and puncture until the entire cord is completely softened, until it reaches the bone, until it breaks through.
And then treat it with the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which most patients have known bad outcomes; rather, this experiment has been attempted several times on this operation, but it is better to leave it to those who know better.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of the soles.
The ancient cauterizers of the soles of the feet, following this method, were said to be effective, and this is the one you should take from the long dry root that is found, and it is of the greatest importance.
And then submerge that in oil and put it on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where it is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and with two small cautery points, one declining a little to the part that was left by the beard, and two cautery points in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the costa, declining a little to the parts behind; and with another cauteri at the middle of the chest; and with three cautery points on the parts behind; and with another cauteri in that location where it is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cautery points on the sides of the chest, after the cauteri that is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not let your hand touch the cautery, but keep it in the open air of the workplace.
And they also said that those who are accustomed to using a cautery of iron resembling a ray and ignite it, and then place it in the location between the ribs, until it reaches that abscess and is completely removed, as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
In this perforation, the cautery is not safe, because it has already happened in the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When you cure the patient's mouth with this method that we have said about healing in the division, do not compare your cure, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three cauterizations or four lines according to the length of the mouth according to the figure of the cauterizations of the thigh, the figure of which has been previously described.
And each cautery should have the largest part of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their back.
And another way to cautery is that you ignite the cautery having two tongs, which we have said in the capital of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the string that is at the end of the melon, which pierces the left side of the patient.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the string according to the length of the body, so that cautery is made according to the latitude of the body.
And then insert the two tongs, ignite one, in that moment when those penetrate the string of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and so four cautery is made.
And if you see, cautery is made with a cautery having three tongs.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not remain for too many days, as it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Do not use a pointed cautery in hydrocele but rather in the proper place.
When you cure the hydrocele, use the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then make sure that those cauterizations are made with four cauteries around the navel and one cauterization on the stomach, and another cauterization on the chest, and another cauterization on the back, and two cauterizations between the spine of the back, and one cauterization in the right side of the abdomen, and another cauterization on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be appropriate to the thickness of the skin.
And make sure that the cauterization is done so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
And do not cure the patient by approaching the pointed cautery to them, as this would cause their wounds to become infected, and they would be faster healed with other treatments.
The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the abdomen is similar to the one above, and the one used to cauterize the buttocks is according to its own form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are infected with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cautery the feet over the back of the foot, avoiding that area between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, and do not return to that position, as the water sitrina evaporates.
The cautery should be shaped like this: And make two cauteries on each thigh, and in each thigh, make the cautery at the end of the cautery blade. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place it underneath and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time to prevent any water from accumulating in it.
Then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
Of the cautery of wounds in the abdomen.
When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity entering the body, which is the digestive and retentive virtue, such as in the stomach and intestines, and is cured with the methods of treatment and not with cauterization, and sometimes the patient suffers from a strong cauterization, then apply a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, and the cauterization of the circle and four cauterizations around the delicate belly, and the clavilh cauterization; and the cauterization on the alcatin over the large bones, or two cauterizations.
And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that above the stomach and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices near the stomach and below the groin, which greatly helps to relieve the condition.
Chapter thirty-four.
About the ancient cauterization of varicose veins.
When there are varicose veins in nature or due to thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, and do not compare it with other treatments, then cauterize with three cautery devices on the back of the small of the back, and with two cautery devices above the belly.
And if it is found that the stomach of the patient is infected and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is pale, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cautery device as mentioned earlier; and with one cautery device on the chest, and with another cautery device on the soft part of the stomach, and with a hammer, and leave the cautery for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of the urethra near the opening of their abscess.
When you remove the urethra, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that ignited cautery into the removed urethra, and finally introduce it through the opening until it reaches the vein from which the blood flows.
And make that incision or two, if they are too large, then cauterize each one after we have regained them, and then cure those who receive this from the mouth until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is better to do so gently.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed naturally in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with cautery.
When an individual has a natural fistula in the back, and it is old, remove the rotten sane and humidity from it, and then apply a subtle probe to it, and know the quantity of its depth with the front-mentioned probe.
Then apply a cautery that resembles a ray. And then insert that lit cautery into this fistula, according to the quantity in which the probe enters it.
And repeat the process with the cautery entering it until those corrupted parts are burned away, one by one or two or three, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
And then heal the place where it was cured.
If the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it has remained like this for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
If the matter is not removed from it and remains there for a long time, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or corroded it, or that this is one of those causes from which it will return to its former state.
Chapter 37.
Of the cautery of the eyes.
When there is pain in the eyes due to a cold or thick wind, and the patient's eyelids are closed, then you should cauterize that above the eyes with a pointed cautery on each eye with a clavilh of which you should take the remembrance.
And if you cauterize too strongly, then after a short time, three lines of cauterization will appear, and they will be more noticeable than before.
Chapter 38.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and moisture, such that the patient cannot hold their urine, then cauterize that part of the bladder closest to the urethra, where the penis begins, and cauterize with a pointed cautery in the middle part, and with another in the opposite side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the skin; and cauterize with that cautery in the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
And the cautery should be a needle-like shape.
Chapter 39.
On the cauterization of the mouth.
When friction and moisture occur in the mouth, and it is prohibited to use pressure, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs from their decay, then cautiously cauterize that part with three cautery around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery, and the cautery should be needle-like.
Chapter 40
On the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist mucus is infiltrated into the part of the ankle, and its cause is the inflammation of its location, and when it is compared to the other, the cushion is extended over it. And the location of the dislocation is abnormal in the part where it is swollen.
Then, you should cauterize the patient on the part of the ankle with a similar pointed cautery, so that you can properly apply it around the circumference of the part as it is rotated, and so that the part falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery that precedes this form is in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present to you, then use three pointed cauteries with large olive oil.
And the cautery should be made according to the amount of the swelling of the entire sinew; and care should be taken that it is healed.
Chapter 41
On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the buttocks and its cause is coldness and moisture, the patient is cured by the method we have mentioned, and this method is ancient. Therefore, you should draw out the patient's heavy humors with fetid or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
The method of cauterization in this case has two ways: either with a cautery made of burning herbs, or with a cautery made of fire.
The second method has two ways, of which one is to cauterize that over the buttock of the patient with three triangular cautery according to this form; and make them deep enough. And let the space between each cautery be as much as the thickness of the patient's skin and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Let some time pass before applying the cautery on the patient's head above the buttock so that there are four cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which should contain and burn the entire sinew.
And this is the method of cauterization in the shoulder when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
But if it extends into the space, then cauterize that one with two cauteries on the shoulder over the area where you wrap the patient who is suffering from pain; and with one cauteri on the back for a few minutes on the left side.
And if the cauteri cuts, and the depth of the cauteri according to the quantity of the sinew of the shoulder.
And if the patient wraps that place where the pain extends into the area mentioned above the feet, then cauterize that one here with a pointed cautery for three or four or more points as needed from that one.
And if the patient wraps pain to be left behind the shoulder in the space, then cauterize that one here with a cutting cauteri.
And be careful during the cauterization process that you do not leave the cauterizing instrument in place for too long as to burn the nerves or cause great damage, and that by doing so it may harm the patient.
And I have seen another case where they cauterized the scalp and left the cauterizing instrument in place during the procedure, and the bed on fire inflamed before the tumor was achieved, and fire pierced and corrupted the entire foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then the patient died.
If the pain is in two parts simultaneously, then cauterize each one in this manner.
And the wise men in the cauterization of any cauterizing instrument of which this is the manner: make it similar to a circle of iron of which the circumference is the length of one palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date pit or a small amount.
And let that circle be another third; and its space should be the thickness of a thumb; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and the length of those chains should be one or two fingers, and make them in those iron edges well dressed in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Approach the fire until it becomes warm and produces sparks, and then place it on the patient's back, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three pointed instruments in a row.
And then leave it like that for three days; apply ointment to that area and leave the wound open for several days; and then care for that area until it is healed.
Dear sons, we have not used this type of cauterization for this kind of wound because of the fear of its side effects, and because we have found some that cause harm to it.
However, those who suffer from this kind of wound often find relief in the area where it is located.
However, those who suffer from this kind of wound often find relief in the area where it is located. They do this by making two circles with a hollow needle that has a pointed tip, and then they insert the needle into the wound and move it back and forth, like a door hinge; the length of the needle should be equal to the width of their fingers.
If the space between the patient's thighs is too wide, then it should be filled from below and above, and they should be positioned so that their second forms are like this:
And then place your hand on the part of the body where the patient is lying, and cover it with your hand; and take water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be hot little by little, and let it stand for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it  because that bite has the quality of fire  until the bite stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe off all the hot water with cold water.
And then leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and leave it for more days, and pour water over it; this is a remedy.
And then heal it with ointment until it is cured.
And if the pain extends into the cushion or the bed, place it in the state where it contains water, as it is made in the bath equally.
And this is the method of the water cure, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkalis and unextinguished fire from a single part, and draw the pieces in a new wave of which the broken part is previously perforated by a small tube, according to the amount that enters into it.
And place the other piece of the wave in another boiling water, and pour over it that alkalis and live fire of two waters which those take by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand those at the tieua main for good compression, and leave the wave that remains after the sharp water in the boiling water.
And adjust all that water, and pour it over another live fire and other renewed alkalis, as that is of a very strong heat, which is administered in certain medical operations and in cauterization of the other members, as that operation is of fire.
And some of the medicines are boiled in them, such as thyme and honey, which causes a sweet smell that is not known to be mixed.
Guillia heard from an ancient man about the operation and cure that was done for the pain of gout and sciatica, and praised it as being very good, and said that there was no need for another cure, and that it was healed with a remedy such as this, which is to bathe in hot water.
And it should be of certain fresh herbs, and if not fresh, then dried; and it should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and left.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the heat.
And then put that in the bath and when the body of the patient is wrinkled, take that out and put it on the ground, for the pain stops and is healed.
And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
According to Escorides, when there is a goat's wound and the vein is stretched, it should be cauterized with this method: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the patient's foot and the wound.
And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to the area that has been cauterized with charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of pain reaches the whole body and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of goats.
Chapter 42.
Of the cauterization of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as by impact or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of moist and ground material.
And the cautery does not cut but only in this specific area that is made for the effusion of matter.
Therefore, after the evacuation of the patient, give them foul-smelling and similar pills, which are made on both sides in the area where the pain is three lines wide, more than you would try in each line with a cautery or more, according to the patience of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
And make the cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cautery points in the form of a cross.
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
These afflictions often occur in children; and similarly, at the beginning of gout in children, it is customary for them to occur on their structure in the joints, especially in the evenings, elevation and movement.
And often in the lower spine of the back and at the feet, where it begins to overshadow the other sponds.
And so when you see that and want to prevent it, then use the pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: which grips the cautery over all part of the sacrum equally.
And if you want, use the pointed cautery in a circle around the sacrum with two or three lines. And place the points between them.
Then care for the area where it was healed with what we have said.
Be careful that the cautery is not applied in a state of shock that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And so when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery again.
And you should cauterize that nearby area in the circle of the foot joint with a pointed cautery.
And the shape of this cautery is like this:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain extends to the ankles or other joints, and that area becomes swollen, then cauterize each ankle with three or four pointed cautery needles from each side with this pointed cautery.
And if you need more cautery needles than these, then cauterize that and do not put your hand too close to the cauterizing tool before it is completely cooled.
And if the pain extends to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the feet and it is called gout, then prick in the circle of the joints as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
If the pain persists in the aforementioned areas, then prick each knuckle and the palm of the hand.
If the pain approaches the joints or muscles, then cauterize the affected areas of all parts of the body.
And do not expel the patient from good care and reception of medicines, for if proper care is given and flatulence is expelled, this cautery method will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When the fracture is in the ankles and the intestines are pushed against the abdomen, and if it is approached, then order the patient to fast on that day and use mild cathartics so that the opening from their belly does not occur.
Then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the fracture is set or the intestines appear.
And then return that one to the position of the patient's thighs, and try to mend the rupture on the bone of the pentenilh, and hold the end of it similar to the shape of a circle, and raise the parts of the body that are below.
And then remove the cautery of which this is the form of:
so that it does not move and get cotton. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery over that one held by your hand and the cauterizer, and enter that one when you have obtained the bone of the pentenilh in the middle of the deltoid; and repeat that other action if you have not succeeded in the first action in obtaining the bone.
And observe the position of the intestine during your cauterization, so as not to burn the patient because if it comes out under the patient, great harm may occur.
And know that when you use the cautery, do not hold the bone, do not perform your operation.
And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
And take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound from the fire is healed.
And take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
And the patient should remain on their back for ten days until the wound is closed and the pus is drained.
And be aware that the patient's food should be given according to the length of time for their treatment, which is appropriate for their belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And when it is time to remove it after ten days, then administer soft food, and keep that for another ten days.
And if they are tired from labor and food intake and drinking, and from violent vomiting, then this entire regimen of healing will cure them.
And if you want to cure the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and so that they do not regurgitate, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and this should be done with a clean part of it; and then care for that burn, and it should not be adjusted.
And they have already said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, rather than with a tent.
And a line is placed that is the most suitable for the width at the side of the rupture, and another line above; and your hand is placed with a scalpel, but the first cauterizer is more slender and better.
Chapter 46
Of cauterization of tortion.
When the limbs are affected by paralysis or by persistent pain after an injury that does not respond to medical treatment for a long time, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, strength, and development, as well as its location and the type of pain it causes.
If he is healed by the first cautery, then good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that member; for it is customary for those pains to be points of pain in that member that approaches the one, in order to achieve those cauteries within that patient before he is healed.
Chapter 47
About the cautery for leprosy.
Some leprous people are sometimes treated with cautery for a great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that person, consider whether the leprosy is common and as that which we have said in the division and not this, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of his body and his entire appearance, then cauterize that person on the head: with one on the back of the head, and with the second one behind it, pointing the forehead towards the ends of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, your hand with the pointed cautery enters a little into the bone, making a small incision, and then displace the sinews, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize over the meat according to what is necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and is manifestly apparent, then cover that part with the cauteries we have mentioned in the book; and cauterize over the end of the nose, and two cauteries on both sides of the chest, and two cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two cauteries on the spines of the back, and one large cauterization near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on each elbow, and one on each hand, and two on the wrists, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hands. And cauterize all those joints of the mentioned arms and feet, and over each toe of his feet, and on the shins of his legs.
And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the tongue.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like they do with other treatments, so that their body is not shocked.
And you should know that the cautery sizes should be large or small according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the specifications of the tools.
And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and another remedy until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
On the cautery for stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
And insert a pointed cautery through the opening of the ear a little bit. And then care for that area where it is healed.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized in some areas that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine of the back and the eyesight of the nerves that move that member, and the wound is reopened.
Do not presume about that, but rather know what is written in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving the entire body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
When warts are ancient and do not compare to any of the medicines, then cauterize over that area with a pointed cautery in a little bit according to the quantity of the species of the ear opening until it is reopened and its color changes.
And then care for that area with a poultice of errors and of lentils with roasted oil and of walnut leaves, and of cobweb or of ironwort, each one being a separate part and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cautery of the neck.
When tumors begin and you want to remove them, then cautery that circle with the pointed cautery along its circumference as it is turned.
And the wise say that it should be cautery with the back pointed cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
And it is better to cautery along its circumference with the pointed cautery as we have said, or with a pointed instrument.
Chapter 10.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When some abdominal swellings are delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess or because of the patient's old age, weakness, or time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cautery along its circumference with a small pointed instrument; and apply leeches there to hasten their maturation.
If you wish to make a perforation with this pointed cautery, then place it in the following form: and pause it at the middle point where it enters the skin.
And if the cautery is placed too far, to prevent the body from being injured; and then care must be taken to ensure it is healed.
Chapter 52.
On the cauterization of corroding.
Corroding is a corrupting substance that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, consuming dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corroding is in the location where cauterization with fire has been applied, then place small and large nails as appropriate in that location where corroding is present.
And then cauterize it from all parts until you have completely removed the corrosion and there remains no cause of it.
And then leave it for three days, and place olive oil mixed with salt on the cauterized locations until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
And then carefully remove those abscesses that are generating flesh.
If after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, then it is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted places.
And some acute medical remedies are applied to the wounds, which is in place of the cautery. However, a pointed cautery with fire is not suitable for removing pus.
And I have already told you the treatment with acute medical remedies in the division, and therefore take that which will be needed from it.
Chapter 43
Of cautery of clubs and other similar things.
The warts that grow on the parts of the foot behind the patient, which is called club, and is a great cause, which lies on the foot; and cautery is done in those two ways, either by fire or by the pointed cautery.
May the cautery be heated with fire similar to a poker, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the handle of all parts, and also of thin margins.
And then place that heated iron on the handle, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the handle until the cautery reaches the depth of the handle. And let it remain for three days until it begins to tremble. And then apply that with wild marjoram crushed with salt, and let it remain on that for a night, until that is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with natural meat juice until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or of a poker or of a poker, and place that over the handle; and then pour a little water into the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the handle, and find the water cauda through the opening of the handle root; and wait for the patient an hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the handle roots are eradicated.
And then do those things to them until they come over all of which are in their body.
And then cure those who have the spots of the clap by applying this to their mouths, which the flesh has been infected with.
Chapter 44.
Of cauterization for trembling.
When a person has trembling due to infection of the nerves or fever caused by it, or by another similar cause, then apply four cautery irons or one very hot one on the spines of the back, between each spine put a cauterizing iron; and place a cauterizing iron on their chest, and on their stomach, an olive oil cauterizing iron.
And the trembling of the person is relieved and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Chapter 55.
Of cauterization for injuries to the body.
When there are sharp injuries in the body, and open wounds that have been made from thick, corrupt matter, then at the beginning with a remedy, that it be cauterized over all of the wound with a thin, fine cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long, sharp cauterizing instrument; or with a blunt cauterizing iron.
And sometimes, the pointed cautery is applied at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and it is not believed by some, and those who do so disrupt the excess and heal from those.
However, it should be done before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 66
On the cauterization of fluxes of pus from wounds by incision of the archery.
Too many troops have flux from archery that is incised due to the wound, which causes deficiency, or it is incised due to abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain that one.
Therefore, if something happens to anyone, then place your hand on the orifice of the archery, and press over that one which you say is most affected by those troops before it stops the flux of the pus from leaving the one you said, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the cauteries of olives, several and many, by the number of words, and blow over those before they are much ignited.
And then take a small or large second instrument and place it on the spot where the artery is broken, over that vein hurriedly, so that it has not yet bleed, and insert the cautery into it and restrict that wound.
And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the instrument and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
And beware that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it does not come over the patient or cause him more harm.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, then one of four ways: either with a cauterizing instrument where it has been inserted, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when its extremities are burned and the wound is restricted, or it is tied with a strong bandage or a piece of cloth for firm structure, or they are placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they are strengthened by a pillow or a compress at the construction of the wound.
May the one who administers a reasonable restriction of the patient's body and the patient's stricture with cloths or by positioning due to causes similar to those, not compare but rather console.
If that happens to anyone and it is not the doctor present or the medicine, then begin by placing a pad on the opening of the mentioned vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of the patient until the sinew is not separated from the main part of the plague, and above the arcery the said does not remain; and above the arcery sprinkle it with cold water frequently until the sinew is contracted and swollen; and cover in what way there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incisions and perforations and bleedings and of phlebotomy and of plagues and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire and medicine is suitable for all diseases, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments necessary in those cases, and we have ordered the chapters of the subiarnent of the head to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who wants to know about it can be helped, regarding what he has asked about.
And I will begin by saying that you should know that in this chapter, son, I will tell you what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that reason, son, I will tell you that in the operation which is in this chapter, there are many ways to evacuate the pus, which is very important for life, such as aspiration of the abscess or incision of the exit or purification of the plague or extraction of the stone or incision of the bone and similar things. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst of them, death.
And I will warn you that you should not do those things in which there is doubt, because some ways are due to the hands of men who have doubts about diseases. And from them there are some that you will go to your disease and it will be due to death, and you will suffer from the severity of your disease, and from the length of your disease, and because of the fear of the disease which means death.
And from those who give you their names and details, you hope for their recovery, and their illness is dangerous.
And therefore do not consent to any one who comes to you with this method; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your curiosity; and do not assume any cause of it unless you have certain knowledge that causes it to you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases prediction and indication of which is converted to health, because in that one is with you help over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O children, God breathes His understanding into you and does not lead you astray or protect you, because that is in His hands.
And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is joyful to you what you ask about it and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of gout that is contained in the head of infants.
You should know that this disease affects children during infancy and when the newborn's head is soft.
And some are caused by an unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those that I have seen it was accompanied by death, and for this reason it is believed to be caused by something hidden.
I have also seen that a child's head whose skull was full of water, and the skull of which was always inflated until it could not be inserted into its greatness, and more that the humidity increased until death.
And this humidity is added between the spine and the bone, or is added behind the bone on the skin.
When the operation in that case where the humidity is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head at a certain latitude, and the length of the incision should be two fingers wide until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions of this kind:
And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should open the commissures of the skull from all parts and pour water into it when you understand that your hand is in the middle and not on the parts inside and outside. So that you cut in the middle of the skull with three incisions of this kind:
And remove all the humidity from the incision; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that which is above on the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with ointments and balms, and strengthen the skull to its equality; and feed the patient with dry food after the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another way of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, that sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the part above, or on the right, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess and the collection of water appear, and do that which is most possible.
And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage in bloodletting, as this may cause death for the patient due to excessive loss of fluid.
Chapter II.
When a patient has cataracts or bruises on their thighs or chest, and this condition is recognized, and no healing is found in that, then the cure in this incision of those two arteries should be tried.
And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the patient has on their head, and wipe the area with a rough cloth so that the vessels appear, and strengthen the collar of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each over the locations that are near the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
And then press on the vessel and try to incise each one at the tip of each part until it reaches the bone, and that is for the length of the head.
If you wish, insert the spatula behind the artery and cut through that area to expose the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is too short, then when a vein is cut, the blood will flow out, which should be stopped frequently.
If the bowel does not appear at the incision, then measure the amount of space between three fingers and gently insert the spatula into the bone.
And that amount of blood that flows out is usually one unit, and if it does not flow out more or less, then that is the amount that appears from the patient's virtue and the replacement of the bowel.
And then consider the cause of the swelling, and if there is some reason for abscess formation, then cut through that area to prevent it from becoming a pus-filled abscess.
And then apply poultices and lint made of cloth to that area, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of extracting the spleen which is located in the belly.
When there are old, sharp stones or sharp objects in the abdomen, and pain is felt in the sides of the belly, and the pain is severe and similar to those, and it is not relieved by medical treatment, then we have found in these illnesses extraction of the spleen from the belly, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient lies on their back; and understands the spleen which is in the belly, and sees it through its own pores, and it is hidden only in a few people due to its strong attachment.
And if it is hidden, then the belly of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then the area should be scratched with a sharp knife or evaporated with hot water until the spleen appears clearly. And at this time, you take the spatula of which this is the form: And then you scrape the cornea with the sharp end until you reach the sclera; and then get in the eye and extract those from the superior parts until you extract the one from the cornea and discover that of the tunics which is left there, from all parts.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a piece of gauze at the end of the needle, and then incise one part according to the quantity by which its ends were stretched and contracted, and not too much, because if they are not incised, the blood will not flow out.
And then evacuate the blood in drops until three.
And if the sclera is large, then cover it with two pieces of gauze or with cotton strings long enough to prevent putrefaction during the healing of the wound and allow blood flow.
And then incise the excess that is between two limbs; and do so at that hour or at another time.
If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make points into the bone of the cautery, where the extramittents are inserted, and it will be in the place of that metessa work.
It is better to use the pointed cautery if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to finish humidity, and therefore it is better in emergencies.
And cover the extraction of the archers that hump the place of the ancient cottage, and place them on clean linen, and then use dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet bandages until it is healed.
And while you are doing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the archer's wound, then you should tighten that pus, or the cautery, or what fills the place of the cottage, and press your hand inside until the pus is stopped. And if none of those causes is present, then place your hand over the location where the pus is congealed, and cover the location with very cold water until the heat subsides, and then tighten it according to what is appropriate.
And it is said that the most effective method for extracting bones from a carcass is to cauterize the vein with this cauterizer, which has two points, so that you can accurately feel the two places when they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it is not consolidated by this cauterizer.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows. However, if the sharpness of two points is not enough, it is better to use two points that are as sharp as two needles approaching each other, and do not dissect the flesh at speed.
Therefore, if there is any toughness in those places, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut away more easily.
And this work is better than all other works and more useful.
And the space between the two points is equal to the thickness of the toughness of the said flesh.
Chapter fourth.
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the joints.
When the acidic humors are in the body, and they affect the joints that are above the crown of the head, and there is no cause for healing in medicine, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking with ants, and the joints of those are exhausted, humid and insensitive as if their flesh were known, and the scabs on them are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods of treatment in the cure of these operations, and they name that cure "spread".
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise three grooves equally spaced along the length of the forehead. If the length of the groove is less than two fingers: the first groove should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a small movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the edges of the jaws, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the gums to the lower jaw. And if the space of each joint is three fingers wide, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloth, moisten it with the humor that dries the joint.
And then place the spatula of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision: which is from the top of the temples to the second incision. Scrape off all the tissue that is between two incisions on the periosteum, which is above the bone, and then do that from the incision further to the second incision. And then place the spatula and enter the first incision another time with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place your hand on the sharp side of the flesh attached to the tissue, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then do that in the middle groove between the other grooves.
And when the amount of blood is equal, express the places of the patient's feet with a syringe.
And then place your hand on each groove of the old man's foot, and place your hand on those powders that are in vinegar and oil and vinegar, and see that it does not become an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that with an ointment made of basil icon and rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
About the treatment of gallstones and the downward flow of the parts descending from the chapter.
When any vein is calcified and continuing, and sometimes the parts of the patient's eyes are weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and their eyelashes fall out, and in the front of the chapter there is sharp pain and consequent exhaustion, then you know that these materials and stones do not come from any other veins but those descending from the parts described.
And the best cure for these is to order the patient to look at their own nose, and then insert a small blade into the middle of the forehead, near the temple (starting from the left temple and going towards the right temple; and the incision should go through the bone; and then stretch your hand over the temples which are swollen due to the mastigation), until it is through the bone.
Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill it between the two lips of the wound at the old wound or with dry cloths. And then apply a clean cloth above the swollen area to prevent it from becoming an abscess.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then insert a small blade into the area where it begins at the bone, and then apply the drying regimen which is made of flour and collyrium (four parts of each), and make an ointment from it and apply it to these wounds on the skin.
Chapter VI.
Of the treatment of that which catches in the fingers.
The entire cause that catches in the fingers is one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is a plant cause such as hazelnut or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone catches in the finger or another similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the finger, and if the finger is exposed to the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distill some oil of violent or sage onto it, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze in order to prevent the onset of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the finger, and extend the finger to the parts above, because these are the parts that are often forgotten in these causes.
If it is not already done, then administer extraction of the stone using the instrument called the epicicloidal epithelial probe with this form:
If the stone is already extracted with the instrument, it is good; otherwise, then administer extraction of the stone using the thin needle of double puncture.
And then if it is not extracted by that, make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the auditory canal and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but only the needle. And then extract the stone with the suction device, which we have found to be very effective.
But if it is not extracted in this way, then take a hook or an old device that has been used to remove the eyelashes, and place a small amount of it on the end of the needle, and then cover that area with a clean cloth. And then insert that into the auditory canal to facilitate, and then dry the ear from the moisture.
And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise the part where the abscess or spasm occurred.
The method for incising that part is to first sew the patient's vein of the saphenous and remove the suture according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small opening between your fingers and convert the wound edges upwards, and do not perform any deep incision in the area where the pain is most intense. And if the opening is of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then use appropriate instruments to incise that part; and do so with the opening at that time with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
And if the cause is one of the grasses that I have mentioned and is inflamed, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then take a thin needle according to this form: And apply that remedy to the patient who has fallen ill with that disease which is called gout in the earlobe.
And do not apply that remedy when you think that the patient has already been moistened by the vapor of the earlobe, and pause it over the affected area, and extract it with a needle or a subtle instrument, or at the beginning, as mentioned above, which is praised for its extraction.
May the water that enters the earlobe be used as a sneeze conditioner at the beginning, and fill the patient's ear with an old cloth, and place a spoon over the ear in which the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; otherwise, take many small pearls according to the length of the mentioned one, and heat them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should put one of those pearls into the trachea of his ear and strike it with another pearl on the pearl inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this remedy until all the water is boiled away.
Therefore do not cease this remedy until all the water is boiled away. And when all the water is boiled away, take a piece of paper or cloth, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned completely.
And then place another cloth and make so many folds until all the water is boiled away, and then remove that which is below and is called the extraordinary stone of the remedy.
In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small piece, use the same method as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece that causes pain at the back of the throat, then administer the extraction of it with gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is the least of all the other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a sunlight.
And if here appears some cause of worms, then extract that sharp or thin instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow needle and wide above it, of which this is the form of it: And enter the thin end into the earhole according to the amount that can be tolerated by the patient; and then quickly pull out the other with strong force, and do so until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey you with the instrument, then open and close it in the circuit of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations which have been used in the past in the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion is the one that you pour into the earhole with this instrument, of which this is the form of it: And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it above.
And so it should be used as needed in the cavity of the catheter here where it is necessary. And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the catheter, or some herb, or whatever you want from these medicines in the catheter  and that is in the aurelha , and then press the ray above and express the oil through your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is in the aurelha should already have been heated by fire for a short time. And be careful that the cause which you will distill in the aurelha is not too cold, because the medicines of aurelha do not bear this.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of opthalmia of aurelhas.
Some people who are born from the wombs of unperforated mothers have already experienced this in some men, opthalmia in the meat of the aurelha by plague or by no flesh at all in that; and this opthalmia is sometimes made in the front of the trau of the aurelha which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
And in the case of the patient who does not understand the language, it is in the most difficult situations for healing.
And in the case where you succeed in understanding the language, cover the patient's ear with your hand and look at them. And if you see an ointment applied, open the small, sharp needle of this shape:
If the end of it in which the width is small has one sharp part and the other not, and the needle is two lion widths long so as not to pierce the ear.
And if the ointment is applied to the ear or to the meat of the patient, then open the small, sharp needles and insert them into that part with great ease before all the flesh is opened.
And if the ointment is applied to the front of the ear, then take a small, sharp needle and insert it into that part for a short distance, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the abdomen, the effort of lifting it causes further difficulty in breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the ear.
And then place a piece of cloth of the second quantity according to the width of the trachea, which you have wrapped around the groin Egyptian style; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any medicine and insert it into the abscess and powder it over it according to the triple method and use it; and if you see that the ear has already become infected, then remove the infection and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a piece of greased wax, until the infection is cautiously cured; and then care for it until it is healed.
If there is a flow of pus, then immerse a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil, which occurs in the eyelids of some people due to a humid condition, and in others due to a dry condition.
Therefore, you should hold those eyes open or closed, and cut those eyelids from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the following.
If the pain is caused by cold blood flow, then you should cauterize those eyelids with a fine cautery.
And the best cauterization is to cut and scrape those dry areas when they return to their original state; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Of the care of greatworms, which occur in the eyelids of some people.
They occur due to some cause in the eyelids of some people, which is similar to greatworms in their strength and hardness, and because of this, they are called greatworms.
And there is an accumulation of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation on them is considered if the large one comes out of that which appears from the eyelid and is moistened throughout; and the cause of it is unknown.
Then make an incision over that with a sharp instrument to facilitate its exit, and then suspend it with a thread and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure it within that which is healed.
And if it is small, then it will not cause harm to that which the oil of it restores and envelops.
And if the large one declines towards the parts inside the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend it with a thread, another that you have chosen for incision, and press it throughout; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then in no case will it be noticed.
And then, approach the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with what is inside that will heal it.
Chapter X
About the treatment of eyelids above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray matter that is produced in the tissues of the eyelid above, and mainly affects children, worsening their wounds and causing them to lose their sight; and they cannot see the light of the sun because tears gather in those.
And so you often see them talking to the corners of their eyes all the time, and to the corners of their eyes while they sleep; and those are the eyelids behind their brows, which have been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of pus is in the wound; and when you press the area with the tips of your fingers, you can feel the pus inside.
And sometimes the operation is performed on that person who lies on his back and places his head on the bed, and then place a cloth under him and over him, and make a circle according to the amount of pus contained in all parts, and then place that above it and press with the tips of your fingers from all sides so that the pus is accumulated in the middle of the circle, and then perform an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument so that the wound does not become too large.
In the first incision you make in the abdomen, go as deep as possible until you reach the peritoneum, where in the most dislocated processes, the peritoneum is usually cut according to the form of white goose.
Then extract those clots that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the uterus, and revolve them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful not to push through the incision so that the sperm does not reach the bladder and the other falls away.
If you do not find any sperm at the beginning of the incision, then push through the incision a small forceps until you reach the other; and then extract that which we have said; and underneath, moisten cloths with warm water and place them over the area and strengthen those wool pads.
And remember that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the incision to prevent that which is remaining from that moisture.
And then cure that which has been healed.
If an abscess occurs in the area, then cure it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those to the wound and make methods of evils as such with frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that which is causing destruction of the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or it is done by incision and suture; or by cannulas as I have said.
And therefore cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert a needle in the part where it is most likely to be near the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate above, and that which is on the edge of the eyelid, near the hairs, and pull the thread above to the palpebra, and convert it to the ray.
And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes, adjusting it with the incisors of the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then remove the hair and place it behind the eyelid, covering it with small cotton or cloth, and then place a tent over the eyelid, and it should be as in the shape of a fan.
But it is important to note that the shape varies according to the degree of eyelid elevation, which differs among men, and those who require it to be incised from the eyelid by a large amount according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then insert a needle in the two lines that you have sutured, and begin from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as large as the largest of the king.
And then place the onion in one of the two corners of the coda, and then scrape it all, and then adjust the suture with the two lips of wool or thin wool, and remove the drainage, and make that which superfluously over the two eyelids stick to some causes enveloping, if you want to do that, and otherwise, don't care.
And then remove the stitches from the wound after three or four days, and care for that area.
If you wish, leave the stitches in place and care for that area with a dry and constricting bandage, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; however, stitches are better. Therefore, do not remove them prematurely.
However, it is important to be careful when dealing with the patient, and it is a good operation, not due to fear.
And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you place a figure of a mirror on the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid at a three-inch angle and gather it according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, then hold the eyelid at a three-inch angle, and if it is not equal, then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle through the lacrimal major, and the second needle through the lacrimal minor, and adjust the threads so that they are equal, and then raise your hand to the same height as we have recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is not healed yet.
If a blister occurs on your finger or in the fold of your skin, cover that blister with wax and the same kind of ointment, and apply it.
Some eyelids are attached to the eyeball by their own eyelashes, so cover that with what we have said about the wound; but stitching in the place where it is more natural.
To stitch the tendons is as follows: and then you turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is hidden according to what I have said; and then make two thin threads of those that length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be narrower than the width of the space. You have already incised at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then add each thread to the excess of the eyelid from the side, and tighten the threads of each section with a strong tension, and leave that for several days, until the scar from the tension dies and is rejected and will rot within that if it does not become infected.
If it is too late, then break the lumps and cure the pain until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
About raising prickly hairs in the eyelid when the hair is hard.
When they are not natural, hard, rough, and prickly hairs, then the operation is to take a thin needle and place it in a soft and sharp cedar wood, and adjust the ends of it and the nails in a way that is very thin. And the length of the needles should be as long as one palm.
And then you can make another thin needle next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that one if you want.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work is clearly visible, because this is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires it, and make it penetrate the eyelid quickly before it goes beyond the natural limit of the eye.
And then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the conjunctiva, and keep the eyelids open one to three or more but not too many.
And then pull your hand out from where the needle is inserted into the conjunctiva and into the eyelid, keeping it within the natural limit of the eye.
If it is inserted too deeply and the eyelid does not move, then insert it into the parts that you have composed at that place, until it moves away from the trauma.
And then look at the eye from the side, because when you move it and the eyelid, it will move and close, and leave it closed for two or three days until the needle has adhered to its place and healed over that good flesh.
If the skin is too short, then adjust a longer bandage from the natural ones, and raise it to the one that allows it to be stretched out almost flat, and then raise that.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of ehrich which is in the eyelid above.
When the ehrich is in the eye socket and the eyelid contracts when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, and this ehrich is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plague or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May the method of the operation in that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use treatment of it from the causes which dry and constrict; because if you do that it returns to ehrich worse than at any time they did not have fire.
Use in that case which has a softening effect like fenugreek, and apply it as a poultice with the water in which they are soaked and boiled, or with linseed oil, which should be liquefied with some of the oils, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
The treasure of your treatment is that you pierce everything that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire has been used from the beginning.
And this operation, which we have said, is nothing more than a correction of the distortion that does not return the form of the area according to what fire has given.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of ehratic that is made in the eyelid.
This distortion that is made in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament distortion; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
The accidental distortion is made by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and place it on the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and place it on the needle, and insert it into the wide space. And if the eyelid returns to its original shape, good; otherwise, take the ray and place it on the broken figure, and with that convert the eyelid, and make both cuts on the side of the eyelid.
And make the ends of both cuts into two angles of the incision, which you have made when they converge, and make the angle of them into a figure of their own.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: lambda.
And then place the flesh on that for the length that is on the side of the eye, which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with wool thread; and then take care of those that we have said about the softening medicines and the poultices inside which it is healed.
And if the laceration is caused by a wound or suture or cauterization, then cover it with a flat incision on the eyelid according to what is prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that the blood flow in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the craftsmen always prepare an instrument in each possible way that is possible to do inside which it can return the figure to its natural form, or close to that, and that patient according to what suits the operation and tools in the best positions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid fixed above the white of the eye, preventing free movement and natural works, then you should remove the extraneous ray from under the eyelid, and elevate it above, or extend it to the edge.
And then you should insert a thin needle into the adhesion, which is not sharp enough to cause pain, so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the needle in place without damaging the eye.
And your incision should be made with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should place salt water in the eye, which you have washed; or apply a solution of chamomile in water.
And then separate the eyelid and eye with a cloth, and place your hand over the eye to prevent it from opening, and use third-day urine from a healthy person as a remedy until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the beginning of the nail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
You should know that the nail is of two kinds, either nervous, resembling a thin, hard shell; or non-nervous, resembling white matter congealed, which when it touches the bone, is easily detached and the bone is not stuck in it.
And the species do not begin until the greater lacrimal bone, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
The worker places the patient's head in a chin rest, and then raises the eyelids with his hand, and elevates the eyelid with his hand, and then collects the nail from the bone with a pair of tweezers and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the nail, or of cavalry or of buffalo or of a similar animal, or of strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place it in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and tie it to the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin on the side of the nail that is the pupil. And if you continue to push the needle through the back of it.
And if you then insert the narrow needle into the opening of the lacrimal duct, using thin forceps or small forceps, to remove the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not continue to produce a continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes use the needle on the sole of the foot, as mentioned earlier, and then remove it using this type of needle:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the needle and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
And then insert the needle into the wound a few times with some salt or powder made of sinapium, and remove it after a while; and take care that it does not cause any harm.
And if the needle is not sharp and you cannot insert it, or it does not stick in that place on the sole of the foot, then use this type of needle to cure it with medicines, and it will be healed as mentioned in the division.
If you wish to incise that, then first you open the clothing of the patient and take a thin, sharp lancet of fine steel sharpness according to this form: am subtilitat. And if you see that it is thinned and curved and enters into that place, then sprinkle some of your own urine in the clothing of the chest made of linen or with rose oil or with salt triple, and cover the chest with the other side.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is in it has been removed, except that the contrary abscess should be in the clothing, because then you will leave that, and cure the abscess at the beginning so that it is healed.
And then repeat your operation until it is healed.
The indication of the flesh of the lacrimal duct, if it is not felt through the clothing for great harm, should be suspended by an ounce; and incise that from that one part, and do not close the incision so that you do not close the flow of tears.
And then drip in the lacrimal canal, make him sleep until he is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the beginning of a certain disease and of that which is born from flesh adjusted on the hook.
Sometimes flesh is born on the hooks, and it is overlaid before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches out over the eyelids and strongly grasps the eyelids to the parts deformed and is assembled at the rose of the balustrade.
The operation is done by the patient placing his head on the chin; and then opening the hooks of that one and gathering all that flesh with scissors, and it is with a forceps or a hook; and then incising the flesh at the beginning until it is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the hook that you do not descend that one of your operation.
And your incision is the one that you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as it comes to this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is removed, fill the wound with salt-crusted powder, or distill it into the dust and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a piece of cloth soaked in honey until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
And if there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess has formed, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with a remedy that melts away that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has been affected in this way.
However, you must first ensure that all wound healing is done naturally or by accidental means, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of serum in the wound.
When the veins are swollen and hardened on the leg and prevent the doctor from performing their operation, they lengthen the leg over days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the leg in which it is swollen is strong and not another disease that is swollen, then collect that swelling.
And if you command the patient to raise their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an ermine or two according to your judgment; and that ermine should be of delicate double thickness according to this form:
or two ermine gradually in a coat according to this form:
And then gather those veins with thin forceps, with delicacy, and wipe away the pus frequently, before they become red and swollen on the leg and are rolled up.
And be careful not to damage the leg at its extremities; and if your operation in the morning causes the skin to peel off, and you have a firm hand in your operation, do not incise except those veins.
And when you have completed it, then you dilute the hot water or vinegar that remains from the sabre in the wound.
However, if you cannot obtain all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of what reduces the pain of it, and leave it on for several days until the pain is reduced and the risk of abscess is avoided.
And then repeat the process until it is healed.
This is the form of the forceps:
Chapter 19
On the reduction of hernias to the navel.
When you cure hernias with cauteries or sharp medicines after the story of it has not been healed, then do not insert into it but rather incise over the abscess to mature its contents and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is discovered.
And when the bone is discovered and it is corrupt or black in it, then you remove it with a tool of which this is the form:
And it is named for a hard head, and made of iron, and the head should be round like the one that has been punctured by a lancet or a scalpel for a subtle puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the location corrupted by the bone, and gradually rotate it between your thumbs, and press your hand gently until you know that that corruption is removed.
And do that several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from the disease and it has lasted for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident happens in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this manner: and you should take a second bone or an acute medical instrument, and when you have exposed the bone, then take a tribune in this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as if it were a spike.
And place that one over the bone, and another near the lacrimal; and let your hand hold a little of the water, and then let your hand rotate it around the tribe until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient feels pain as if it were entering his body.
Therefore, then restore the place with drying astringent remedies as you have seen.
Therefore, when the flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed into the parts of the body returns to its source, so that is more like a wound on the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the elevation of the water.
When the water elevates to its totality and does not cause harm or decrease in the excretion, then let the patient lie down, and let him follow that, and let you place some bandages on his neck for good suction; and let you place a liniment on the water made of pitch, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and let you strengthen the plaster on the water with powders.
The method of cleaning the feet is to take cloths made of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make those parts.
Then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose. Then apply strong pressure with the cloth, made of durable, strong material; and repeat the succussions on the wounds; then remove the cloths and let the wound heal during the day and night.
If the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
Then remove the ligament as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the wound and the cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 21
Of the beginning of the elevation of the choroid membrane.
When there is disruption in the choroid membrane, and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids like a sharp object, and takes on the form of a person, and you want to incise it, then the operation is done as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the edge of the choroid from below, and then place another needle double the size of the lacrimal part above it, and make that penetrate, and let the first needle follow its position; and then incise the location of the doubled part and lift that part of the choroid around the needle, and apply strong pressure on that part.
And then extract the needle and place it on the woolen cloth soaked in album of egg whites and let it rest until the thread is pulled through the goose's eye.
And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
And some cotton is gathered from all parts and placed in a circle inside the wool, adjusting its height to be equal, and then perforate it with a thin spatula until it reaches the surface of the wool, and let the albumen moisture descend, and then lower the wool and insert it immediately.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
Of the cure of cataracts.
This disease, which is called cataracts, is not other than a waterfall that descends into the wool and is not that one.
The method of working in it is that the patient should sit on the prepared and adjusted chair, and then take the upper part of your hands in two parts and hold that one where you see the disease arriving at the affected parts, and then let it dry and not descend, and let the light be, and the patient will see the causes as he usually does.
And if it does not come down in the foot, you will know that it is water.
Then, if it is not prepared for the descent to the skin, take that which we have said, and make the patient lie between your hands, and then take a thin sponge and moisten it with that, and place it on the conjunctiva and tunica cornea in the cornea (entering into the eye), until it is completely absorbed.
Then, when it is completely absorbed, you will distill water with a tail of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already prepared fenugreek and honey.
And then cure it from the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22
Of the cure of water descending from the eye.
We have already said the species of water in the division and which is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that one second to healing.
Then you should make the patient lie between your hands on a cushion and cover their eye, then press it firmly.
And place your hand on the side of their eyelid, if the water is on the right side; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
And take hold of the right eye with your right hand, if the water is on the left side; or hold the left eye with your left hand.
And place the tip of your finger near the cornea over the thickest part of the eye's white on the side of the lower eyelid, and then gently touch the eyeball with it and rotate your hand in that direction.
And penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that your finger has reached the cause of the swelling.
And note that the length of your finger is equal to the distance between the pupil and the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And place your finger in the location where the water is, and then quickly turn your hand over another one, so if the water descends at first, then first wipe the patient's eye with that cloth, and place your finger in their eyelid.
Then rest for a short while; if the water is descending, then pause at that other stage in front of you where it is not yet gathered.
And when it is dry and not descending, then extract the gathered water with ease, and gently rub your hand on the wound little by little, and then dissolve in the water a small piece of clear gemstone salt; and then place that cloth outside the wound, or infuse a stopper or linen infused with rose oil and album of egg and bind it to the wound.
But we and those who have lived in our time use album of egg instead.
And if you do not obey the instrument of the wound due to its hardness - which is one of those men whose wound is very hard - then gently take the spatula that is called the handle of this type:
And then pierce it at that conjunction, and do not let your hand in the trough, and do not say if you did not make a subtle way to the water.
And then enter the second ingredient that we have mentioned.
And you should prepare the patient for the operation, which is done when they are lying on their back in a dark room, and prohibited from all movements.
And place your hand on the patient to calm their nature and not cause harm to their head or any other part.
And let the bandage be according to their condition until the third day.
And then remove it from that dark room and extract the free view, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
And do not let it be done at the hour of cures or too soon, the infusion. Having been allowed to do that because the water can be more effectively and forcefully poured out.
But if an abscess occurs, then let it be removed after the seventh day, and correct that with the water that causes the abscess.
When you have finished examining them, place your hand on their face to control their vomiting, which exists in the deepest darkness.
Then gently lift them from that darkness and discuss their causes.
And know that in some cases, the disciple of vision is not excused from certain operations, and then you should be skilled in the operation.
And we have already reached some of those that are in the Arctic, and some say that fire is made in the air by piercing the water.
However, we have not seen such a thing in our land that has performed this, nor is it found in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who ignore them:
And they are made of earth or iron properly, and their external parts are like this triangle, the sharp end being like that form.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose different fleshy masses are assembled, which is caused by some reason that is similar to a scorpion of fish, or a polyp; and this disease is called a polypus, which is like the representation of that fish. And from there is cancerous flesh, which is black in color; and from there is flesh that is not black in color.
Therefore, in those fleshy masses that are not fraudulent or cancerous, you should make the patient sweat between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and wipe the nose of them, and pick out the tumor from among those fleshy masses. And then extract that from the parts of the foreskin, and then cut off that which you have comprehended from among those fleshy masses with a sharp tool under which you know that all the flesh has been stopped; because if there is any cause for which the abscission is possible, then later you should remove that with one of the delicate tools with which it can be removed. If the lord has swelling or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause there with a poultice; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize that area where the pus has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then apply a cold compress on the nose, close to the beginning of the nostril where the blood is coming from. If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has been healed.
If the moisture does not enter after applying the poultice, then you know that there is no flesh in the swollen tissues of the nose where the pus has not been drained.
Therefore, cover that place with a thin cloth where there is some swelling, and apply pressure in the mouth, and pause between each pressure for the amount of time or measure that is necessary, and guide the patient and insert one end of the cloth into the nose to hold it or another cause that is possible at that time.
And when that is done, bring the patient's nose close to the opening of the nostrils, and place it on his gently, as many children in school do this action, and it is the likely cause for that person who wants to do it.
And then place both of the patient's extremities on his nose and the other in his nostrils, and administer a carnivorous animal in his nose, and do that when you know that the meat is already in his nose.
And then remove the patient, and place in his nostril the abstraction of saint's blood, and do that for three days or more until the tongue corrodes all that is in his nose.
And at the end of the cause, place in his nostril a plumb cannula through which he will be cured.
But if it does not cure, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nose with which they are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
And do that with silver or earthenware, which is similar to a small lantern uncovered, with a small bowl, and the meat in the same way.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a straw, and the canula of the instrument to be used as a purgative and is flat, uncovered; at which hand you hold when you remove the oil or that water you want from the sucs and from the causes suctiblas.
Chapter 25.
About the nostrils on the outside.
When the veins in the nose are swollen and appear outside of their normal position, and they are magnified and swollen on other days when they are not properly cared for.
To prevent that, you should insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the symptoms, and continue with that. And then place your hand or cautery or medicine over the area where it is located.
However, if the appearance of the symptoms is delayed until it becomes magnified, then consider whether it is hard, black in color and has little sensation, because those swollen veins that have inserted this pus into that person have caused great harm to that person.
And if the pus is yellow and not black in color, and the appearance of the symptoms is possible at any time, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by pressure or similar.
Know that when dissolution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is not recommended to perform surgery on all men.
Therefore, if someone has any cause of those, which you consider whether it is fresh pressure or its wound, then adjust the two lips of the wound to suture, and care for that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then consider that you excise each part of their skin until it does not become infected. And then adjust the two lips to suture and strengthen those, and above them powder dragon's blood and triple salt, and place a thin layer of diachylon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and care for that until the wounds have healed.
May the suture needle be such that you add the solution of continuity or have needles as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have done and inform.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the women's genitalia in the parts divided.
Some hard abscesses similar to pus-filled cysts in men's genital parts of their labia, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes larger.
So that you convert the labia and each of those hardnesses of that part, and empty the abscess with a syringe into the location of three fingers until the wound is strengthened, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the location with that which has stiptic properties, until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the beginning of flesh adjusted in the gums.
Great number of vagabonds lay on the gums adjusted to the flesh, which the ancients called albus, therefore cover that you suspend it on a cloth or that you hold it with forceps and insert it into its place, and leave the saliva flow or let it dry.
And then place your hand on the wound site or another stanching or astringent powder.
And if that flesh returns, then secondarily insert it and cauterize it, because the cauterizer will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the jaw and between the gums, scraped, rough, and some vagabonds are black and are made yellow or green before that through corruption they pass to the gum and the teeth become yellow.
And then make the patient sit between your legs and place the head of the patient on your shoulder, and remove the teeth in which those scrapes and similar sand appear before any cause is removed, and that makes black and yellow and other colors before they are modified.
If that is not the case, then proceed with the ratio on those areas on the other day and the second and third times until it reaches the end statement in which you want.
You should know that the teeth have required variously shaped tools and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you know which tool is used to shave the part of the tooth and another tool used to shave between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of tools should be prepared by you, as you will see soon:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
That you cure the tooth of its pain from beginning to end in the extraction of it, that there is no cause that delays the withdrawal of the tooth when it is extracted, that is a sublimated substance within which extraction is performed.
May it be that when the patient is forced to have that tooth extracted, that you must certainly be certain of which tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the patient confuses the pain with a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of the teeth.
Then, since you must determine which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how, cut around the tooth with some tool that has some usefulness, until it is dissolved from the gum on all sides, and then remove that with the forceps, or with fine tweezers starting small and gradually until that is done.
And then, with a large, strong loop for good speech or extraction, place the patient's head between your two thumbs that you hold so that it does not move, and then extract the tooth in a straight manner so that it does not touch the patient or cause them greater pain.
And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those tools, and place it under the tooth on all sides to facilitate and ease the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, cut that break and tighten that with a fine wire so that it does not break in the moment of your construction on that with the forceps.
And cover that you work carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not tear from there, and return over the patient for the malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity for the eradication of them, which they do not administer to us as we have recommended; for many wicked people bring great evils upon men, which are more difficult than those that are quadrupled, and all their reasons remain, or some of those, or that they extract from there with ignorant wickedness as many testimonies have shown.
And the eradication of it should be washed the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
And if there are flows of pus through the wound, as many have said, then cut off some amount of sponge and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not compare to that sponge, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with the ones that are praised for their long, thin jaws at the beginning, short handle and thick, so that they would not bend when performing those tasks.
And if there are times of thick handles entering that when they are new, they would not be bent, then they are short jaws.
And they are made of Indian steel or right-angled jaws, and in the jaws of those ones have teeth of which some are inserted into others and they are made with great strength, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia, which is called a crane, so it is held, and they are very strong.
Chapter 31.
Of the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the jaws that are impacted.
When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, then first place your hand over the location close to the jaw for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then enter with anesthesia or hold the jaws of which they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The external parts of their thighs were cut with a knife or an axe.
And if they do not obey your commands and these forceps or hold them, then carefully cut around the wound and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of the talon, which is a small saw with this form:
And if it is of short length and thick, use a small one, not too large so that it does not become crooked.
Then if the wound is opened, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which the following are the forms: the form of the first instrument is a triangular blade in which there is a groove:
The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more slender tip.
And now you have helped yourself with this instrument having two handles of which the following is the form: And other instruments which I will describe for the extraction of teeth; because it is well done with this instrument which resembles an ice pick, and this is the form:
From the triangular extreme part that is twisted or short, which is some swelling, and not thinly enough to be a triangle.
And other wise that the instruments of teeth are similar to the other instruments.
May the skilled and subtle artists in this art be able to perform this operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are different from others in their forms of various species.
May it be thinly enough to be a triangle if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are triangular, or if they are rotten, then carefully treat that part which is convenient for this operation and the forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of the teeth roots, and help you with how to handle this:
And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is fully removed; then restore the place with appropriate medicines for this.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black center, and cure it within so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 32.
About the care of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth are prominent and do not naturally follow their own course, and especially when they occur in women, and especially in revered virgins, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and there is no possibility of a bridge or ligament from it, then you should remove that tooth; but if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument whose shape is like this; and it is similar to a pig's trough, and should be made of Indian iron with an extra-sharp edge.
And if your incision is in the area where you incised it in three days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if the prominent tooth is exposed to the gum, then you should file it with this file of Indian iron whose shape is like this:
And if all the iron is from India and the hammer is also of the same kind; and if the points are made with a pointed tool like a lion's tooth, which are made into needles, which should be sharpened little by little in different days for convenience, so that there is no other tooth that is worn out and broken. And then draw lines along the bone, and shave it with a razor.
And if there is a tooth that a part of it is drilled and the tongue is exposed, then cover that hole with something that the roughness of that fraction is stopped and covered, and filled so that the tongue does not descend or the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of worn out teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth due to impact or fall, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been effective, then use gold wire instead of silver, because silver becomes green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
And if the bone is so fragile and rough according to how much can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reccio is that you grasp the bone and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two tortuosities of the bone between two muddy ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the task in the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not muddy.
And your string should be the one that strengthens the bone from the roots of the teeth that do not escape.
And then cut off the excess parts of the bone with forceps or pliers, and add those to each place according to your gesture, and convert them into those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the muddy one, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then let that tight space be as in Roman.
If it is dislocated or broken, strengthen it with that or those other bones in such a manner that they are all connected during the entire time.
And this is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth and two crooked ones, as follows:
And when it is done that the tooth or teeth return to their proper place in such locations, and they are regrown as we have recommended, and remain straight.
And this is not done by just any skilled and knowledgeable person.
And some of these bones are suitable for certain causes of cow's bones, and they are made into teeth in such a manner as follows: they are placed in a location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve well for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is located behind the tongue, some of which are made from certain bones or is natural to the person, or is an accidental and has become solidified.
And the operation is to remove the patient's mouth from their face, their tongue existing on the chin; and lift their tongue, and then insert a ligament nerve according to the latitude where the tongue ends in its recency.
If there is any difficulty or resistance in that place, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should give an incision and divide it according to the latitude where the ligament has been inserted and the resistance has been dissolved.
And be careful that no incision is made in the flesh of the carcass and that you divide here an arc and let out blood flow from the sinew.
And then wash the footprints of the incision with warm water or vinegar or warm water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving again so that another movement is not consolidated.
If there is blood flow from the sinew, place your hand over the third rib; if the sinew goes away, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then approach those other causes that are needed to be healed.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, certain swellings on the tongue, similar to a small abscess, prevent the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if they are not treated soon enough, they can fill the mouth.
And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sunlight and examine the abscess.
And if you see it as dark or black, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part.
And if it is declined to a white color, in which there is moisture, then you put the needle in it, and insert a thin sponge into it, and cut it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the patient's throat, as it is vinegar, until it is restricted.
And then return to your work before you have completed it, before it is washed with warm water and salt; and cure the other with the same treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36:
On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch it with a knife for fear of infection; leave it alone until it matures, and then either you will break it or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, thin, and the pus of it is thin, then that should be lanced.
And the operation in him is that you consider, during your operation, whether the abscess of him has completely healed or if it has decreased at all; and then do so by turning the patient on his side, with his head on your hand, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him, and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Then when you press that tongue against the abscess, and catheterize over that your hand, then take an onion and place it in the wound, and pull those out as much as possible. Another thing that you take from the membranes, and then incise it with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that you take from the membranes, and then incise it with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, sharp, the one being made of iron and thin.
If this instrument is not at your present, then insert the pointed end of that which has this form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And after you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this method of insertion, and then guard the patient from cold water.
If there is a flow of blood, guard the patient from cold water, use decoction of wormwood or elderberry and similar to those that are hemostatic within which the blood flow is restricted, and then care for it until it is cured.
And sometimes blisters are also found in the groin and other abscesses or those two boils, and insert them according to what I said in the insertion of two needles equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman breathed very straight, and had already prohibited eating and drinking water, and was already reached death if more waited for a day or two.
And the abscess had grown so much that it had pushed two ribs inside, pressing on two ribs.
So you correctly made an incision in one of them, and pulled out that one, and took out a large portion from it, and then you incised the other part where you understood the other wound, and closed the mouth of that, and covered their tongue, and then you squeezed the incision into that abscess.
And then you took out a large amount of pus from it, but it did not flow from it, but only a little bit of sanctum. And then the whole body of that woman was completely covered with it, and soon afterwards she began to urinate water, and then you did not cease incising from that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in place of that one, which continued to grow.
So you applied a bandage and cauterized the wound of it, and then you continued to dress it; and then you walked around and did not know what God had done for that woman.
Chapter thirty-seven.
From the beginning of labor when it becomes obstructed.
When catarrh occurs in the uterus, and it becomes obstructed and prolonged, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
When the condition we mentioned in the division is cured, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that an obstruction has been removed from it and is thin, then cut that which is round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and not in the center, then cut the beginning of it, where there is danger to the patient.
And when you see that the second, as I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and place the tongue of it with an instrument that processes its shape and puts the onion in the new place, and pull that down and cut it with one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two needles.
And if you do not insert that but rather what is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, then if you insert it from there, you will damage its language.
And then use what we have recommended for insertion in the insertion of two women, and cure that within which it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the insertion of that, then use the method of cauterization with its fears, and the way of holding the cauterizing instrument in your hand is not other than sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient on your head, and then take the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the water we have mentioned in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it to that living cause, and do not press too hard or subtly, and from that fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
The external part of that in its cavity where the medicine is placed over the spoon, and the patient lies on their side to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not cause any harm to that.
And approach your hand with the medicine, and apply it to the uvula for the space of about an hour until that becomes discolored and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a small tube until that adheres to the tube, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it, and after the cauterization wash the area around the uvula with a soft cloth in the circumference of the medicine, and change that which is in the circumference of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and apply ointment afterward, and give garglings until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe and longer than the beginning and end of the fear.
Some ulcers are cured by applying a substance that is more subtle than cauterization, which is cured by means of fumigation in this manner: take camomile, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabic scicados, camomilla, broyda and similar herbs to those of the plants, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bath, and they are submerged in very hot water and boiled; and the bath should be well washed with decent soap, and there should be a trough over it, above which a suitable instrument made of iron according to this method should be placed; it should be made of silver or iron.
And the end should be inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula over the quill, before the uvula becomes obscured.
And apply this remedy to those ulcers before they dry, and remember that you should not perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would be too harsh for the abscess, and do not make this remedy unless you are sure of the diagnosis of the abscess.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a stick and place a piece of wood in its mouth, so that the patient's mouth is covered, because the piece of wood prevents the smoke from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of that which sticks to the sole and other causes.
Foreign bodies stick to the sole or in the foot or some other cause.
Then see what you remove from those that are visible, above which catches the sight, because you should use an instrument designed for the sole, so that it is clear what is in the sole.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the sole, see what you make the patient vomit, because the cause attached to the sole is often expelled by vomit; or that the patient swallowed a pea of bread or a piece of rice or a small amount of dry bread; or took a sponge of sea sponge and soaked it well in water, and then placed it on the sole, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are and are extracted, it is expelled. And then take an eel and roast it over a fire, and remove the bones and skin; or take a pork chop and remove the skin and fat.
And if you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
And it should be as thick as a straw, and at the end of it, there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
And the agate is held elevated in the patient's mouth, and be careful that the touch of the sieu bone of the neck, so that it does not cause harm to the patient or the instrument, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient feels pain from that inserted instrument, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and he pushes it downwards, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, then do so according to the amount that is prepared in time before it is forgotten.
Chapter 39.
The extraction of blood from the vein attached to the buttock.
When the blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the cure of medicines and not comfrey, consider this in the buttock of the patient during the sunlight, as you have understood the tongue of it with the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the blood, extract it with a small needle or with a fine incision carefully.
And if it is not possible to withdraw it, then take a concave needle and insert it into the buttock of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the needle, and hold an ignited iron there, and do this as many times (until the blood is dead and does not come out of the buttock) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
And then take a full wet cloth, and work the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not wipe any cause from it and let the water stand for an hour, then another on its hand, where the blood is as cold as water.
If it is not forgotten, you should smoke the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument recommended for smoking in the suffumigation of the uvula.
Do that, in four days.
And another way of operation in suffumigation of that, is that you take an oven in which there are burning coals and the oven should be covered with a blanket in the middle of which there is a hole, and it should be placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then lift the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the tube, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not lost until you know that the suffumigation has reached the sanctification, which takes four days.
And if it does not heal, then repeat the suffumigation after more days, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids when they are visible; it is similar to forceps, but with some curvature in a certain place. which is placed on the hemorrhoid, and its tip is similar to the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is smeared with lime, so that when it encounters any cause, it does not let go.
Chapter 40.
In which is the main part of the speech on the treatment and cutting of abscesses.
Abscesses are special types of masses, according to the memory of their appearance, each in this book.
And they are different in puncture and incision, according to the following methods, one of which is for the special type of abscesses that can be directly opened; and because it understands the humidity.
And the second method is for the places where the disease occurs, such as the abscess on the head is different from the abscess on the buttocks; and the abscess in the fleshy part is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has its own incision for surgery.
And more about abscesses, some of which require not to be pierced until their maturation in those places or their suppuration.
And other abscesses which require to be lanced when they are ripe, and not matured according to their condition, just like abscesses that are near joints, where an abscess that is approaching a joint, its cause is prolonged until the pus inside it is removed, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay the piercing of it until it is matured, it will not be saved from the main member; or it is near the anus, so lance that unmatured one; and do not lance it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that the pus of it does not spread and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and is made a fistula, or that it is done in the term of it that is not healed. When you know the time of rupture of the abscess, it is then that it is mature.
And you know that it is mature when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease of headache and pulse, and the increase of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you know that the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from which healing will come from the maturity of the abscess.
The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the locations of the tendons of the nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until it is confirmed that the digestion of it has been completed, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, the length of the limb of the patient is prolonged and the movement of it is slow, and very often the lips of the wound are hardened and the depth of it.
When an abscess is perforated according to the size of the flesh or the need, or according to what the member indicates.
And when you administer small perforation, and in large abscesses great perforation and wide or deep incisions according to the difference in the size of the abscesses.
And other abscesses in which it is necessary that the cavity be filled and closed, when made so that it does not open again, like those that occur in swellings of the groin and in buboes.
And of those that have three-angled incisions; and of those that are made like the shape of a sickle, like the abscesses of the armpits.
And of those that are made with round and crescent-shaped incisions, like those.
When the one that is not like those is superficial abscesses, then you should make a shallow incision or only plan it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it, as you would not want to extract all the pus in one hour; taking out a part, and the next day putting in the abscess, and then taking out a larger part, and doing this gradually until it is fully drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a child, or an elderly person, as the animal spirit becomes more senile and resolves at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, as you must remove the pus and consider whether the pus of the abscess is little, or if it is a flat section, then you administer those remedies to him or from an ancient source; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are large, then you must wait until they meet before they merge.
And if a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or has been concaved in that area, then you should cover it with old or new cloth made of fabric, just like when you have treated wounds or rashes, their moisture; and strengthen it within the third day; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the juices inside until it is healed.
If you accidentally spill blood during the operation, then you should administer cold water and apply a cloth of linen on those parts where the blood is flowing, and place that cloth over the area of the bleeding wounds.
If the bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and cures and powders of those which have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
If it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near important nerves, then you should cover those parts with powders and oil, and place them over those areas.
And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply powdered sulfur or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be applied before the third day, as we have said, and then you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it what is appropriate for its healing within the time it takes to become healthy.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that has already been said, each abscess should be treated differently depending on its specific type.
Chapter 41.
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
Small abscesses in the neck, and their specific types that contain tunicae that are unique to them; and their specific types are as follows.
And among them are those that are thin, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey. And among them are those that contain moisture similar to honey and their own kind; and of those that are hard, like stones.
In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one should not fear, as it does not create a barrier to the extraction of those.
The operation in the section of those is that you use those instruments in the shape of which it approaches the area, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then cut that section according to its length through the surface in this form:
And begin in the section of the line of B up to the line of G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, since too many wounds returned, if there is any cause of it.
Then immerse it in Egyptian cotton, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that area and leave it there for another day, since that water corrodes everything that comes from that layer.
And then repeat the procedure on the other side, thoroughly and carefully if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that skin; then cure the pain with the same method until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should insert this second instrument in this way: with a curved shape like a crochet, and insert it between two lips of the instrument and scrape all parts, and use your skill to extract the membrane that contains that.
But if your instrument causes discomfort, then do what I have told you first.
And similarly, perform the operation on the abscess with healing and treatment according to what we have told you; and if you incise an abscess that is filled with pus, it is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And some people have such abscesses that they are completely dry; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and drain it like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, it will cause pain.
In other cases, abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, as with those that occur on the heads of children and must be explained by the sections of hair, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the spread of the disease to the lower parts.
And apply that which is appropriate for healing to that of healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck, arms, and legs; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and their causes among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, and as with the nodular abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the types of these scrofula are hard, as some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and those that do not respond to treatment.
Then in the place where you have found good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the code, and is maggoty to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arch, and is not pronged, because you incise that place with a dry superficial part above the part behind the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that place from all parts, and extend two lips of the code on one side, or on both sides if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small piece by piece.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And it is not a sharp instrument, which does not adjust to your hand in the incision, or which disturbs the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised the vein or arch and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the vinegar-soaked cloth or other powders that keep the flow of pus, and clean the place, and let that remain inside which stops the increase of the abscess and the skin becomes soft and begins to dry. When the tooth is removed.
So return to your operation before the wound is completed.
And then inquire if there is any cause of other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the region of the large vein of the scrofula, do not incise that scrofula of its region. Before you do that, make sure it is very strong and that it does not harm itself when it falls.
And then complete the patch with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mummia, and then cure that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, make sure you adjust the two lips of the patch and cause them to stick together as soon as possible so that there is no excess.
But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, make sure you suture the region of that and administer that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, pierce that surface puncture here where it appears to you at the location of maturation of that, and pause that puncture which is the lowest of that, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, using needles and similar to those, in order to erode that which is around the corrosion. And then when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then you cure that needle of generated flesh before it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the section of the pus pocket in an accidental abscess through the thigh.
This section has been done in the groin, and no one has seen anyone do that in our land.
And this is the inscription of that speech.
May the men have an esquinencia, cover that should be avoided during the extraction of the groin, as it is not done well for that reason, because all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the disease is not in the root, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent the danger that is done by suffocation.
So when we want that, cut off the epiglottis with three or four small sections of the epiglottis circles, or for the thickness in the area between two circles, that the section is in a cylinder, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is devoid of flesh and the sinuses of sane from it are open.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to one side, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinuses of sane if there is some cause from those.
And then cut the larynx according to what we have recommended; and it is indicated over the section of the canal through the flaccidity which is from that and the disruption of the voice and for the abscess of the throat.
Let the wound be left open for some time.
Therefore, when the time comes when that puncture is feared, add two strips of the wound's skin, and let it heal alone with the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that prevent the flesh from becoming infected until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is nothing more than to see how some people who have been infected with abscesses have been cured, and the patient has died, and his mouth was sealed, and they cut the epiglottis so that the patient could breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, leave the wound open until the poison of the patient is consumed; and the poison lasts for three days; and therefore, in that case, commander, leave the wound open, and cure it within the time it is healed.
And what I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and inserts part of the lung's tissue into the patient's mouth, and she was called for its treatment, and then she covered the wound with mud as it does the morbid flesh, and then exposed the wound and covered it with a clean cloth that was not from the wound.
Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guide of the wound, and the wind was from the wound, and cure it within that fire is healed.
And do not harm the servant if he does not return to his former position, and bring him back to his previous arrangements.
Now tell you that in the section of the epidural there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of incision over the abscess that occurs in the groin forward, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess large according to the color of the body, and it is caused by women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural one there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is similar to abscess that is caused by the formation of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not make any assumption about it as you would with a sword, except in the case of a small one. And if you have a needle and thread, investigate it and see if it resembles a heavy knot, and if it is not suspended by any of the veins, then insert that needle with the knots and extract that which contains the bone and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire structure and apply treatment with what you believe to be most effective before it is healed.
Chapter 45.
Of the section of the types of knots.
Of the types of knots that I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
And you should make a distinction between a knot and an opening when making a doubtful decision.
Therefore, you should say that an opening is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of excess is subdued; and it is a putrid condition that ceases the fever, pain, and heat.
If there is no heat, fever, or pain, and if the patient's pulse is like that of a lion, which is slow, then this is a sign of death.
If the color of the body is pale, and the beginning of it is like that of a corpse, whether major or minor, and it is one of two kinds, either fat and containing much humidity, or the colors of humidity are mottled, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure of the disease, examine that and inquire about that at the beginning of the instrument which is called the introitus, according to what will come out of its form, which is appropriate for this.
And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all wounds, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you turn the tips of it little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the instrument and consider what is inside it.
If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry superficial section as mentioned in the other abscesses.
If there is no moisture from the imprint of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
And if it has a form of crochet according to this shape: As you have been taught, suspend that with the hooks, and excoriate the cord from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that and remove that pus from there.
If it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you wait until that happens, and then you remove it from there before any cause comes from it.
If it comes from any cause, too much or not enough, then the skin returns according to the most.
And if you see that it comes from any part of the skin, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over that which seats the abscess cautiously, and cure that from the other cure before it is healed.
If it is necessary to treat a large wound, then take both of its lips and cure that part with that which contains it.
If it comes from the opposite side or not, then take and fill the wound with a mixture of vinegar and lemon juice that is boiled for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the suppuration begins; and then return to incise that which remains.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
Of those that have the forms of probes, and of three kinds, which are large, and theirs are flexible, and theirs are small.
The form of a large probe is this:
The form of a small probe is this:
Made of iron, of steel, of the ends that are curved reasonably, so that the instrument does not get stuck in the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experimenters, and they are named Albert, and one of them is called Berthold.
And there are three spices, one of which is great, namely pepper, and another is small.
The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
The form of the pepper experimenter, his shape:
The form of the small experimenter, his shape:
It is said that they are for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils, because among them there are bones and other causes.
And they make needles, large, lions, as with great golden needles, and they are made of iron, or of gold, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of iron.
And they are made by the experimenters of black pitch, which are said to be useful for those who have fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflective, that they are reflected by their lightness on those reflections.
And of three sizes, that the longest of them is on their longs, and the others on their sides, and the shortest on their chests, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and its stricture.
The great experiment of the plum:
The middle experiment of the plum:
The small experiment of the plum:
The forms of the nails are of special types, that of those which are simple ones, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and middle.
And of their nails there is an arch, and it is of three kinds.
And of those which have two curves, they are of three kinds.
And of theirs which have three curves, they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
The form of a small simple nail, the shape of it:
Form of a large nail having two curves: Form of a small nail having two curves: Form of a small nail having two curves:
Form of a large nail having three curves:
Form of a small nail having three curves:
And these are the forms of sharp and pointed scalpels that cut and lance the nodes and abscesses, and there are three kinds, one large, small, and medium.
Form of a large scalpel:
Form of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of a small scalpel:
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not rested in such a way, but so that they can be used well in the excoriation of nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and for those it is a cure for the patient and also peace of mind due to the drainage of the abscess.
These are the forms of amulets, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you see.
These are made of gold and their like, which is made into powder.
And it is on the outside that it is pricked with a hidden needle and placed between the parts and the skin, as you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatiums, which are placed between the parts for the puncture of abscesses and do not pierce the skin, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those:
The forms of those which are cut off from the flow of blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; their forms are as follows:
These are made of gold, round or some length, and they are subtle.
And you should have these kinds of syringes, large and small, because when you need to remove abscess fluid quickly, it is necessary, and later when there is no medicine.
However, do not use them in all parts of the body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs and cushions, and on the sides of the arms, breasts, belly, and groin, similar to their fleshy areas.
Some syringes are made of other small tools similar to lancets, according to this form; by which the pus is removed when it is done by fleamotomy, or you must insert into a vein or an artery.
And some syringes are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47.
About the care of men's breasts, which are similar to women's.
Some women inflate their breasts with air to enhance their appearance when they start losing them due to aging, and then remove the inflated breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and remote ones.
And to those who have that, cut those parts in the shape of the crescent moon according to this line from .B. to .G., and then remove all the scabs, and place the flesh-colored medicament on the wound, and adjust the edges of the medicament with a cotton swab, and heal that before it is healed.
However, if the breast declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as it does in women, then cut it into two parts higher up, each part similar to a crescent moon shape, of which each contains the other at the end of each, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. and .G. And then remove the scab that is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing before it is healed.
If you do not complete the initial incision as instructed due to the patient's restlessness or excessive bleeding, then apply a cloth soaked in corrosive liquid to the wound, and leave it inside where the corrosive substance eats away at the gray matter, and then care for the area that needs healing.
Chapter 48.
On the perforation of abscesses that come from the mamilla (nipple).
These abscesses that come from the mamilla are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pocket.
And among those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all the content of the abscess is evacuated, then you can close it with a stitch and leave it open for another day.
And then the wound should be left to heal and treated with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands of the neck and of the scrophulas is, then you incise it as we have said in the section on the scrophulas equally.
If the plague extends to an area that cannot be pricked, then administer it with a cautery according to what we have said in that case.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur by force or by vein.
When the ribs are broken and the membrane is consolidated over it, then boils and pustules occur because of inflammation and abscess through the artery or vein: because when the abscess occurs by force, it is longer in the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the place where it is.
And that which occurs by vein is round like a shield on the front of the body.
And incision over this abscess is an error, and especially in that which is behind the shoulders, and in the elbows, and in the collarbone, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great wound, so therefore avoid its cure by iron, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
When over the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with scissors and the arch, and remove the tunics inside where it is discovered.
And then place the needle over that and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with a double force in two places,  which causes you to have an experience in extracting two arches that are in the temples.
And then push the location between two ligaments within the space where it is completely in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within the space where the ligaments fall; and then cure that with a suitable remedy to it until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to a section of a vein, then cover that you have your hand on the location where the abscess is, and then introduce the needle after the location where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract it from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a double thread according to what I have told you in the vein of grape4 of two parts and two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread will come out, then insert the thin needle into the pus at the beginning of the wound, and strengthen the four corners of the thread.
Then dry the pus in the middle part of the wound before inserting that which is inside it, and leave what comes out of it.
Then place a poultice over the wound, which you have soaked in water and oil, and then administer the cure that is made from herbs and applied inside until it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
When abscesses occur in the arches and veins, and similarly when abscesses occur in the nerves when they are affected by excessive work or similar causes.
And it is done in the places of the assistants or the ankle, or in any place where there are many joints.
And the abscess is severe, and it is similar to the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the limbs, and when it is stretched by violence, it feels in the patient a similar shock.
And there is no abscess attached to the front of the body, and therefore the cord is left, and it is not maggoted at all parts and does not go to the previous or posterior parts.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it could cause great contraction.
May the one who is in the head or on the forehead have the cord made of sponge. If there are few abscesses, then use those at the tips and cut off the ones on the ribs.
And if it is large, then hang it on an hook, and scrape off that one, and remove it; and adjust the bandage to the wound, and cure it before it becomes healed.
Chapter 51
Of the incision of abscesses that occur in the cheek and those that occur in the belly.
In some people, moles occur in the bellies of those and in other parts of their bodies of those that are called fungal because they resemble those that function, with a subtle rib and a large head; and their lips are also converted, and it is from those that are small, and it is from those that are very magnificent.
And I have also seen one, and in his belly were two thighs that were more similar to functions, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller reason.
And the lips of those were turned inside out and defended themselves, and moisture ran from that time onwards.
Therefore I inserted those and again in the one foot eight unciae, and the other five unciae.
And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider if the patient is humid, and the color of the thigh is white, humid, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because motas veguadas deves la seccio of them is expelled by sanc; and if you vent the sanc, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient purple and afraid, guard yourself from insertion with iron; but then take some recent blood, and strengthen that thigh, the manner of which we have said; and leave that for two days.
And then adjust in the narrowing of the lead rope; therefore, do not stop pulling the thick rope until it is cut and falls by itself into its own labor.
However, if the rope is too thick, there may be some cause for fear and anxiety, especially in one who is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you incise the wound of it, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then care for that until it is healed from the plague.
And be careful that you do not incise the rope that is of dark color, of little sensation, and regularly round, for that is cancer.
And you will come to remember cancer soon.
Chapter 62.
Of the cure of high abdominal pain.
High abdominal pain is caused by many causes; or by fissures of the navel which is on the belly, and it is covered with cloth or intestine according to what is appropriate in the other ruptures; or by swelling which flows from a vein or artery according to what is called it, or by constriction of the bowels in it.
If it is due to a rupture of the tendon and inflammation of the skin, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and it is accompanied by severe pain, and appears in different positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is different from what we have mentioned before, with greater variation, and when you press it, it disappears, and then returns; and often it is accompanied by severe pain, and it requires a lot of effort to introduce the bath and intense labor.
If it is due to moisture, then it is not painful and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it tightened or hardened.
And if it is due to cancer, then the abscess appears with blackish downward slopes.
If it is due to a tumor, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it feels like a certain amount.
If it is due to inflammation, then the touch of it is painful.
And the operation on the patient is considered to be if the prominence of the navel is due to a bone, or a vein, or by pressure; then it is prohibited from the cure of the patient, as there is fear and terror in that which you have been taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses by bone and by vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then make an incision around the entire umbilicus, and then command that person who is standing between your hands on the side, and then circle the sponge around the circumference of the umbilicus over the place where you have placed the tent; and then extend the main part of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then tie in the circuit the strong or the weak and the method of the knot of the rope.
And then suck the pus of the abscess extended on the ligament and introduce the said needle into that place and seek the intestine; and if you have not done so before or guarded it by the ligament, then extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts below the belly.
And if you have found the cloth, take that one and cut off the excess parts of it.
If it is against your arch or vein, then circle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those two points strong, and penetrate two needles into the circuit you made around the abscess, which you make to penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound heal on its own; or cut away that part which is thinning and seeping, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers the wound before it becomes healthy.
And if the umbilical opening is filled with flesh or moisture, then cover the abscess as we have said and remove the sanc or moisture, which you find in it, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers and consolidates the wound.
Chapter 44
Of the cure of the knee.
As we have said in the previous section, about the knee and how to treat it with medicines, and that it is a good practice in the treatment of the knee so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the knee generates in the most and careful treatment of the cure of it.
The ancients said that some knee gout can be found in places where it is possible to eradicate it, such as the knee which is in the breasts or in the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of it, and especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and great, do not try to treat it yourself, because I have not seen anyone who can cure that or any other, nor has it been reached by that.
And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and lay the patient and purge him of black bile some gout, and if it is found, replace it with a clear one.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from moving any limbs that could cause harm; and then shave all parts of the body thoroughly without causing any injury to the patient. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in that manner, and examine the affected areas, and clean the wound thoroughly with your hand or any suitable instrument that is available to you.
However, if you encounter heavy bleeding from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area as soon as the blood flow has stopped, and then treat the wound with the appropriate method until it is healed.
Chapter 4
Of the treatment of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the previous division, the types of dropsy caused by water, and the symptoms of each type, and their treatment with medicines.
And the one that is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not similar to the type of timpanistres or the type of hypopyon, which is fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of hydrocephalic headache with medicines and not caused any harm to the patient, consider whether the patient has recovered from the other illness or if it is another hydrocephalic condition, such as those in the chest or abdomen, and similar to those, then be aware that you should not treat it with a knife, because fear is involved in that.
And if you see that the patient is of good virtue and has no other illness except hydrocephalus alone, and not in a child or an old person, then the method of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your arms, and place him on his back, pressing the water out of his head at the part behind the occiput, and then take a sponge of this form:
should be of two sharp points long, with a sharp tip like a sponge; but it should also be in some small length, so that in the operation you do not pierce into the intestine, and that you do not harm that one.
And then consider whether the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because it is often said that you should make an incision along the belly for the length of three fingers above the umbilicus, on the right side of the patient.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to a bad intestine, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to a worm, then your incision should be on the right side.
And do not let your incision be on the side over which you want to make the patient vomit, so that the excess does not flow into that place.
And then pierce the entire intestine with the instrument, and then insert it into that incision, and lift your hand between the intestine and the siphon, and you excoriate that; and if the quantity of one finger or more.
And then pierce the siphon until it reaches the space at the place where the water is. And then extract that one and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; made of silver or of thin iron wire, which has a small hole in the lower part of it and three holes on each side: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end according to the manner of the plume, as follows:
And at the upper end of it is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then draw it back over the instrument, and thus drain the water in small quantities, because if you drain too much at once, the patient may die from resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents may occur to them.
Do not drain too much from it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient, the virtue of their leg, and their goodness.
And then extract the instrument, and remove the water which causes that it is first retained by the cord, which removes the hole that is on top of the cap, which you are told to pierce it according to that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient can tolerate that, and remove a small amount of water, and do that for several days in a row, and guard yourself from error so that it does not come out of the water.
But if you are afraid of the patient, and leave a large amount of water, then cure that one with burial in sand, and moisten it with warm water, and let it rest under the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until they are healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mouth and tongue to remove the water, according to what I have told you before.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure of children who are not born with perforated urinary tracts.
Sometimes, some children are born from the belly of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not perforated (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Then cover the wound with a thin cloth of this form:
And place your hand on the wound and tie it with a thin thread of this form for three days or for four days.
When you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
And if you do not place the plaster, it is possible that the urine that comes over the area will not clean this covering.
That of which the wound is straight should be treated with a plaster of this form, as we have said, for three days until it is healed.
May those in which the wound is not in the correct location, such as those that cause this condition, the one that is not born and the wound is at the end of the penis for which it cannot urinate at the parts below, until the penis raises it to its own hand above; and it is not at the generation, because the sperm cannot reach the greater in the right way, and this is a disease caused by a lack of blood.
The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then the head of the cautery is placed in your left hand with a firm grip, and the tip of the cautery is inserted into the second wound, as if writing with a pen, or not making any cuts, so that the edge of the cautery resembles the edge of the cautery and that the blood flows out of the second wound.
And be careful that in your operation of bloodletting, four things often go wrong with it; and pause at that point where you are cutting the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the white substance that often occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the penis and corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce to the tip of the penis.
Four things often occur with this white substance in the penis and its foreskin.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is not.
No-malignant, cover that you suspend an uncial subtle and abscise that part which is entirely covered by those moons; and place it over the submerged part in Egyptian salve; and apply that, cure the wound with the salve until it is healed.
And if it is malignant, of a black color, then cover that you administer a pointed cautery to the beginning and the ratio of it.
However, if it is malignant and located on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the malignancy is ingested by the prepuce and the other part deformed, then cover that you remove the part that is ingested within the beginning until it is consolidated; and now cure that deformation, for when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not ensured that it will not be trinquate.
And already, accidents have occurred in the genitalia and in the black and curled prepuce, then cover that you conquer all that which has been denigrated and which is intended to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and apply lines over that apply this ointment, which is made from crushed scordium of milfoil and of thyme and cress.
And then cure that one with the other treatment until it is healthy.
But if there is a flow of sanctum (holy water), then administer the lunar cautery in this way:
where the cautery is applied at two positions simultaneously, one at the flow of sanctum and one at the plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the vergua (phallus) is corroded and destroyed completely in the hour, then make sure that you insert a plumbum (lead) needle into the opening of the prepucii (foreskin) so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adherence of the prepucii (foreskin) to the head of the vergua (phallus) (and this adherence does not occur except in that case where the foreskin is known, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to plague or abscess) make sure that you excoriate (remove the outer layer of skin) with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the vergua is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to design those exquisitely, then cover the area with some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and apply a soft cloth over the foreskin, as when it is thin, it is often perforated by its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thin cloth, which is already softened in the wet climate so that it does not adhere to another layer.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is of our operation and our will, and those who are truly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that better operation and through that more gentle way, they are lost to salvation.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they did not use it in their laws, but rather we have acquired this through experience, which is the cause why I have observed that the majority of artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a knife and scissors; and they use a rope for a handle and a hook.
And I have tried all these methods and have not found better cleansing with scissors, with a rope for a handle, or with a hook, because the foreskin often evades the noose, as it has two layers, and the inner layer is more behind, and it is sometimes necessary to use another handle and cause certain pain. And with cleansing that is done by alphecati, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, the handle of the instrument does not secure the end of the male member, because it often goes into the wound of it.
In the operation with a hook, the nail often breaks and corrupts your operation. And the child's penis is short by nature, and not stretched in such a way that it requires circumcision, and I have seen such a case.
Despite the circumcision that is done with scissors and a thread, as I have experienced, because the scissors are of proportional size, for this reason the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand so proportioned to both sharpnesses, and insert it according to a certain comparison in one time; and it is a compression of the foreskin that contains the figure of the entire penis, to which there is no error at all.
And the way of the operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is one of those who understands a little, that you do not do anything but tie the foreskin to its penis only, and let it enter the other day.
And then make that child happy in all ways that is possible for him to understand. And then position that person between your arms, prepared in advance, and not too close; and hide the forceps in your hand or behind your back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on the child's head and blow into the nostrils, and pull out whatever is blocking the opening of the nose, and remove that which has been added due to congestion.
The shape of the forceps for surgery, this is the shape:
The outer parts are not sharp and the inner parts are sharp, so that the nail of the thumb does not fit in, and the length of the two blades is equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in surgery is that too much force is used to pull out the entire or part of the intestine from the beginning.
Therefore, you should extend that of your hour with your nail to the abscess of the area and insert it with the same equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a needle and insert it.
If they have passed three days, and that is inflated behind the abscess, then you should let it out before the abscess bursts, scrape that with facility, and insert it again as you are prepared.
And be careful of the tip of the needle, because it will not go to that.
And therefore, cure that person who is suffering from the aforementioned condition with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised above the ankle, and the parts underneath are obeyed, then that is not to be done.
And until that person is cured, continue with the treatment we have mentioned.
Chapter LVIII.
On the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction formed by a stone or by a congealed mass, or by a tumor or by flesh, and similar to those we have mentioned for the methods of cure in the division.
And if that liquid is not dissolved, then forcefully apply the instrument we have mentioned, which is called a catheter, of which this is its form: It should be made of silver and shaped like a lion's head, with a thin needle at the end, similar to a palm leaf and a pin, to which a thin needle should be attached at the top.
And the way to extract the urine from that person is to take the thin needle and fold it and tie it at the exit of the catheter with wool or cotton for good tightness; then insert the ends of the needle into the part behind the catheter, and if there is any excess cause of the wool, do not introduce it into the catheter with force, but gently. Then suck the urine from the catheter at the border and in the album of honey.
And place the patient on a bed of salt, and massage the bladder and the urethra with oil, and use olive oil and honey.
And then insert the cushion to facilitate its approach to the root of the urethra; and then bend the urethra upwards towards the navel; and then push the cushion through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is when the patient is ready to urinate, and if this is not done in this order, but in a different one, it can cause injury.
And then gradually extend the small thread to the cloth where the urine is flowing.
And then remove that and do for the cure of urine, using a cushion, do not stop doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is relieved again.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of bladder catheterization using the same or similar instruments that are appropriate for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or when it is swollen in that area, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then this should be done with the instrument called the catheter, and this is its form:
but if it is outside of that area, it is closed. And in that area there are three parts: two on one side, as often.
In the beginning there is a cavity, in which that which is infiltrated is located, and the second quantity that opposes it, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from that humidity, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, that water is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, according to what causes a clamp to be made of naphta in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to create humidity in the bladder, insert the end of the clampedra into the humidity, and draw out that water which is infiltrated in the parts above, where the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampedra.
And then insert the end of the clampedra into the urethra after we have recommended it in the catheter; and then draw out the humidity with that water which is drawn out, where that humidity quickly reaches the bladder, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the delicate christening cross that is used to christen the bladder, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or lead, of which the top part is similar to a small feather, and then the cane is inserted into it.
And then take the bladder of motion, and place it in that moisture which you want to christen in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the christening cross into the urethra.
And then place your hand over the bladder with that moisture and structure which has already entered the patient's body, where that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if there is no bladder present, then take a cork and make it into a circle; and perforate it throughout its entire thickness; and then insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it can be turned over; and then attach the circle where it was also attached before, because you are placing it in that moisture which you want to christen with the humidities, and listen and smell.
And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into your hand when it reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed the kinds of stones and their cures in the division of medicine, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone in which the operation is performed, and the incision.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that sticks to the bladder.
And I will describe it with a clear and brief explanation.
Therefore, it is said that stones in the bladder mostly appear in children; and the symptoms of which are that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its thinness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in their lower abdomen, and it is then drawn out; and at that time, they feel relief.
And this is the healing of children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In young people, it is often mistaken for that which is between those.
Of that which the stone is larger and the cure is less clear; And if it is scarce, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which is called chrysophanic acid, which removes all the crack in the intestines; for that crack sometimes prevents the entry of the stone due to its investigation.
And then press the intestine to its feet and be careful and make it moist with oil so that the stone descends to the opening of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some place.
And then make that incision between your hands prepared, and the hands of the patient should be placed under it, so that the bladder is completely made to slope down to the parts below.
And then approach that one and all of that one.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly perform a section on it.
And if you cannot remove the entire stone at once, then rub the tip of your left hand on the affected area, if the patient is a child, or the right hand if they are an adult, and insert it into their rectum. And then approach the stone that is still inside you. And gradually push it towards the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that one with your hand, and expel it through the parts of the bladder where you made the incision.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain raised, the one that is under the parts where you made the incision.
And then insert a probe with an incised tip of the following shape: And split in that which is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the section be on the stone, and let the cut be in the buttocks, and let a transverse section be made, so that the deformed section may be wide and narrow according to the amount that the stone requires for it, and not more, because the stone will get the stone which is in the buttocks the section, and it is forgotten its defects.
And know that there is a stone from which some angles and margins are, so that the examination of it is made difficult by that.
And from that which is like a lion's claw, round, and made of the same material and difficult examination.
Therefore, if it is to that which has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not forgotten, then forcefully grasp that, or firmly grip it with a decent gesture, the end of which is such as with a file which grasps over the stone, and does not slip from it; or that you insert behind it the subtle instrument of curved end.
If you cannot reach that one, then enlarge the wound slightly, and if you want to draw out pus, cut through it strongly with that glassy three-pronged instrument.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the marshmellow into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little bit more; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is customary to incise that great section, which causes one of two things: either he dies or he becomes unable to continue the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not entirely solid.
If you do not administer the expulsion of it before it is forgotten, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps until it extracts that in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and of dragon's blood, and strengthen that one. And place that cloth soaked in oil or oil-soaked and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from being too dry.
Then place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
When those wounds are removed, apply warm water and oil to the area, and cure that with an ointment and an ointment for diabetes until it is healed.
However, if in the same place an abscess occurs, it is hard and corrosive, and of that kind, there is also such a thing as when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and because of this, the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the tiu said in the wound and extract that wound, because if it causes the bladder to rot and decay.
Then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and with an ointment that suits it for the cure until it is healed.
And cover all the spaces between the patient's thighs and adjust the medications placed on the affected area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that person with this remedy until you reach the section where too many troops are gathered for this treatment; and I have already extracted that, and it is recommended that you take a felut iron perforator of this form:
of triangular extraction, sharp, stuck in the handle.
And then take a clean, and place that urethra behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing until the perforator reaches that stone. And then rotate the perforator with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you pierce the hole of it until you make the other side penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
And then place your hand on that spot where the stone of the kidney's part is located, which is called the bladder, and is flushed with urine, and the patient is cured.
However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place one faithful person below the stone and another faithful person above the stone. And then cut into the stone in that bladder between two incisions. And then extract it. And then remove the membrane and moisten the wound with a salve made in the place.
It is not necessary to place a cloth below the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other cloth above should not be placed, because when the faithful one removes the cloth from the stone, the wound returns to its place and becomes infected.
And for that reason, when you have the faithful one above, you must lift the wound to the parts above, or return to your usual complaint and take the wound as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of extracting stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely born.
However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many manipulations.
One of them is that the woman is very strong and gives birth.
And the second is that you do not find a woman very skilled in discriminating whether the midwife is suitable when she is casted, or has many children.
The third is that you do not have a woman very skilled in this art, mainly the operation is dangerous.
And the fourth is that the location of the section over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision, and in that there is fear.
However, if you need to do so, then you should take a very skilled and rare midwife.
However, if you are not able to find such a midwife, then look for one who is wise and subtle, or present a woman who has been experienced in the matter of women, or a woman who has not left this art.
Then perform that present, and command the patient to do everything you tell them during the examination from the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover that with your hand and feel for the hymen in her buttocks.
Then cut off that, remove that from there, and then command the patient to insert it into that.
If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert that into the patient's vagina and examine the hymen, placing her left hand on the bladder, and compare it with a good comparison.
Then cut off that, gradually scraping it from the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the summit of its virtue until it reaches that at the edge of the wound.
Then insert it into that opening at the edge of the wound from any part where it is stopped and in that part, and the patient's hand should not remain on the hymen cut off.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount that is known to be the size of the stone that was removed from there.
You should know that the types of stones are round: some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Therefore, you should know which type of stone is from there for what you mean about what you want.
And if you want to remove the stone, adjust in that location for three hours and wait until it is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure to prepare the instruments that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want to remove the stone, and you know that the extraction of the stone is from the groove that is incised, then place powder on that location and loosen those instruments and structure, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because otherwise the patient will die. And then treat the wound.
Therefore, when the sharpness of the bone is reduced to a few days, and the wound heals, then return to your operation before the stone is completely forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia.
Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white belly, which is contained in the belly of the testicles, and is called scrotum.
And some veins are in the proper pancreas, which nature has prepared in the part of the testicles, before it becomes another organ; and this is the vessel of the testicle between the white belly, which we have said, and this is not other than fat.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening, which happens to the testicles, so that this matter is poured into them, and some occur due to a blow caused by an impact on the testicles.
And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood red, or gray, or black, or white, and this is what is most.
And the symptoms by which one recognizes this aggregation of water: if it is in the white phlegm that we have called, then the abscess gradually declines a little along with the figure of a bird, and appears like a pimple, because of the moisture from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the patient's own skin, then the abscess gradually declines in parts of the body and appears like another bird.
And if the moisture is between the roots of the teeth and the white phlegm, then it should be removed with a lance.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and compare it with the colors that precede its form; and according to the color that is in the footprints of the entromes, judge what color it is.
Therefore, when it comes to the treatment of this disease, then order the patient to be bled if it is possible, and sometimes examine the parts of the body.
And then the patient should be laid on their back on some cause, and place something under their buttocks to support them.
And then you should stand on the left side of the patient, and command the assistant to follow on the right side of the patient, who extends their hand to about one span from the groin to the navel.
And then take a wide spatula and cut open the groin from the inner side to about halfway through the penis.
And then make the cut straight and evenly distant from the line that should be on the groin, until it reaches the white point that includes the clitoris.
And then scrape that, and observe, and be careful not to scratch it; and your scraping should be like the one that was scraped by part of the joint that is suspended above and subtly scratched according to the amount possible.
And then pierce the clitoris with a wide hole and extract all the water.
And then separate between two labia of the section of the unguis, and extend the ligament to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the genitals, and incise the ligament in that manner that is possible for you. And then incise that bone to its entirety or in pieces, and more deeply its subtle part, because if you do not carefully examine the incision of it, it is not secure that the water will not return.
If the wound from that part of the cord in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the ligament, return and adjust those two labia of the cord of the genitals with a suture, and care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if the wound is corrupted by another disease, then carefully remove the veins that support it, and extract the wound, and care for that as we have said.
And if the water is added in two parts and equal, then know that those are hernias; so incise that part as you have done in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
And then approach and clean the wound, and enter into the incisions with wool submerged in oil or rose-water; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil over it, and spread it over two gauzes and a mirror, and cover those with a second cloth that is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and their folds of crimson wool according to this appearance; and make the edges of the wounds with pieces of cotton or moist wool, and attach them to the structure in the buckle of the braces, and one end of the extremity is held between the buttocks, and the second is held at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over two cushions and two other extremities on two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the buckle of the braces.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of a cut in the section; and you should take a thin pointed cauterizer and insert it into the groove of the thighs, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that it be discovered when the white cloud containing water is seen, and then you take the cauterizer in this form: and it resembles Greek lettering.
And then pierce that abscess with a pointed instrument, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the abscess with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with a fine cautery that is ignited; and incise that second one as much as possible so that you can completely remove it; and guard yourself from the heat so that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than the operation of lancing, and better than any other operation of section.
But if the abscess becomes contrary to you at the time of lancing or at the time of cauterization, or at the time of lancing, then cover that which you cure with what contrariety it causes to you, according to the cure that is appropriate to it.
But if the patient is afraid, and does not want the second operation because of its horror, then administer lancing according to what I have recommended; and when you are certain that it is necessary, by what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is dangerous.
Then, place the patient on some kind of raised platform, and carefully pierce the abscess in the lowest part of their back, near the spine, and stop the puncture according to its length.
And make the incision wide enough so that all the water can flow out.
Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water keeps flowing out. And then care for them until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance to the flow of water at that time, you should not pierce it unless there is a white cloth in the orifice of the wound that causes resistance and prevents the outflow of water, then put a pen or instrument into the wound that can extract the water from the hydrops, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
And you will know when the water returns, and it is collected in vials or containers; and as it is collected, then pierce it again according to that method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Chapter 63.
On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You should know that in the incision of this hernia, there is a danger of losing important parts; therefore, I see the release of it and being saved from that better.
And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses do not form in the parts where the inguinal glands are located and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is directed to the inguinal glands, or due to impact.
And its color is according to the color of the part, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And very often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not feel pain.
And sometimes it is done by the narrowing of the arches, and due to inflammation of those which have already been perceived, or due to inflammation of the veins.
When it is caused by inflammation of the arches, it is known as dispersed pus when you feel it between your toes, and it does not matter that it touches.
When it is made by inflammation of the vein, it is not dispersed from there for any reason of compression on those.
And it is possible that on this special one section is made and on the others; and you insert the cord of the testicles, and then place the hook above, and extract that from the white cloud, and remove the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensory as you remove all of the parts of the hook.
Therefore, if the hook is already attached to those fleshy parts, then it is possible that you remove the hook and insert that.
And if there is adhesion for any reason of the white cloud, or between what is between the buttocks, then it is possible that you remove all of that adhesion and insert that round at the beginning.
If the birth of meat is in the location of adhesion which is behind, then cover what you insert completely with it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then when your operation is completed, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and wine; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
The thigh is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a blister due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, fear for that which precedes it is remembered.
However, cover what they say operation in that second that made the first.
And say that cover what you do is to place the patient on a raised chair; and then lift the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals from the thighs which are said to be probated to the wound; and hold those other ministers who you, and extend them with force.
And then carefully insert the narrow, sharp blade through the cross section of the veins to expose the veins.
And then carefully remove all the parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of the acorn, which are found in the temples.
And then place a double-pointed needle in those places where the accident occurred, and another needle in the back of them. And then carefully insert those needles in the middle of the section, and extract what has been added by the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then care for the plague with the cure of other plagues in which you want to generate sanity by causing the veins that are not affected by one of two generations, because it is not bad for that.
But if the accident occurs to all the testicles, then cover them or cause the testicles to be removed because of that, in order to be deprived of all nutrition by the insertion of the veins, and that they be stored, or that it causes so that they are not favorably affected by those.
Chapter LXV.
Of the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the side of the miracle of the belly, causing the intestines to protrude through any of the intestinal openings.
And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from an incision of it, and these two types of ruptures occur due to various causes: impact, straining, coughing, or lifting a heavy cause, or similar things.
The cause of this is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the body through the opening of the belly because the abdomen presses on the intestine.
The cause of this is when it is due to an incision of the abdomen, where at the beginning pain occurs suddenly and violently; and it is an abscess that differs from the usual one, and it is caused by the intestine, and the cause of this is the parts of the belly.
And some cloths are removed from the intestine, and this is called an enterocele hernia.
And some cloths are applied to the intestine for moisture, and some cloths are placed in the intestine's wound, and they are held there, and this is considered a great danger for the patient, and some cloths cause pain that is very bad and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because one must avoid contact with it in that place.
The method of the operation of that is that you command the patient to reduce the intestine to their hand at the parts of their cavity if they obey your return, and then it should be placed over their collar between your hands, and raise their legs.
And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and then fasten two lips of the section secondly when it is necessary to open the section with those.
And if the section is second to the quantity that you can possibly get from that one, then it should be removed.
And then scrape that hair which is located below the scrotum of the testicles, until it is completely removed from every part.
Then insert your finger into that hole where the testicle is located, in the hole between the white hair, which is below the scrotum, and between the white hair, and remove the adhesion that is in the part behind the testicle.
And then pull the scrotum of the testicles to the parts that are deformed, and extend the white hair on its left side, and raise the testicle with the white hair to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend it and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind when the solution is completed.
And then examine your fingers to see if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white hair. If you find any cause of it, then place it on the abdomen behind.
And then carefully insert the knife into the area behind the testicles, sectioning it as we have recommended in that which we have said.
And then administer wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and apply the bandage that we have recommended (and some white cloth is sometimes cauterized, which we have said to do at the beginning of the process, because some cloths accidentally come off).
If the wound of which we have spoken is delayed, then apply warm water and place it on the wound as we have said.
And then care for the wound with the other method of healing until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflamed hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been found who has been cured of it by iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is above; which is that you tie the veins near the section of it with facility, and then dry in the middle location around the abscess, until the veins fall away.
And treat the pain as we have said it should be healed.
Chapter LXVII.
About the dislocation that is done in the elbows.
Sometimes there are breaks in the elbows as we have said, and we indicate the location.
And they do not give any cause for hernias to the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged, then a cut is made in the groin before they mention the hernia in the groin; and this happens because of the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and it becomes soft, and the location becomes an abscess and indicates.
And its treatment is with a pointed cautery as we have said before.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this way: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the location of the abscess is cut open with a section according to the size of three fingers.
And then pull out the white lint that is placed inside the wound to be revealed.
And then take the ray and place it over the prominent part of the lint, and press it against the abdomen.
And then cut the two prominent parts on the end of the lint of the wound, and adjust one of them with stitches to the other.
And then extract the end of the lint, and do not incise the wound completely, nor stretch the bowel, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that with the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the fields, clean it and restore the wound within which it is consolidated; because the wound contracts and is not adjusted to the prominence of rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to promote healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the wounds of the testicles.
When the cord of the testicles is stretched in men, it is softened by the use of warm water, as the flesh that is between them is also softened, and the procedure is repeated as necessary.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is performing the treatment to position the patient in the proper way, and then insert the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you wish, cut off the excess of the softened cord in three or four places and then make a suture.
Then insert between the sutures; and cure by treating the other wounds until they are healed and the fever subsides.
Chapter 69.
On Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it is allowed to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor may know about it when he is asked about its treatment; and the other reason is that we have had the need of castration of other animals for our uses, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that circumcision is performed in two ways: either by tearing or by making a cut and sectioning.
In the one that is done by tearing, the method of operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between the genitals of the patient while they are soft and flexible and hang down. And then take those parts with your hand inside where they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
In circumcision performed by cutting and sectioning, hold the animal and take the scrotum of the patient's testicles with your hand.
And then lift the suspensory ligaments, and make a cut on each side of the penis where two hollows proceed.
And then make a cut on those parts that will be excised. Do not leave any cause on those parts of the circumcision, but rather make a thin incision over the veins.
And this method of circumcision is better than the one done by tearing, because tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is located, and the other is between two testicles, where a small amount of intestine protrudes.
And some people have urine that is in the space between the testicles.
And in women, it is a special case: the hernia of the vagina over the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, a small amount of the uterus is at the part of the fornix where the penis of a man and two testicles are.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men, one from women, and one special case. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside so that the opening of that does not occur, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second special case of men where they urinate from the prostate, there is no cure or operation in that.
Chapter 21.
Of lentils and meat prominent due to causes of women.
Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made legally; and some women are magnified in some women as long as it is spread with them as in men and perceived during intercourse.
Then cover that you have the excess of lentils with your hand or an ounce and insert it.
And do not insert it at the beginning, mainly at the entrance of the vagina, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then cure that with the cure of the plague until it is healed.
Flesh meat not cooked is meat that has not been cooked in the horrible part of the mother until it fills that, and strongly it is also applied to the parts deformed according to the same way (and for that reason first call that "deformed womb"); therefore cover that you insert it like inserting lentils, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded it, and that is caused by meat not properly cooked or by subtle or rough salt.
And it is caused by food in the main part of the body, or in its costal regions, or in the uppermost part of the body, or in the lowest part of the body, and prohibits movement and engorgement and swelling, and strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is caused by regular menstruation, if the obstruction is obvious, then it is propitious; but if it is not obvious, then you should look for it at the vaginal opening or at the vulva.
But if the obstruction is due to rough salt, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt that.
And place your hand over the two labia minora, and then press on the indicated spots of the vagina that are most sensitive.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs spread, and then extend the two labia with force until the delicate cylinder is broken and the obstruction is removed.
And then take wool and dip it in oil and place it on that spot, and stitch the area with a needle to prevent the area from not being consolidated.
But if the cylinder is large and thick, then sew it with a needle and thread that is wide or from a needle of a milliner's.
But if the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a needle and thread and sew it up.
And apply the medicines that cause the cessation of blood flow from wounds, such as acetic acid, and bloodroot, and iodine, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from not being consolidated too much.
And hold that for several days and administer some of it daily.
And then apply the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes certain accidents occur in the major native land of other flesh, and then cover it according to this method. But if it is for abscess crancos, then the abscess crancos that is in the major should not be punctured in any way.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure of emorrhages and of tail and of red blotch that occurs in the belly of women.
Emorrhages are appreciated from the openings of some veins until it flows continuously; and when these emorrhages are made, they are stopped.
And I have already described in the division the types of those and their symptoms, and to say that there are those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
When the swelling and pain are in the first part of the leg and do not appear to be felt, then no treatment is needed with iron.
Those that are on the joints of the leg over which sensation is felt, those are the ones that are cured.
And cover the wound with a clean cloth and approach the forceps or the sharp knife, and scrape those wounds with the razor.
And then powder those wounds with the flowers of the bark of one of the scissor powders, as with acacia and similar to those.
And then soak the feet in cold water for an hour, and place that wound in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that wound in a decoction of sumac and of scraps of millet, and of walnuts, and of similar things.
And then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultice of that on the back of your hand.
If the bone is abscised, it is good; otherwise, make two incisions and perform an escharotomy at the milk glands.
Then take wool and apply it to the wound with the juice of columbine or the juice of arnaca or the juice of garlic, and apply it to the area; then care for the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
Then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Of the perforation of the eye socket in the face.
Special cases of accidental abscesses in the face, such as cancrum oris and lapident apostema and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas and morroys and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And since you will find in this treatise on abscess how to cautiously open the largest of the abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know in what manner the operation is performed with a knife.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp and accompanied by swelling, redness, and fever, and sometimes it increases and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform perforation on it, and cure that which helps to mature it within the time when the severity of the symptoms ceases.
And then consider whether you make the patient lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and recline on his side and adjust his feet to the part of the stomach that is closest to the abdomen, and his legs should be expanded, and place your hand on his chest, and hold a cloth to this wound.
And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the largest opening, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
And when you want to administer this instrument, hold it against the palm of your hand, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the palm except for the palm itself and the lead of the instrument. However, if the instrument is larger than the palm of your hand, then cover it with powder on the surface of the palm to prevent the instrument from entering entirely into the palm.
And cover the tip of the needle that is on top of the instrument and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the tip until it enters the opening of the palm.
And when the incision is made, and it touches the palm and blood, then cover it with a cloth against the palm of your hand.
And when the pus is evacuated, then cover the wound with a moistened cloth in olive oil or fresh oil that contains some stiptic; and place a bandage on the section in the palm of your hand.
And place a cloth under the largest and over the penis, where the soiled linen was submerged in water in which molds were built.
And it should be treated properly within two days with the ointment that is suitable for that.
Some wounds on the thigh and the groin are washed with honey and water, and then with water in which razor or aristolochia longa is boiled, and then return to the ointment.
And if the wound is deep in the thigh, then be careful not to treat it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses should be treated when they are not in a natural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the natural position of the fetus by smelling it, and when you examine the woman with her legs apart and want to smell the air, and on top of that is removed by what is on her head, and the presentation of the fetus, then know that this part is the second natural position, and its presentation is over her own head, and the second hand is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Therefore, when you see those symptoms, make sure that the patient's belly is gently pressed so that the fetus does not come out too much, as it can cause harm to the fetus and be beneficial for its development.
If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, as when the fetus is on its feet and the patient's head is in front of the patient's chest, or the patient's hand is on the patient's foot, or the patient's head is on the patient's belly, or the patient's back is on the patient's collarbone, and it resembles the patient's unusable figures.
It is necessary to have a wise and skilled midwife in all these causes, and that she avoid errors and deceptions.
And you should show all the figures of those, and what kind of engineering is in those so that it can be understood by that and stand on that.
When it is done, it is on its own head due to natural exhaustion, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and sometimes the power of the fetus has already been weakened, then do that procedure, or what women have for that, and evaporate the water from the fetus with a warm cloth and warm oil.
And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or cut it with a knife to remove what is in it of moisture. And press the belly of the woman until she gives birth.
But if she does not give birth, then let the woman be rubbed with a mixture of mustard and fenugreek seeds.
And then command her, and the midwife, that she be calm and make her cough to clear her throat; and give her a mouthful of water and a noseful of water for an hour, so that the child will be born soon.
And if the two shoulders of the child are born at the beginning, then let her gradually reduce those to facilitate delivery. But if she does not obey the instrument, then let the woman lie on her back and raise her legs up, and then shake the bed; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
And if the muscles are not torn and the wound is bleeding, then insert those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or place it on the chest of the patient with a cloth and remove that equal amount.
When the child lies on its feet, then push those upwards, and gradually turn the child small, and gradually place your hand under it, and gradually extend those little by little.
When they are inserted into the thighs, then command that patient to express themselves, and make that extrusion conditioned, because that person may be saved if God wills it.
And if that is not possible, then gradually return the child little by little until you reach the second natural position, because that person will be saved later.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of aloe and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the lower part of the woman's belly. And then make that cushion in water, until you reach the hypogastrium.
And when those parts behind it are softened, then do the sublimation of mercury and pause that to it. And when you have done the sublimation for an hour, then place that on a plate, and do that to stir it and remove the mouth of it, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of the belly of it with gentle compression, which makes it soften quickly.
Eyssiment of the patient lies laterally with one of their hands. If it is not possible to reduce the intestine, then lift the woman and let that happen.
And if it cannot go, then perform the jazer on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient vigorously, and administer ointments that you have and recommend for mucous membranes.
And if the child is born, then perform that sezer on the cecum, and study the reduction of the intestine, and equalize the patient according to its natural figure, and make the woman faint and command her until she is forgotten.
The swelling of the fetus on the neck, its hands expanded and the surface of the foot is to the side of the greater one. So that the midwife holds the hand of the fetus and slowly turns it, and that it is facilitated.
And as it becomes and how much it equals, and then pause over the wound of it with that which we have recommended of oil and of mucilages.
And then command it to turn its hand slowly, and when you have done that, make that cushion on a chair and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to be comfortable; and make that sternutation conditionally. The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the second finger of the midwife is inserted in this manner, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you insert that of the umbilicus, so that it is not held and remains.
And then apply pressure to the parts where the second rib is located, and ask the woman if she feels any pain, and the man should also be examined in a similar way, if God wills.
The death of twins or many fetuses. It is wise to know that twins are not always born at the same time, and sometimes a few are born three or four months apart, but this is strange and difficult to explain; rather, it is a matter of natural causes, not a sign of life.
And count those, whether they are multiples or not, one by one, and distinguish them within the umbilical cord of each of those, and some pain is felt as if it were a fetus by natural means, and its cause is not clear, as we have recommended.
And if it is difficult to determine their cause and they reach the point where we have mentioned about unnatural figures, then you should treat them as we have recommended.
And if the skilled woman makes that which brings ease and subtlety, and delay, and is ingenious according to all figure according to what is prepared by the engineer to the salvation.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts six, and another all of them, which cause is made by the measurement of the glorious saints.
And all that is in the science of the midwife which is very much like that, and therefore she should apply to that which is similar.
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus, use what we have said in the division of medicine and do not deface it, and you can safely use operation with the hand, therefore consider whether the woman is of sound virtue and not of any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
It is customary to place the woman on her back with her head slightly raised and her arms and legs elevated.
The assistant holds the patient's arms or lays them on their side in a supine position to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, you moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of garlic, fennel, and seeds of lavender.
Then, the midwife places her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enters her hand into the mother to facilitate the birth of the fetus, and then surrounds the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to breathe on its own, and then you look for the umbilical cord in the neck of the child, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the places suitable for the chest, or in the hypogastrium.
If the injury is on his feet, then in the tenth, or in the middle of the sides.
And if he has an ulcer on his hand, place your hand on the curvature of the wound in that location between the patient's fingers, and insert your hand to facilitate and make the ulcer in any of those locations we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the wound.
And then place and hold another finger, or the third if necessary, to keep it equally attached, and not extended too much according to its correct position only.
And let it be at all parts, so that the wound of the patient is healed as it is done in a tooth for its eradication.
And if there is any part of it that is held, then place and insert those experts and turn them in those parts that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten, then move your fingers to that location where it should be put back; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
If the limb is leaning towards the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; and then extract what is inside, and insert it into the joint or into the wound.
And if you do not know what to do in the other limb and on both feet.
If the head of the bone is large, or if it has pierced the traction cord, or if it is too tight at the top, then insert some spicules between the mentioned parts and cut the head and remove the bone, or use an instrument called a "bone saw", the shape of which will be shown in the next chapter.
And similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then insert it into an oven or use forceps to remove the bones.
And if the head is exposed and traction is applied to the furcula, then cut through it so that the moisture inside the wound is drained.
If it is not complicated and does not cause obesity, then you should insert the needle as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the area of the belly is abscessed or is in the hydropic state, then you should puncture that part which contains the fluid that is in it.
If the foot is on its side, then the direction of the wound should be towards the mouth of the bottle and not downwards.
If the belly and chest are bound, then you should remove the cloth that has been placed on your hand, and then puncture the belly and chest where that fluid is located.
If the other members are still and the needle returns to you, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the bottle is blocked, then insert your hand into the preon of layre, and cover that with a cloth, and attract that towards the mouth of the bottle, and then insert one or two inches, and attract the fluid into the bottle.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not disturb it; instead, beforehand, administer an infusion of wet, fat herbs. And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said about the living wound should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of decay in the wound.
And when you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
And if blood flows from the wound, then stop it in astringent waters and administer the other cure.
And I have seen a woman in her belly who was dead, and another woman approached that fire with another plan, and the dead woman's wound was also burned. It happened to the man after a long time that an abscess formed in his belly; and when it inflamed, fire came out, and he began to shake.
And I was called to care for him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed some strong-adhesive plasters on him for certain reasons, and after several days, I removed another bone; and I was very surprised, as there were no bones in his belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
So I continued to extract bones from him, and I found in his belly many small bones, which had been there for a long time, and were now only a little wound.
And I did not think it was strange, as in that case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled craftsman administers for healing.
Of the forms of the tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of vomiting that occurs most frequently:
This is the form of strength in which the limbs are equalized, with equalization resulting in two vomitings in two extremities of two feet. However, this vomiting should be more subtle than stricture, and should be made either by an iron or a wooden pipe.
And the length of each pipe should be two spans and a half, and the width of each end should be one span; and the length of each pipe is one palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two pipes there are two stoppers of that measure which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one span and a little more, and the width of each is two spans, or a little more.
And these two stoppers are inserted into the mouth of the patient so that they can be opened when you turn the two prescribed vomitings.
Another similar form that is more subtle and lighter:
Make a splint of wood or second-class (a type of metal) according to the appearance of forceps. May insert at the end of his two additions as often, and the length of those additions is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you make an incision on the right side of the leg, over the thighs, and place that which is between his legs. And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps, equally according to the amount you want of the opening of the mouth of the larger one until the midwife makes what you want.
The form of verticality that the ancients said:
The form of impelling that is pushed to the child:
The form of support that is held against the large head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end, as often, and some grooves are made like this, as often, with a blade that is sharpened and held, which is incised and held. The form of a small amulet:
Form of an ounce containing a spike:
Form of an ounce containing two spikes:
The form of a spoon that has two ends, and the head is cut off:
The form of two wide spoons:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and are prepared by the artists, it is more convenient for their operation and more necessary for women because of their quantity.
And do not work with those instruments whether they are there or not, because the need for them is inexcusable.
For extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their other hand, and then do this wiggling condition, and strengthen your hand on their mouth and on their nose, and if it is forced and twisted, well.
And if not, you take an oil and pierce a hole in the covering and place it on the herbs burning at the mouth of the mother, with calamint and rough and anet and camomile and scythian and cassia lignea and santauria. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that on the fire.
And then place a goose quill in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the hollow of the mother.
And then do that steam inhalation as we have said, and the second part is removed quickly.
If this treatment is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then insert that into the womb and rub it gently with the second part, and when that has been found, take it out little by little, and if it is attached to the protrusion of the mother, then insert her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found the second part, pull it out gently so that the mother does not bear the attachment vehemently. A bandage should be applied to the chest on both the right and left sides for ease of breathing.
And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure with suction and medication of the mouth with herbs.
However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is necessary from him to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then christen it with honey and tartaric acid; because that will cause it to dissolve and disappear within a few days.
However, when it is poured, the bad odor is raised to the head and stomach, and that causes the patient; therefore, make sure that they are administered sub-fumigations and appropriate to that.
May ancient doctors already practiced sublimation of natron and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which the woman is sublimated must be for retaining menstruation and the secondinea.
It should be made of copper or iron.
And the narrow end should be placed in the fire and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be done over the arms of the fire.
And hold it within that which is consumed by that sublimation and repeat another.
Of the cure of the anus of the uncircumcised child.
When newborn children and their anuses are not circumcised, which have been already thinly smeared and anointed. Then cover the midwife who performs that anointing; and if not, perform that anointing through a sharp instrument, and guard that it does not touch the foreskin.
And then place it over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and then cure that anointing within which is softened.
If you fear that they might be poisoned, then pause a tube in their mouth to drain their stomach, and remove it when they want to vomit.
And if there has been an obstruction of the anus due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then cut that consolidation and cure it with the same remedy and plaster that we have mentioned for the cure.
Of the treatment of fistulas that arise from them.
The fistulas that arise from the lower part of the abdomen, which are large and numerous, and which occur near the anus or in the space between the legs.
And if it is a fistula or not.
And if that congestion is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate those fistulas.
And those worms are known by the fact that they come out and are windy; and some use the patient's excrement for their exit, and many are not of those worms.
And some of these fistulas are sometimes widened in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the buttocks.
And that in which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, is that you place your finger in the anus, and insert a thin probe of iron or iron in the fistula when it does not have turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that place, then insert that thin probe of lead or horsehair into the fistula until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed with the probe for any cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the significance of that is immediately of urine from that and prohibition of that so that that place be consolidated by medicine.
If it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then it is considered to be entering here if there is not turbidity in the bone, and causes pain in the circulation of the part; and that from there it often spreads quickly; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating wounds, it is not possible to cure them all, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons upon which it is based.
If in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing is done with iron according to what I have advised you, and that which has already been tried.
And if the patient moves his hands between your hands over his chest and raises his legs under him, the cushions should be inclined towards his belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or of iron if there is turbidity in the wound, until you know where the probe enters.
And if the patient is lying on their back, then enter your hand into their belly.
And if you feel the tent in your hand has already penetrated, or another thing between your hand and the patient's skin, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, as it is not healing, as we have said.
However, they say that this is healing in some men who are born with it.
And the medicine for which we hope for great benefit in this is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the belly; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent flesh has been cauterized and the wounds resemble a bunch of quills.
And then care for those wounds wrapped in a border until they have all healed, and then care for the flesh-generating and consolidating medicines, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at some time by another treatment.
If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the tail, which is in the anus, and between that and the probe there is a layer of flesh or skin, and if the fistula is in that area on the surface of the anus, then dry the anus from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe is dry inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and catheterized.
Then wash those fistulated flesh parts that are assembled like a pen needle and have no cause of those.
But if pus flows between you and your operation when you have entered those flesh parts, then milk that is and the more pus-resistant instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, because the cauterizing with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres those flesh parts adjusted, and discharges the pus from the exscess of humidity.
And then carefully remove the calloused skin wrapped around bones or threes that enter that place where the arm begins, and then carefully remove the hard flesh that generates and solidifies.
And these medicines have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the chest, then insert the finger into the anus and explore that place.
And if you find that the tent is stuck and enters between you and it is velvety or of flesh, and is directed towards penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but a second way of trust and hope.
This cause is to be administered in that place in one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to dry out that which you can reach the cavity of it for the purpose of being able to enter those things and the proposed cure, and not process any more because of the reason that you do not inscribe the lacerated contents of the wound, and that something happens over the patient and his will; and then carefully remove that which we have said that is very helpful for healing; or to lengthen that velvety and moist that which secures that entry into the anus, as we have said, or with the tent or with another sharp instrument, and to remove those fistulated flesh that are in the section inside the wound where you can perform the crustation; and then exert yourself to restore the entire surface of the section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the anus, and is more dangerous for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you introduce the tent into the fistula, and it is around the buttocks on the surface of the body and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
And introduce it into that folded part of the skin or around those; and then introduce the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks nearby, then you remove the skin from that part where you introduced your finger into the buttocks; and extract the extremity of the skin and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, then cut off those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but make sure it is in the first one, which is not what you do to avoid scarring; and then do so that it is healed.
The form of the spiral needle used to suture the fistula: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not scar what is not necessary, sometimes.
Suturing of hernias where the scar is at the beginning of those.
Hernias are of two kinds, either they are between the buttocks similar to those made of cartilage, or they are like a bag of skin. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the scar comes from those immediately and is one, and its inside, and its outside, and in their extremities.
However, those that have their outside the buttocks follow the few moisture, of which the scar is yellowish or a small one of skin with continuous, and its inside according to the color of the skin.
And the cure for that which is inside the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expel what is inside the belly until the bowels appear to you. Then you place yourself above the patient's wrists and make an incision along their ribs.
But if the wrists are not firm enough to hold those at that location due to their moisture and softness, then take those at that location with dry cloth or cotton or a piece of woolen fabric, and remove them from those at that location, and then make an incision along those and sprinkle some ash on the incision, so that they are in the place of a cauterizer; or cauterize those as prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those at that location with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the wound does not allow for exit, then crucify the patient with a cross in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water which is in the belly and which allows for better exit when the patient expels.
If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause is usually a fistula, and you should insert those with your nail, or with a needle, and incise those, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
And the one who precedes in incision should administer a suture to them according to this method: take a thread wrapped around a needle and insert it into the swollen part, and remove the swelling from the parts above, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the needle, and horizontally; and stretch the swelling firmly, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, and leave one unsutured, so that the excess from that one can drain from there.
Then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the chest and command the patient to breathe. And then leave that space empty until the time when the wound is ready to be treated with some ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And since they do not work well in that medicine, you should cover those with a wet cloth or your finger, holding it above the area to prevent them from solidifying; and then treat those that have already solidified.
And then apply a more violent poultice to the first one that is healed and has been excoriated; and then treat those that are healed.
You know that almsamir is clear, and not if it does not redden like the color of cloves, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the feet, and it is caused by those pains that cause the anemia.
And then carefully cut that which is inside the navel, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its location; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its chapter.
Warts are a small elevated, rounded, and painful sore on the surface of the skin, and many wounds occur in children.
And its treatment is that you extend and cut that one, or that you replace it with a new one using a false or real bone. And if you wish, cauterize that one, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
Ants are a small or large pustule on the surface of the skin, and when it breaks open, it is full of small wounds in the same way as a bite from an ant, and it is made around the skin.
And the treatment is to take a strong needle of iron or of copper, and place it over the ant's nest where it contains the circle of the needle parts; then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle, and place it on the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
And if you want, do this with a needle of bronze or iron in the following way:
The part of the needle above the hole should be thin and blunt, covered with something that the skin does not stick to, and the rotation of which is around the same.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the chapter on cauterization of the head in the book of cauterizations.
In the form of instruments that are used to give cautery.
Some cauterizations are made with silver or copper or bronze or hammered; and some cauterizations are made with those instruments small and large according to those that are used to administer them, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and the cauterizations of those who have wounds or sores are small.
The form of the cross great and small:
The tip of the catheter of him above in which is attached the bag should be wide according to this method; and it should be at the distance where the bag is attached as often.
And the end of which is inserted into the anus, which is entered into the subtlety; and on one side of its two tracks, and on the other side one track, and it should be wide according to the roughness of the rays and the largest a little.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed, and its reason is one palm.
And it should be pierced by a track according to this method; and if the space between the tracks is the largest of the above.
And then enter those tracks with a strong iron of strong iron, which is of the above fields, or around those; and adjust that bag; and when it is placed in it, it should be straight in the cross between two different strong ones, and then crucify it on that one track: However, the quality of crucifying it on that track is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too cold nor too hot.
And then the patient should be turned on their back, and their knees raised up and held in place with a pillow or blanket; and then a hot oil or album of sulfur or fenugreek or similar paste is applied to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse takes the bag and expresses it until all the contents are emptied from the intestine into the bowel; and then the bag is removed and the patient's knees are lowered to the side.
And if the medicine does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if sleep comes over the patient for the whole night, it is better to let them rest.
But if you cleanse the patient in the sick bed with a solution of bowel and the application of the medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are morbid or abscesses in the anus, then the bowel should be thin and sharp, like the needles that children are sewn with.
Of the treatment of wounds.
He has already said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and he says so with such treatment of those who are not able to use medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, wounds are classified according to what kind of wounds they are and where the wounds occur.
And the causes for which wounds are made include sharp objects such as rocks, spears, swords, axes, or similar to those caused by other weapons.
Wounds that occur in the parts of the body such as head wounds, neck wounds, chest wounds, abdominal wounds, or similar to those of the limbs.
And he recommends the treatment of some wounds because they follow that reasoning and rule for other wounds.
And he begins with head wounds, which will be remembered in the beginning of the third chapter.
When a headache occurs in the upper part of the head without being a fracture, consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and if it has been soaked only briefly and is very painful, and there is a fear of abscess forming, then first perform lumbar puncture, and do not delay; and extract the fluid according to the amount of its virtue, unless some cause prohibits lumbar puncture, especially if the fluid that exists from the pain is little.
And if the lumbar puncture is from the opposite side of the painful part, then keep the patient in a position of recumbency and of nourishment and of thick foods.
But if there is some cause that prohibits the minimum amount of food, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And if there is an abscess forming, place a poultice on the pain, either in olive oil or in a cloth that is stoptic.
If you are sure of the abscess, then pause over the wound, if it is recent and the pus has not changed in color to the powder that I will recommend to apply soon.
And if the air has already changed, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or has spaces and similar openings, and the lips of it are not adjusted by stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for their stitching.
If the wound is already separated from the bone and flesh, and it is not retained by stitches but only by a small suspender, then insert it and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods that are greasy: caps and similar things until it is healed.
And if there is decay in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all of that rotten matter and remove it, and care for that matter.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which unclean blood may flow, and it is not cut by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it uncut, then you should incise it with a sharp instrument or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unclean blood is flowing.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is likely to be light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which has been mixed with water, so that the air can move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of extinguished herbs; mix all these together, and then fill the wound, and bind it tightly with a good bandage, so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the unclean blood.
Then bind it tightly with the powder and let it stay there, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be repeated while it is not healed.
And some people used to do that alone with cauterization, when they were not in your presence or had no knowledge of the dragon.
And this medical operation is performed in the great wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and straightened, and their recent wounds are not altered by air.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then this powder is not applied to that position, but instead cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with a degistius ointment, or you place it on those wounds with a flour of bread mixed with water and honey before bedtime; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs to the broken wound in bone, and it is small, then you extract that with this remedy.
And I will direct the cure of the broken bones in that which is venomous.
Of the joints of the neck.
If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different from other medical cases, and between the pain of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in that engine but rather avoiding treatment with that which causes strong hemostasis, such as zinc and zegi that is vetriol and similar to their quartz and contracted that. And do not place any cause of all hemostasis over the pain, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuation is in the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, such as washed with rosewater or not, and thucia when washed with hot water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and found humitz.
If the pain is great, then administer sutura, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
If the pain extends to the lower part of the leg, then puncture it in the most dependent area.
If an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to stop the bleeding.
If the spines of the ribs or all have already been cut, and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the lips of the incision on the edge of the rib cage and do not touch that; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and strengthen it with a structure that is decent, and leave it for several days until it is healed.
If the pain has already affected the bones, then perforate it; and if there are fragments of bone, remove all that you can from them; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and let it be separated and the area around it be cleaned.
If the pain is recent, then powder it with the powder that was recommended to you. But if in the pain a fistula is made, then cure it with that which will be remembered to come close to its capital.
If it is a percussion of a lance or a spoon, and sometimes you see its depth, then consider more if the pain has moisture when the patient breathes; then know that the pain is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the pain is recent to its own sinew, then you place powder on it in the first hour, and do not strengthen that so that the sinew is not held in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that any liquid does not enter the patient, but pause in that attractive spot, and discharge those two veins on that day.
And if the gout does not present itself to you, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound, near the old scar, so that the moisture that is there can drain; and make the patient lie on the wound so that the moisture that is in it can run out.
If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, trembling of the heart, malice, or other good dispositions of the wound, then you can know that the wound is healing; and then treat it with poultices and other remedies until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can know that it has become a fistula; and therefore treat it with its own remedies.
And if the wound is caused by a cut of a sharp object or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or the back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been an incision on the bone, and you have already cut through it, then twist the plate and cover it to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then leave the wound open to allow the plate to heal, as its extraction is advantageous.
And of the other plates that occur in other members, their healing is beneficial, as we have said before.
Of the plates of the abdomen.
The disposition that occurs in the abdomen is either large, or small, or mixed.
And a small disruption is difficult to do by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so if you do not immediately make an incision into their place, as it becomes open and swollen, because the instrument of it is difficult to use.
And the best way to proceed is to move, because in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, as it is in the two special cases mentioned.
You should know that there are four ways to close the belly, but two common ones are suitable for closing wounds on other parts of the body.
And two other proper sutures connect to other parts of the body, but they are more appropriate for the belly suture.
I advise you to expose and declare each one.
Therefore say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the hernia in that case, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two ways is: either by patience with the disruption as we have said, or when inflation comes to the hernia due to the coldness of the air.
And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth that you have soaked in warm water alone, or that you have boiled in water with cyperus, spice, and embroidery, and put it on the hernia before the inflation is resolved.
Some vinegars are made in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which vinegar and honey are mixed, because for that, the instrument of the patient is relieved from much pain.
But if the instrument of the patient is removed from this cure, then gently separate the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not broken.
The first cure is best when it is properly applied that it does not dry out, and it is not occupied to dry out too quickly or too slowly.
Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
One part of the instrument is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt end.
And when the wound is amplified and the intestine comes out, then cover it so that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on it, because that is better.
When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then place the patient on their back, and support their hips as high as possible; if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and support their chest as high as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then place your thumb and index finger quickly in the area where the pain is most intense to separate them.
And similarly, administer this remedy in severe and mild pain.
And in mild pain, place the remedy you have prepared between your thumb and index finger, holding the disruption entirely in your hand and adjusting the lips of the wound, and gradually uncover from one to another until the sutura is found.
And this is the common method of suturing: first, take an awl, or count out an awl according to the size of the wound; and lay it at the edge of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the awl one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread, but in the two ends of the needle that is behind the thread of the parts inside, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the needle, and made four stitches.
Approach with strong force double the thickness of the needle's circumference, and some stitches in two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and leave the largest of them and insert another needle into that, and hold that also as you would the first needle; and do not cease to do this until the stitches are completed through the entire contraction of the wound.
And the needles should be of a medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and thick needles are difficult to pass through the codena, and therefore for that reason they should be of a medium thickness.
And do not let the needle be inserted at both ends of the codena properly, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and so that the wound can heal before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged as stitches so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient, and place cotton balls over the sutures from all parts, which held the tips of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And these types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, because in their suture there is one or two or more needles.
The second suture is similar: and you administer the four ends of the gut, two ends of the needle, in a way, with a needle that is thin and thick in proportion to its fineness and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle from that part of the gut where it started, so that the thread does not pull out from the wound, because the second suture with cloth is made with strong threads.
Pause between each stitch the amount of thick hair of that same limb.
And this stitch is for women.
And this stitch was used to sew the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was punctured by a knife, and it was the rupture of the main vein of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine of the lower leg, and it was the rupture in the middle of the member; and then I reduced that after the intestine had been open for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and it was treated and healed; and then I applied that for months, and it was converted into its normal position.
And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle, fire, which I did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not burned or any medicine, but I placed over the wound a piece of cloth for two days and frequent baths with melted honey until the fire healed.
May you direct two special types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And if you begin with the suture of the neck, and insert the needle from the front to the back.
And so that the needle penetrates the neck and the other arm correctly and throughout the entire body, and leave the end of the thread in the place where you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread from the front to the back in the other arm.
And so that you have made the first penetration, then make the second penetration in the other end of the arm from the front to the back; and leave the end of the thread on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other end of the arm from the front to the back.
And let the needle make the penetration in the thread at the place where it makes the penetration in the thread in the end of the arm that is in the part of the body where all that penetrates.
And then begin at this point and cut that which is on the side that is of the kidney in the other side, and extract the needle from the codex that penetrates, and return it to that codex and cover the end of the kidney that is on the other side with the extracted part; and extract the needle from the codex that is on its side.
And do that again and again, and do that again approaching another one until you have finished all of it according to that example.
And the sum of this stitching method is that you sew with suture threads that cover the skin, so that you sew the kidney one stitch at a time from the side of the end of the codex, and wait until it is completed.
The second special type of stitching, which is called Gualia, and this is how it should be done for each part and recommended, is that you sew that second semilunar suture at the part where other doctors sew it, so that all parts are matched to its corresponding part at the appropriate place by nature; and apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own part, and make it penetrate into that spot, and let two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from one end to the other of the thread.
And then turn those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the thread into the spot of the mirror on other sides that are on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common one of the liga, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the word of Gaul.
And moreover, it is said that the abdominal suture is corrected with two needles, so that you insert one in each, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you should use, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the previous sutures of those that join the hearts equally.
When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medical practice of plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is that when you get the recent plague from the same person who has not been quarantined because the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine and remove it and prepare it incorrectly, then place it on the fleshy powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it on the alcohol that is present before it hardens and coagulates; and it should be consolidated and mirrored; and cure it as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines present, then place it on the first thing that comes to hand, before it starts to rot and change color, and exchange those two vinegars daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need any other medicine in such simple dispositions when the plagues are present.
If you are afraid that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply lion's wool soaked in quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas where the pain is, and leave it there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which is used for that purpose, and if the poison reaches the intestine and is made to penetrate into its cavity, then apply a strong stiptic black tea, and more so if the poison has reached the intestine and is made to penetrate into its cavity.
And you should know that the pus from a large intestine is less harmful than the pus from small intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine that is called gegunu from all plague, because it has many veins in it, and its size is large, and its nature is similar to that of nerves.
If that which proceeds from the wound is clotted blood, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your right hand, by which you will equalize the intestines equally.
If it has passed through the wound and is already white or black, then place your hand firmly on the spot that is darkened by it, to prevent blood from flowing out, which contains veins and arteries in the cloth.
And then introduce that which is another ligament, and place two extremities of the flesh hanging from the part of the wound on either side of the wound, so that the attraction of it should be from the cavity of the cloth and emission of the wound's blood.
Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in his belly by piercing of a lance and the wound was the part direct of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and eyssic of its management and ventositat.
Then I continued the cure of him, although he was not yet ready for healing, but I subtly introduced that which cures and consolidates the area.
And when I saw that the area was consolidated, I placed over the patient a poultice to prevent any further harm from occurring in his own belly; and he did not suffer from that harm and remained in his usual positions, eating and drinking, and then he was bathed and exercised in his bed.
And it has been said by many experienced doctors that when a wound occurs in the intestine, and it is small, one should proceed as follows: and you should take large needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the mouth opening over the two lips of the wound; then when you place it on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the wound, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle near the first one, and do not cease to do this until you have done this with all the wound.
And then reduce that space and place a cushion under it; and those who are close to the patient should remain outside the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
It is also possible that the intestine can be pierced with a thin needle instead of a sharp object; and you should take the end of these needles, which is blunt, and place it on the outside of the intestine, wrapped in cloth, and then insert that needle into the wound, and reduce it to the disruption.
And this method of stitching is only the second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the intestines, then it is not possible to sew it up, but only to relieve it, and not heal it completely.
Of the treatment of fistulas and abscesses.
You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes inflamed and suppurates, and is then made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and does not heal completely and constantly bleeds in some part of the body, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless tumor that is located where the bone is usually located; and to remember this, it is called a bone cancer, that is, pain.
And in wet men, the one that gets a lot of sweat; and if the moisture is removed in a few hours. And some times this moisture is moved, and it is little, and it is thick, and it is thin.
Now that all those causes have been shown, along with their symptoms and their cures in the division of medicine.
And I will show you how to perform the cure for a fistula, which is caused by surgical means.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; among those that come to the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some part of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some joint composed of muscle and skin; and these are the ones that are closest to the main body parts.
And among these fistulas that follow this method are difficult to cure, do not receive treatment, and require hard work and ignorance.
And if the depth of the fistula does not reach these places that were mentioned, and you wait and trust in its cure, and you want to know about it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you follow it.
If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the weight of the person's body can alleviate and straighten the twist.
If the fistula is too horrific to be investigated with a probe, it may not be possible to proceed with this method.
Then clean the orifices with their respective solutions, as the moisture used to clean one will spread to the others and cause them to rot.
And then carefully examine, according to the method that you know how to use, whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or the short one is in its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is entirely above your strength, your endurance, the patient's pain, and the invention of the pain due to your compression on the area, and similar to the meanings and causes of the accidents to the abscess.
And when you have found all these causes in standstill, then proceed to treatment with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint or in the bone, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have mentioned to you.
Then dry the fistula after it has been opened and remove any pus that is in that filter and rotten flesh, and also remove anything that is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the gallbladder and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the fistula is of long and deep depth, and is straight, then cut it as much as possible in front of you, and remove all the rotten flesh from that; and apply cotton pads soaked in acute medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded everything that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, unless you prevent any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
If the bone is revealed to you and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that which the corruption covers entirely; and cure that with which the flesh within is healed.
And if it does not heal and there is no way to do so as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you reveal it again in the second and most precise way, and make the reason for it and its cleansing with a strong fortification, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depths of the body far away, which has not been achieved, and therefore you cannot enter there except by leaving that.
If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully, and do not leave any of them without cause by your strength.
But if there is any resistance due to the moisture, and they do not cause fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of a bone to replace those bones of your hour, then place that which can harden that area over those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard that it is not consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, then place over those ligaments three times in oil, or under the anointing of Egyptian oil, or in any of the ointments, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them by the setting, and the attraction of those is alleviated.
If there is a large bone like those of the leg or thigh or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it while it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you use that which has been encountered in a man's thigh for placing a cushion and assistant over your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were affected, it was clear that the matter had spread throughout the body where the matter reached the thigh, and that matter was a large abscess, and not an external cause.
And then the doctor extended the flame to that part of the body where the abscess was located, and matter flowed from it, and his cure was paused with the flame close until the bed became fistulated, and then points were made in the sores which all poured out and removed the humidity from the wound.
And then all the doctors took care of him for about two years, and not in those ways but in the heart, until he was called.
And he saw the bed of that person and the matters that flowed from it through those openings, and all the wounds of that man were stable and the color of the wound was yellowish.
And then he inserted the tent into one of those openings and reached the tent to the bone.
And then he approached and examined all the openings and found that they reached from all parts of the bed.
And then he showed and inserted into one of the openings that reached inside where he described a piece of bone, and at the same time he removed that corrupt part, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and a part of the bed had already penetrated into the intestine.
And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And then apply that which was not in the bone but rather the corruption that I had removed and applied, which had already been destroyed.
And then apply a consolidating medical treatment for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then apply that which I had repeated and discovered again on the bone secondly, and again continued the corruption of the bone.
And then apply that which I had discovered from that corruption, and then applied it to make the cure of it and its restoration, and it was not restored.
And then I discovered another way and did not cease to gradually incise the bone particularly, and performed the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I had incised about a palm of it, and that extracted its marrow, and then applied that with medicine, and it was consolidated and healed.
It is not necessary to repeat the operation on the patient and sectioning of the patient except for the disposition of the lady's maid and the scarcity of the patient's tolerance and fear of death, because the accident in all hours is due to excessive evacuation syncope.
Therefore, healing is for the entire cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to arrange the patient in their own body and restore the patient's virtue; and it is conducted in its arrangements and does not do anything against the patient in ambulation or harm in any cause.
However, if the bone is in place of the body already rotten, then you should proceed with this method: and that you take a strong thread and that thread at the end of that bone, and command that it be stretched; and pause that thread of wool thicker than the first thread; and put it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to pull the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
Pause the table beside the bones correctly, because when you do that, it is not prohibited to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
Cover the sawing over the rotten area gradually, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, and force the sawing of it another way.
And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, advance from one continuous part to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you remove the flesh from all parts; and place the saw beside, and use the saw of the first part where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other part is completed.
And if the sawing is in the location of the corruption, do it gradually, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, insert into that rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw in the ratio but rather in a line.
And if the corruption is in the chest or foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and cut that, and remove it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let everything be corrected by you, when no contrary wind or nerve comes.
And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and purity of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
And you should know that that operation means to you on the specialty of the instrument that you need; when you are great in study and long and knowledgeable of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you will have already learned all these things for yourself, what is suitable for each instrument for each illness.
And you will find the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Saw blade.
Other saw blade.
Large other saw blade.
Ruler. The head of this ruler should be in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
And it is not advisable to use those when the joints are damaged, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Smaller razor.
Broad razor.
Make the other saw blade in a way that is not too sharp, with a curved edge and a dull point, and the handle of the saw should be made of wood. Shape of it.
A form of a razor that has a hollow:
Another form of a thin razor:
A form of another curved-ended razor:
A form of a small razor similar to a needle:
Another form of a smaller incisor:
A form of another incisor that resembles a ray, with its end shaped like a saw, and is used in certain places in the ratio of bones:
A form of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of the one that is pierced through bones:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp end.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a coating that all the causes that we have mentioned about razors and incisors and saws.
Of the cutting ends of bones and the sawing of bones.
The ends can be sharp or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or when you have cured that corruption by the use of those medicines and the cure does not follow, or sometimes the corruption causes the member to die without any cause, then cover that member within that area where the corruption is, so that the patient may escape from that death or harm that is greater than the member.
And the limb of the one who suffered, it is that the member was made black before it was cooked by fire, or if it was poorly cooked, then bring the blackness inside before the wound enters that member and takes over the whole body; and thus you should begin to treat that.
And similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to certain poisonous causes such as from a scorpion marsh or from viper or from ruta and the like.
And if the corruption or poison is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
And similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the root of the torch, and not give space to the corruption until it takes hold in the arm of the torch.
And if that fails, then insert the arm into the body at the joint.
And if another corruption passes around the body, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause in cure is of no use in treatment.
And similarly, when decay has caused the death of the foot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. But if it is possible to enter the knee, then you insert the thigh into the joint of the knee.
And if decay has already reached the knee, then there is no remedy, and you leave the patient to die.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and you extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend another minister's ligament above; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide, and all the flesh is discovered; and it should be inserted or cut.
And that it be covered with cloth of all parts to prevent it from touching the area, and that the patient's injury and pus are properly adjusted and cauterized.
If the patient has constant diarrhea while working, then you should cauterize the area consistently, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical duties until it is completed.
And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage and cure it before it becomes healthy.
And I would recommend to you that which happened to a man in his foot, this type of accident that I and you would have recommended, which occurred due to the blacksmith's work being similar to burning from fire.
And that corruption first occurred inside his own foot before it spread throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared for himself more pain than the cure going to the member due to the intensity of it, and the unscathed foot entered into the joint, and was healed.
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the other foot of the patient.
And then it came to me, and I could not help but reflect on that excess which was placed over the patient's body in medicine, and its purification of the body; and the excess did not reoccur and began to go to the other foot where it first occurred.
And he called me to incise the skin of him, and I did not want to do that hoping for the repercussions of that excess, and more than fearing the incision of his skin, which was a matter of life and death.
And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his land and reached me that that man prepared and incised his skin entirely, and was healed.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in that which heals from this disease, and that it signifies by what is meant and by what is done secondarily.
Of the treatment of sinuses and the quality of the clyster with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in a carnozed member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is torn and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains as if it were a vessel, and the code that is over it is like fine cloth, and it does not reach back to corruption, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is then called a fistula and not an abscess.
The treatment for it is to insert the entire codena as it is rotated, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the codena sticks and that the corruption has not been completed due to previous consequences, and there is a hole in the codena, then you cure it with a poultice.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes from it has a fetid odor, then poultice it with an Egyptian medicament which is made of oil and wine and equal parts of honey, and mix them in a vessel, and cover it over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches a certain degree of honey.
And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; poultice the sinus with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on it for a number of hours.
And then extract that dirty cloth; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the pus is removed.
Some people are treated with ash water, when this medicine is not present; and you should take the ashes of willows, put them on the water; and then filter that through this cloth and treat that wound with it until you confirm that the wound is healed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water with ashes, then filter that through water and honey mixed in equal parts, and treat that wound with it, because honey has the property of cleansing and moistening, and it helps the wound to heal, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you have done this for some days and you confirm that the wound is healed, then treat that wound with water that contains salt.
And you take some finished diaphanic oil and dissolve that with some rosy oil and vinegar; or you make a clyster of some medicines and oils that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on oils.
And if the orifices of the sinus are narrow and do not receive the clyster needle, then gradually widen them with a small iron, pausing in each area covered with Egyptian oil or basilicon until they are widened.
Similarly, if the orifices are widened, then add the lips of that suture and leave as much quantity in which the clyster is added.
And if the orifices of which the intestine passes are raised to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine passes through it; because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest place that you want, then prepare the member for the preparation in which the intestine passes through it according to what is suitable for you and that there is no cause of the intestine retained.
The one that is over the orifice of the sinus, which remains in the entire hour so that it can be adjusted on the arm. And so that you know if what comes from the arm is thick or thin, or digested, or not digested.
And if you consider the location of that sinus, if there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
When your medical treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that is applied to the orifices of the sinus has adhered, or has acquired adhesion, then you should remove it or replace it on the third day, and when you remove the plaster, then change the dressing and renew the ointment.
However, if the sinus approaches the sensitive space, do not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of it will take place, as in some people in which the generation of flesh in the wounds takes a long time, and in those in which the opposite is done.
And if the sinus approaches the skin in several days and becomes inflamed, then you know that the sinus will not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged treatment, then you adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their effectiveness, they are dried as soon as they are applied with excess of ointment.
And the most rear part that is being treated, you should take some animal fat, finely ground and dissolved in warm oil, and place it on the wound as if it were in its original substance, and then comfort that part and use it.
And it is done in the same way in that action, when there is no bruise, animal fat, when it is thick and well-cooked, and use it; or take lard and aloe and honey, and grind everything together and powder it over the fire, and then apply that mixture to a cloth and strengthen that on the wound; and apply the same mixture to the part that you have cut into pieces and powder it over a cloth and strengthen that on the wound.
And some wounds are treated with the long-lasting and powerful remedy of celestial lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of errors and centaury, and use those simple remedies or adjust them, grind those and crush and powder over the animal fat that I recommended; and use that.
If the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its head, and it may be found in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then treat it with fistulotomy, as mentioned above.
For the treatment of nail and toe injuries, and incision of the finger, and sectioning.
Nail injuries are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the big toe or foot, and they often occur in other toes, and if they prolong and their treatment is highly valued, it may be a caustic abscess, or it may be corrupted, and if it enters and eats away the surface of the nail, and it often corrupts all of it, and it often spreads its corruption to the bone inside which it has a fetid odor, and the end of the toe is black.
And when you have that thing that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cut away all the excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound with that cautery, which is helpful in this case.
If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additional flesh of the nail has already united with the flesh at the parts where it was torn, and the pain and inflammation have subsided, then place your finger gently near the angle of the nail that pierces the flesh, and push it inwards, and incise that flesh with a sharp instrument, and pause over it until it has been completely healed; then cure it with ointments that have been used for burns until it is completely healed.
If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cut out that bone and remove it, for there is no time when a bone that is corrupted can be healed.
And if the inflammation and corruption have already entered into that bone, then incise it in one of the joints according to what is remembered of its shape, and cure it within that time until it is healed.
If the nail has been perforated or broken, and there is also severe pain in that area, then at the beginning, you should lance the patient, and quickly cut off the nail at a sharp transverse section above the area, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is behind the nail, for if you do, you will cause severe pain to the patient, and also cause unnecessary damage to the surrounding flesh; and cure that area with ointments that reduce pain.
If the patient is lying on his back, it is not in the custom of many men, but rather the whole body is very hot, and very much in the bones, or very much in the fingers.
And they are not in the position of the joint, or it is the origin of the disease in many people. Those who are not in the position of the joints do not have evil, and those who are not in the joints very much are badly affected.
And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and it is that you insert that devil's position at the left side.
And of those who are not in the position of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore be careful of the suppuration of it.
And of those who are not in the position of the devil's joints, you should insert at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then press one of those convenient clamps on that, and cure that while it is healed.
When the body becomes consolidated, as it does with the aforementioned conditions between their thighs, or due to the birth of the child that was not born, or due to the consolidation of plague, or due to burns from fire, or due to similar reasons, then seek a way for that consolidation to return to its natural form.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil between their clothes to prevent them from becoming consolidated too quickly, and separate those, or place a thin layer of plaster between them according to what is found.
Similarly, if the consolidation occurs in the palm of their hand, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
At the beginning of vice, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic excess that comes out in the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer a strong purge of the body to expel some bile, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
There are two ways to cure their liver: one is to cut it and throw away the black bile, and the other is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The section of the liver is done in this way: first, boil the leg with water and tail fat until the black bile is thick and can be scraped off the leg. Then place the patient's leg on a table or bench, and dry the vein in one, two, or three sections. Next, raise the black bile to the upper part of the leg, below the knee joint, and let it flow out. This is done until the desired amount of black bile has been extracted, which the patient tolerates well.
And then, avoid those foods that cause black bile to generate.
Repeat the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noticed by the patient.
The elevation of their limbs should be done in this way: if there are motions in the patient's leg, raise it and apply heat to the leg with a hot water bottle until it becomes warm and the veins are exuded; or if exercise is strong, do it before bathing, until the member is softened.
And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a drop, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a pinch.
And then cut the cord with scissors and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the sense, and it is necessary to appreciate that which sometimes that rogue declines to black.
And then when you remove the cord you see that white thread is cord.
And then place a cloth under it when it is raised and moved by the cord, and suspend that which is like a lion's claw.
And then approach another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord of the part above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that and insert it behind the other section of the calf, and then extract it and insert it into the second section where it is on the inside, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do that inside where it is most superior or most outward from all the sections, inside where it is on the inside, and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it there and extract it, or insert it behind the bone and rotate your hand at every part where it is attached. And beware that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that motion and it comes out over the patient for that harm.
And when that is all out of the wound, then place your hand over the area of the cloth submerged in vinegar and oiled and not oiled, and heal that where it is healed.
And if the wound is twisted and has turned into a knot, and it does not follow the correct direction as we have said, then you should cut through all parts of the knot and the surrounding tissues, and then suspend it with stitches inside that lift up the entire area.
And be careful not to pierce the vein and do not place it on that area, which is difficult to elevate by you; use your prudence in that matter.
The shape of the incision made in the wound:
It should not be as sharp as the other stitches or have a sharp tip to avoid piercing the vein; it should be of thick flexibility, like a lion's claw, because if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; it should have enough thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the leg vein:
This vein originates in the thighs, in lowlands as the Ategi in the Arabian land and in the dry and arid lands of little fertility, where there is no herb or abundance.
And it often occurs in other parts of the body, such as the back.
And the condition of the patient is one of putrefaction, which leaves the wound with venom that enters the body like a snake, worms, and other parasites generating between the wound and the flesh.
And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this condition is due to this vein that occurs in the back, causing severe inflammation; and at the location, it is vesicated; and then the vein is drawn out from the place of that vesication, which seems reasonable.
And then, when it appears at the extremity, you should cover it with a plaster made from lead powder of the weight of one drag, and not more than two drag; and leave that and let the lead hang from the back.
And so many times when it comes to some cause at the parts deformed, cover that with lead and leave that. And if the mot is prolonged, then you should insert a part of it and cover it with a Roman bandage; and do not insert that which seems reasonable until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it contracts and enters the flesh and causes abscess and pus in the location and ulcer.
So that the cause of his illness may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from behind him and he remains with no cause in his body.
And from this vein, it is inserted into some men who are in their length of up to 20 palms and has already reached me that it is inserted into one of them.
And if it is incised during the time of his treatment, then introduce the ray into the tract of his body and perforate that long tract through his chest, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the location for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes causes pain, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with orifices, and is inserted from which orifice.
And cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above mentioned.
When a wound is made on the skin over the generation of worms, it is called bovine illness.
This disease is not called bovine illness in any land because the worms that cause it are found in cattle and are called tapeworms, which are not between the intestines and flesh, and they spread throughout the body and downward, and it is shown by the feeling of pain from member to member until the intestines disrupt and come out.
The generation of these worms is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, such as those that cause the appearance of snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
It is feared for its maliciousness, because when it enters the body and reaches the head, it spreads throughout the brain, and a strong fever ensues, which destroys the brain, and this is how tapeworms are caused.
Therefore, when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first feel its appearance and then tightly wrap what is on top of it and what is behind it with linen and strongly bind it, and then dry it and extract it.
If it is taken from the flesh and not from the bone, then place a pointed cautery over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then apply strong pressure on the upper part of the bone, and place a bandage over it, and extract that; and let the patient use medicines for the evacuation of bad humors, putrid and harmful, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section for pain in the naval.
This disease is not named in our land naval, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
And you have already seen the second one that I will tell you. She was called to a sick woman in a village, and she discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after an hour, she saw that inflammation go away as if it were worms moving in this way, but more strangely than if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then apply pressure to that painful spot and keep it in the muscle, and wait for about an hour.
And then correct the other side of the body until you reach the other arm.
And then recommend that he turn over completely for his entire body after you saw him; and it is too marvelous of the change in him and the speed of member to member. And I have already seen that method in the middle of the body, but I have also seen some things that make it seem that pain is changed from member to member. But I did not see that there with the ribs like in the woman.
And I did not think that was the case because it was due to the fact that the woman was old, with dry body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there was that change of breath.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this treatment in those who are delicate and have a soft body with constricted veins.
And when you want to cure them and the patient feels that pain, do not immediately apply the heat as we have said, but strengthen them and then apply heat over that area, and seal it with a cautery.
But if you do not see the swelling of the body, then cure that with exercise and expel the bad air, and give those foul tablets, serapi tablets, and similar ones.
From extraction of teeth.
Teeth are diversified according to their species, and according to the locations of the body where they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave, and deaf ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have roots.
When the spleen is pierced by a sharp object, passing through the bone and entering the skull, it causes severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, headache, inflammation of the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding, followed by vomiting of bile, which is similar in appearance to pollen, and yellowish discharge from the wound, resembling the color of flesh.
And if you encounter such symptoms, then stop the treatment and extraction of the sharp object from the wound, unless it is necessary.
When the sharp object pierces the heart, it is close to the right breast, and feels like a hard object that has been inserted, not a wound; and the movement of the sharp object resembles the movement of the flesh, and comes from the black plague, and causes coldness in the extremities, trembling, and shortness of breath; and you should know that death is near.
When the saffron has placed the lung perfectly in the middle of the chest, and the veins that are close to the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and he breathes heavily with great difficulty, and demands air frequently.
And if the saffron is placed on the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes a great violent pain and a loud groan, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
And if the saffron is placed in the stomach, then the patient will have great difficulty swallowing and may vomit undigested food.
And if the saffron is placed in the abdomen and stays there, then the patient may have a tear in the intestine, or the cloth, or the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope of cure by removing the saffron.
And if the saffron is placed in the bladder, and it obstructs urine, and causes some cause of the parts to be discharged from the body, and it causes great pain on the patient, then you will know that it is fatal.
When other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, spine, wings, and similar to the members, they are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the wound does not find vein or artery and is not poisonous.
And I would recommend that to you who have seen these wounds, for what it means about this treatment on the cure of the disease.
The cause of which is, that in a man such a wound occurs in the lacrimal duct of his eye in the nasal bone, and I would extract it from that part, after removing the gray matter of his eyeball, and it heals, and does not harm the eye.
And I would extract another wound from a Jew who had it in his eye in the gray matter of his eyeball, after removing the eyelid, and the wound was already hidden and not achieved by that but a small extension at which adhered to his cheek, and it was a great wound among the sharp wounds of the Turks, with no eyeballs.
And if it is not the case of the gout, and there is no such accident in his own house.
And another sage was extracted from a man named Crestia who was caught in the galley, and was Arabic sage, and it was the one that he had; and then he secretly inserted it into his between two guides, and it was already submerged in the galley of him; and then he cleverly removed it, and he healed Crestia.
And another sage was extracted from a man who was caught in his own belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change on him due to his conditions, he secretly inserted it into the sage and poured it over him, and he healed him, and no bad accident happened to him.
And he saw another man in whom a sage was caught on his back, and it had solidified over him, and after seven years the sage was in the middle of the wound.
And he saw a woman in whom a sage was caught in her own belly, and the wound had solidified into her, and it did not change in her conditions over time, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural operations.
And I saw another man who had a wound on his face that was healed but still painful, and he moved it, not experiencing much pain, and similar movements to these.
And I extracted the wound from the man of the king's prince who was located in his nose and had already declined to the direct part a small one, and the entire wound was hidden.
And I was called for its treatment within three days of the wound's appearance.
And then I again examined the wound of the injury very carefully; and then I inquired of that one who was subtle, and he did not feel it; but he felt a prickling sensation behind the nostril, and then I suspected that that prickling was at the end of the wound.
And I applied an ointment in the location that is both attractive and digestive, convinced that this location would help me to find the location of the wound, so that it could heal over it.
And do not be concerned about the significant location where the surgeon has achieved that location; and continue to apply the plaster to it for several days, without any accidents; and the wound remains healed during this time, and the patient recovers from the injury in a few days until the surgeon feels ready to remove it.
And then apply the acute corrosive medicine to the plaster for several days until it is ready to be removed, and gently pull out the tent, and again carefully remove the tip of the plaster that adheres to the skin.
And then adjust the opening of the plaster for that acute medicine until it appears visible to me after four months.
And then, when the plaster has been expanded, and it is possible to insert forceps into it, and continue that, and do not be lazy, you have not ceased to gently and carefully remove it with the help of instruments until one day you can remove it with forceps, according to the shape of those in the end of the chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore the plaster.
And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the pain is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no need for any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some parts of this art and their meanings, because I have not mentioned them, as the divisions of this art and their definitions are not understood by narrative or not understood by those who practice it.
And the skilled craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present and what is absent; and they perform a new operation and use a new instrument when an accident occurs in the external causes of the art.
And therefore I say that the parts are not removed from the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite part of the other part.
And that which is removed by the place in which it is inserted, or the part from which it comes is flesh, and it is attracted and removed.
And if you do not obey the instructions of the hour in which the catheter is used, then wait until the urine that collects around it clears, and relieve the attraction of the catheter and its exit.
Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not obey the instructions, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and moistening in each day, and it will eventually be removed.
And if you do not obey the instructions for several days, then wait until you perforate the circuit of the saw in that bone from all sides with a thin needle until that place is enlarged by the saw, and then extract it.
If the needle is already embedded in the body and is causing pain, then you should inquire about that pain, and if you feel it, then you should apply pressure with appropriate instruments to the attachment of the patient.
And if you cannot remove it due to the thickness of the skin and the length of the needle, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then you should make an incision on the skin until it is wide enough and possible to extract the needle.
And if you find the parts that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides as much as possible; and examine that, if you cannot remove the flesh from the fracture of the ribs and twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the stone from any location where it is, then you use a forceps in your hand and forceps to all parts that enter into that obstruction; and subtly, you apply the subtlety that the stone is not broken and that it is made by your difficult attraction of it and of that extraction.
And if you cannot at that moment, then leave for several days the parts that are in its circuit, and repeatedly apply that which is usually used. But if you have contrary flow of blood, then administer that which we have said for cure in its capital.
And guard your skill of incision of vein or nerve, or of cord, and administer ingen in any possible way of the evasion of the stone; and do that with facility and tranquility and delay and firmness as it would be and to your recommendation.
And therefore, you make the stone to move against it that the patient is according to the figure by which you should remove the extraction of the stone in it, because it is more useful. If you are unable to do that, then administer what is possible through figures.
If the sagittal sutures that are protruding from the opposite part are those that have already been processed by any part of the opposite side, or if they cause goutiness in the extramatal part due to the sensation of the part below the proper cord and sometimes in the eminent part; then you should remove it; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken; and then apply it, as it is made lighter by this.
If it is held in the bone, then you should twist the blade according to the opposite direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it, and then remove it.
And if not, leave it for a few days, and then remove it when it can be done.
And if the saw is in that place, then you should push it against it.
If the force is lost and you want to administer impulse, then insert it, if it is dull, strike against it so that the concavity of it enters the coil of the saw and then push it against it.
If the wound is concave, then you should insert that instrument forcefully into it, because the wound is relieved by that.
And if the wound is poisoned, then you should try to remove all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then treat that wound with appropriate medicine.
And if the wound is located on the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is near enough for you to touch it with a probe, and if it is possible to cut over it, then cut over it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and remove it, and then cover the wound as soon as possible, and treat that wound until it is healed.
The shape of forceps used to grasp wounds:
The ends of which are shaped like the beak of an eagle and are made with a saw when they are placed on the wound so that it does not slip.
And there are special types of forceps made with different sizes, thickness, and length, according to the size of the wound and its depth, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
is such that it can be removed with the instrument in the concave scalpel and pushed out.
Of vein tapping.
The veins that are tapped in phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in total, are two pulsating veins located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs located on both sides of the forehead; and two veins located in the lacrimal glands of two eyes that are called aspicientz; the prepared vein in the middle of the front, and the vein located at the end of the nose; and two veins located at the collarbone; and two veins located on the upper lip; and two veins located on the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic ; and there are also two veins located behind the tongue. When the veins that are bled in the arms are visible, there is one called cephalic, which is also known as wild grape; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilic vein, and another branch of the cephalic vein; and the people name that one "the vein of the whole body", and the basilic is the vein that is palpated in the domestic groin, and it is called "citillar", and the common people call that one "the stomach vein"; and the median cubital, and it is palpated over the elbow, and it is the vein that is bled in the foot, and it is the vein that appears on the sole for apparent manifestation; and the basilic, and it is the vein that is between the auricular and the smallest ear, and it is in the two grooves.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that it is placed behind the curve of the wild grape; and the second is the saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic groin; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild grape groin; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The swelling of the veins that are close to the ankles is due to ancient catarrhs, emigrations, and saffron and ulcerous headaches.
And the quality of that is as follows: it is to wash the patient's head, and to wet the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are close together with a wide cloth and good friction; then strengthen the patient by placing a band around their neck where the two veins appear and the places of their ears are close to the ankles; and if you feel pain in those places, here is what you should do.
Then you take the cutaneous lancet, and it is the one that incises, and you introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the fleambottle comes to the bone. And then lift your hand with the vein and the groove above and incise the vein at the incision. And the length of the incision should be the thickness of two fingers or around that amount; and make it as deep as you wish.
And then apply strong powders and leave them inside to be healed.
And previously, at the beginning of the book, they indicated the location and the cautery for those.
The veins and arteries that are near the temples, which are called the vein of the phlebotomy, are ancient and evil and overused and cause sharp and sudden outpours of blood to the head.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those is as follows: tighten the patient's neck with a cloth so that the veins appear at the sensation, manifest and demonstrate their pulses to you, and then you will know.
And then you lift the cloth above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and insert the phlebotomy needle underneath, and raise the vein with it; and do as you did in other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then release the patient's bandage, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place powders and strong medicine on that with great constriction, and leave them inside to be healed.
And before the remembrance of them, and of those who have preceded them, and their attachment to the beginning of the book.
And the lancing of the vein in the forehead is approached by lancing the cephalic vein to the ancient maladies of the face, and to emigranea and ulcerous and fetid ones.
And the quality of lancing this vein is that which I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a pillow on which they can rest their head; and then take the instrument, which is called the fossor, of which this is the form of it:
And place the pointed part of the fossor on that vein and strike it with a hammer or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity that you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen it in that place where it is healed.
And some people use the lancet laterally, however it is not recommended that the lancet should have a sharp extremity as with the other lancets, before the flat side, and lance that one according to the transverse, which is propitious and strong to break in the lancet when it is subtle.
The inflammation of the two veins that are near the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to a wound in the eye and swelling in the eyes, and on the face.
The quality of the lancet is that the patient holds their head still with a bandage, and then you use the lancet on those areas, and you should be standing over the head of the patient.
The lancet should be used across the width of a small amount of skin, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, it will easily cut through the skin.
And then apply pressure to the wound as much as necessary, and place your hand over those areas, and hold them tightly for a while, and then remove them.
The lancet for the nose vein is recommended for acute fever and strong sweating, and for face swelling and headache that occur on the face, and especially when it is chronic.
The quality of the lancet for that is that the patient holds their head still and places their right hand on your left hand, and takes the sharp lancet and inserts it into the upper part of the nose, straight down, where the vein does not appear to the touch, and where the wound begins to bleed soon.
When you have finished massaging the patient's foot little by little and applying the second remedy according to your need; then apply that to a cloth, which is then restored to its place.
The juice of the foot massage of the rosemary plant is used for the contraction of ale and the beginning of leprosy and other diseases and infections and malignant ulcers that are also found with herpeticum.
The quality of the foot massage of those is that the patient should hold each one in their own collar; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a bed.
Then apply the foot massage to the long vein along the vein little by little; and then extract remedies of warm water according to the appropriate quantity or as needed; and then do the same with the other vein.
Then remove the collar and tighten the two veins with a ligature to prevent the patient from being poisoned, and leave it inside until the pain is healed.
And the swelling of the abscess of the veins, like small apostemas and pustulas of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the abscess of those is that it causes the patient to turn their head to one side, and strengthen the neck of it with a band, and then rotate the lips of it and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the indication of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that is more so in the circle of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
If there is doubt about it, and you do not know what it is among those, then you should incise the largest of those and the most obvious pus from those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
It is also customary to use the lingual tonsil as a prefocus for the central vein that is located in the thigh, for the patient's mouth, and for other mouth conditions.
The quality of using the lingual tonsil is that it follows the patient's mouth between your hands, raises their tongue, and observes from behind the tongue, one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then perform the lingual tonsil on each; and be careful not to touch your hand with the lingual tonsil after that, because behind those are arteries.
And your veins that are lingual tonsilled in the body are located in all men, and the lingual tonsil is made according to two methods, either they put a small, declining olive or mirtilat; or they cut the lingual tonsil with a sharp knife, and apply it to the wound, and this is the form of that:
and according to the specifics of those who have more experience in opening the concave veins full of thick blood, and to those that contain thin bloody bubbles.
And this bleeding is of lesser extent and more subtle end, and it is suitable for the bleeding of thin veins that contain thin lemon juice.
The main vein of the bleeding is the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the patient's body and chest, and also from the abdomen.
And it is suitable for the bleeding therapist, when bleeding in that way, to keep away from that and be cautious in that, where there is an artery, and if he err and adjust in the puncture of the bleeding, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not bleed from that with bleeding, before slicing as with the illness.
And if the basilica does not appear manifestly, then let it go and move to the other one, or surround some of its roots; or use leeches in place of it, as it is manifest; and apply it as we have said.
And if you want to use leeches on the arm that you are treating, then let the structure of the arm that you are touching enter into the area between the elbow and the shoulder, and place your hand over it; and then bend the arm and apply the leech as we have said; and be careful not to percuss the area where the artery is.
And when you see, with strength, the limb swelling in the area where you have placed your hand, then that swelling is swelling of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the leech as if from the ear of a child, and the blood is thin and watery, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then cover and place your hand over that area for a long time; and then remove your hand, and if the blood is abscinded, because veins are also abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient's head with a pillow, and be careful not to move them until they are healed.
However, if the bone is not removed, and there is no medicine available at that time, then you insert the artery, as it appears to you; because the end of the bone is contracted, and the bone is removed; or you take a forceps and open that, and place one hand on top of it and strengthen it over the location of the vein and the skin and flesh inside.
And if the bone is removed, then it is good; and if not, then cure that from the location of the powders that are used to remove bones.
And the removal of the bone from that location is difficult due to the small space and the possibility of the skin of the arm.
However, if the dark vein is used, the trocar is very useful for removing the bone from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a basilar and cephalic branch, as we have said.
And approach the person who is most afraid of the phlebotomy of that one, because it is near a nerve; and then adjust the needle in the phlebotomy and touch the nerve, it will cause great pain to that one, and it is difficult to heal them, and fortunately not all are cured, And this nerve is visible to sensation; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach that one who has performed the phlebotomy with a sharp knife, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
The drawback of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood from the head and compares to the maladies of the hands.
And approach this properly, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive oil or a moss; because it is the safest of all veins, because it is not near the artery or nerve.
When pus is present in the armpit of men, if it is not lanced in the first percussion, then do not touch that pus.
The first of those is the one you know that lancet is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope of it and caution against the onset of diseases, and that it should be made lancet in one of the veins that are in the code, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that it should be made lancet at the beginning of primaveyra, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter at mealtime, when signs of repletion appear.
And a fleam operation should be performed, and the third day after the first one that has passed three hours after midnight.
When the bloodletting is administered, more when it is convenient and necessary for that person, at all times and in every moment.
And it is covenanted that no one should be bled before the age of fourteen, and women who are pregnant should not be bled except in the fourth month until the seventh, and the old ones who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And if someone wants to be bled for any reason, it is covenanted that their intestines should be emptied of their contents before the bloodletting with a lion's claw, so that the veins do not spill superfluous blood during the bloodletting of the intestines, which are pure, and do not harm the main members.
And those who are not bled should not be bled for any reason, nor those who have just escaped from illness or drunkenness until they have recovered from it, nor those with hydropsy, and more that bloodletting should be feared in colic passion and vomit, and in stomach, and in multiplication of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and in all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And then consider the evacuation of humors that cause this condition, if the abdomen is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then enter into the bath and if any cause does not prohibit, or is exercised by some exercise so that the abdomen is evacuated.
And place the feeding tube in his chest, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
And that the chest of that person be kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain, such as fatigue and similar afflictions to them.
And to his seat, make present the causes in the use of which it is customary for men to have aromaticity and odor, and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the feeding tube on a cushion that is put or that of that one who should be fed.
And then remove his arm, and scratch it with a sharp knife or three times; and then stretch the skin and wrap those three scratches with a bandage.
And if the structure is cold, when it is not equal, or the structure is superfluous, then prevent the discharge of pus; or if it is a softening, then prevent the body from sweating completely.
And then remove the structure, so that the one who should be scratched scratches his hands together between his fingers where the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the feeling.
And then give the scratcher some old oil properly; and place your hand on the side of the vein, where the incision is to be made, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside because of the veins that are there at the time of the incision, and those that are full of blood when you place the scratcher over that, it contracts the scratcher, and if it does not contract, then it is tight.
And therefore, for that reason, the phlebotomist should be stopped and concerned with all these causes.
And then remove the phlebotomist, but if the vein is punctured in a crooked way, then it is; and if not, you repeat that other crooked place nearby that location for a short time, or above the patient's wound, if the location is not infected.
And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because that would cause more pus to form, nor would it enter into the body.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if needed.
And if the puncture is small and corrodes slightly, and you fear that it will not be enough to draw the required amount of blood, then you repeat the phlebotomy in that area again, with straight alignment and adjust the wound for a short time, and do that until the location is infected, because the location becomes infected in some people due to small punctures.
If you have already placed a cushion on them, do not move it, because there is no cause for you to do so; and place your hand on a certain part of the bed, which would be suitable for the body of the patient. It is better in this place than oil and other oils.
Similarly, apply oil in all phlebotomy, which is the act of opening veins to let out blood from the body of the patient, and do so with a Tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on the one side of the patient, as the sanc is subtilized and revolved when it is full.
And if in the place of phlebotomy a large abscess is generated, which is caused by vegetable accidents, and especially that one which has not been bled but only the vegetable, or in the puncture of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the spot a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it with it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And cover that which is done with a bandage from the incision of that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not note it; and if you wish, place over it some cause of allurement and of magic dissolved, or some cause of succulent menthol or calamint or a similar substance to it.
And move the swollen parts and elevations of the abdomen with blistering from the basilica.
And place your hand on that, and if you later use soft compression on that, then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore be careful to place over it some cause of the above, which will greatly flow from the incised vein.
And apply an astringent to that, so that the place is hardened, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
And cover that which is drawn from the incision with all men according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the incision after it appears.
If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it becomes rotten; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then wait until its sharpness is dulled.
And if the person is tall and strong and needs an extraction of bone in a difficult case, then amplify the trocar of the vein and the trochar should be left.
And in the case of a weak person, do the opposite of that, and if it is extracted in difficult cases, then it should be straight.
And the best thing that is administered in trocar of vein is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of trocar of vein saves from bone flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than the second method by latitude and length.
And in the case where syncope occurs during trocar of vein, and you should care for that person after the trocar of vein with a small amount of infusion in the form of milk or simple oximel; and extract it from the bone in three or four difficult cases.
If there is a complication of the complexity, then take the fumigation bath to inhale essence of myrrh or essence of honey aromatized with such spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or with an aromatized and fragrant essence.
If the fumigation bath causes sincopi and its cause is the lack of one sanc, then take inhale water of meat and an aromatized fragrant essence; use aromatic oil, and let it be poured on the patient's chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopi for evacuation.
And who wants to move his arm and dissolve his second sin, then take the fumigation bath, which is for great evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the sin little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
When someone wants to perform surgery on their arm, and the second joint is bent, and the chest is strong, then do that approach around 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
When someone wants to draw the second joint of their arm against the opposite side where they lean, it should be done on the second or third day.
When that arm in which the second joint is already scarred and inflamed, and causes fever, it should be bent in a splint, and supported with a large amount of bandaging, and the opening for phlebotomy should be amplified until the syncope occurs, so that all conditions for phlebotomy are preserved; and your hand should be placed on the thigh of that arm, to prevent death from syncope, which is caused by ignorance and negligence of the phlebotomist.
And do not do it when you want to straighten the arm and remove the second splint, as the opening of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove from the joint, which would be done with too much force and would cause damage.
When performing a bloodletting procedure, one should use a lancet that is sharp enough to pierce the skin; or pause on a piece of tyreacan alfarsch, or sawdust, and compress it firmly into the wound to prevent bleeding.
If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
If you need to evacuate the blood again and there is no excuse, then draw it from another vein in the other arm.
The vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the popliteal or basilic veins, when they are not obstructed or occluded, which are composed of those.
The quality of the bloodletting from that vein is that the patient should immerse their hand in warm water until the vein becomes visible.
Then apply pressure over that area with a firm bandage; and perform bloodletting following the transverse direction, not horizontally or lengthwise.
And your incision should be wide and your forceps should be sharp, which you use to grasp the joint above the knee.
And if it is prohibited to let the blood flow, then you will elevate the limb in the air and allow the blood to run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you will be excused from elevating the limb in the air, and the same applies to placing the body of the patient in cold water during the summer.
And the forceps for this vein are safer than all other veins, because it does not have any pulsating blood or nerves.
And the forceps for the ankle of the leg are similar to those used in childbirth.
And the quality of these forceps is that you should strengthen the limb with a bandage or with your hand, rather than elevating it in the air, until the vein is inflamed and has been demonstrated to be successful; then use transverse forceps; and if you insert them, it will not cause any harm.
And do not let your hand remain on the fleshbotomy, which would separate the nerves of those dissected parts from their carnage.
And then repeat the hand in the back and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not repeat it there, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And as the blood is extracted according to the amount needed, then you place your hand on the vein oil and salt, so that it does not solidify constantly; similarly, cover what you do in all straight lines.
The juice of the fleshbotomy from that of the hand on the right side is that it is compared to the evils of the melon.
Do the same in the fleshbotomy of it as you did in the other one.
The juice of the vein sephena from the fleshbotomy is to the evils that are in the part below the waist, such as its evils of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and the evils of ronhs and ulcers of thighs and abdomens, and their similarities to the evils.
And the quality of the fleam used on him is that the patient puts his own foot in hot water and makes pressure on that friction where the blood appears; and he ties over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes out from the same spot, and from there its branches spread on the surface of the foot like ramifications.
And then use the widest branch or behind the cushion to tie the bandage; it is better and more healthy.
And if you use the fleam on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and place your fleam as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the fleam be silent.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited; then you should wash his foot in hot water and let the pus flow out through that place where it can be drained.
And if the fleam is in the first vein, then wash it with a small amount of water; the location is healthy; and do not fear him, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, make a cushion for the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the location where we have said it is, place it behind the calf of the posterior thigh muscle.
And the juice from the popliteal fossa of it is pain in the hip when it is burned with cauterization.
And the quality of the popliteal fossa of it is that the patient lies down, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion of it from the side of the hip entering under the calf above four digits, a long subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, then you popliteal fossa that second each time that is to your possible and second the transverse, and it is better; or insert that at the beginning or remove that at the end, because the location of it is salt.
And it is in some men not ameliorated; and if you press that, and it does not appear at the feeling of all, then popliteal fossa some part of it, and that which appears in the back of the foot on the said auricular and annular.
And be careful of the nerves, and let the blood flow out in the amount you desire.
And then remove the stricture and place your hand over the area of the lithotomy incision to strengthen the area, which is usually healed.
Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
Symptoms are of the heart, or of the brain, or of the veins.
And symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by incision.
And this symptom that is by incision is made in two ways, either by fire or by fire.
And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first part where symptoms are placed is the nape, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms of the jaw below the mouth; and symptoms of two spoons; and symptoms of a hostler, and is above the foot; and symptoms of two forks, and are of two bones; and symptoms of two cavities; and symptoms of two cushions.
And do not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, do not cauterize them with fire or heat of any kind, nor cover the wound with anything until the entire body has been completely drained.
If it is necessary to drain the pus due to illness or continuously, administer it at every hour during the beginning and end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth finger of the hand, then command a blister to be made as soon as possible after two or three hours have passed since the day.
And it is important to note that the blister should be applied to the nape of the neck because when it confers gravity to the head and adheres to the hair, it is more effective in evacuating all the body.
And this blister is at the location of the lumbar puncture of the cerebral spinal fluid.
And it is not recommended to use that one which is of complex fragility, or in which there is a catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason, it is not recommended to use those which are old, and in the lids of which there are injuries.
Moreover, it is recommended that the one who makes the blister should place his hand on the parts behind it to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
When the alchemical vapor is in the place of fleam opening of the dark vein and the basilica: and for that, it confers asthma, and contraction of the lungs, and the scissure of the instrument of the lung, and coughing, and repletion.
And if the alchemical vapor is inhaled in a small amount, if it is paused behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the alchemical vapor of alhagdahan confers accidental pains in the head and in the teeth, and emaciation, and pre-focus, and pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleam opening of the basilica.
And if you command the vaporizer that he does not press his hand during the incision so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And the vapor of alcohol confers alcola in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the maladies that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleam opening of the herb that is in the upper lips.
May the cloth that is made on the two spoons be placed on the cap, which is made for the replenishment of warmth.
And the cloth of the two parts taken from the forks is placed heavily on the flap of three veins, which is called the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because it attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the blower not to proceed too much in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and leaves its nerves and arteries.
And there is a cloth that is blown on the buttocks and placed on the hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that have been left.
And cover that you command the blower to be a large cloth, and of linen, because the area needs strong drying; and it is covered with thin blown cloths and is incised in incision.
When the bed is filled with soft materials to relieve pressure on the entire body, it helps alleviate old pains of the ribs and spine, and bladder; it also helps with constipation and diarrhea; and it is used in place of a flebotomy for two hours, and after meals, and for two hours.
However, this method weakens the entire body and causes hiccups in some people.
And the soft materials are placed under the buttocks, as they would be on a bed of several chambers.
The quality of the position of the soft materials is that they are placed under the buttocks at the beginning and gradually reduced by gentle pressure, and do not prolong the position of the soft materials, but rather pause them more frequently, and keep them in place, so that the humors can reach the area equally. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and cut the hair in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Because that person who has thin flesh and is prone to sores, you should shave them once and not again, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to blow on the shaving and cut the hair in small portions, and at the same time facilitate the process.
And if the skin is thick, then shave twice, because in the first shaving, you open the path to the artery and the softness of the area. And in the second shaving, you can make an incision for the extraction of thick skin.
And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third shaving to get rid of it.
And finally, when we want to extract the skin in small portions or a small piece, we need shaving.
And if we want to extract a large piece of skin, we need a large shaving; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave in preparation for the extraction.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only so much.
And if the one whose wound is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then it is recommended that the locations of the blisters be more gentle, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use oil of aloe or oil of violat or oil of allspice or oil of cement of goat; and if it is in the winter, then use oil of narcissus or oil of lily or oil of camomilla or of sandalwood.
And if the excess is thick and sour, then use oil of ambergris or oil of balsamita or oil of aloe or oil of anethi or similar ones.
But if the blister-maker is of wide pores of thin flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit oil, and it is recommended that for these locations of blisters, they be washed with warm water or sour water of salt or water of goat or water of borax, and similar ones.
And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash their feet with warm water or with a mixture of salt, vinegar, and similar substances.
And if the patient has thick sweat, wash their feet with warm water or with a mixture of wormwood, of cedar, of camomile, or similar substances.
And it is recommended that the footbath be given immediately after the bath; having been given, it should be administered close to the bath for an hour or two, and it should be allowed to dry near the foot.
What is the reason why a bleeding person should not take a footbath before the footbath?
If the person who is to be bled or the one who is to give the bloodletting is angry and has a sharp tongue, and if the skin is red and inflamed, then it is recommended that cooling causes be used, such as sour milk, warm water, ice, julep, and similar substances.
And place their food and meat, such as pork, and meat from game birds, and cooked vegetables, and similar things.
And of that which has a bad complexion, such as barley bread or barley flour, and sumac, and any other fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that it be used in small amounts of food and drink, and place the food of that person with pork and game birds and pigeons and small birds and doves.
And on the day of ventozacio and flu botomia, the bread should be greater than the food.
And it should be given in bread to some people in the form of alpharac, or medicaments of musk, so muscated, or alcelita denant the ventozacio or denant fleubotomia or approaching, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
When the incisions are made on the patient's body, they should be made over the ribs, over the belly and gout, over the navel, in the locations of the joints, and on the widest part of the thigh, as these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
And it is not sought for those but to attract blood from the member, such as a blister over the breast in case of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and use that which dissolves the blood visibly from the member, such as a blister on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the member and drains it and relieves the pain when the blood is dissolved.
And it is placed over the ribs when they occur in their inflammation or boil, because by virtue of the attraction strong water heals the inflammation and eradicates the boil from its location.
And similarly, when it is placed on the ribs and belly to draw out blood in those who are closed up.
And these vapors are administered through steam alone; and some vapors are administered with fire.
And some vapors are administered full of warm water for the patient's illness.
And this is to make the steam full and big, it is only water or water in which herbs suitable for that have been boiled.
Form of vapor administered with fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the most of a palm; and it should be in the direction of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of him, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters into him with a needle.
It should be made of wax or citrus, of large margins, lion, equal and rough so that it does not damage the member because of its position on the patient.
And it should be at the side of the patient, a transverse wax or iron bar, on which the candle is placed by the fire.
And now let's consider this great wind that we have recommended; and the lesser one of those that follow the diseases and the state of that who uses it.
And the winds of children and wear them out are different from the winds of young people and large-breasted women.
And the quality of placing this wind on the member is that it extends the muscle with a decent amount of fire from a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the verge transverse in the middle of the wind location, so that the fire is lit around the part that is not burned to the patient's body.
And then place it on the member of the patient, and say the incantation that we have said, until you have the winds and do not order them to open the mouth and let the steam escape over that mouth, then the wind will soon be dissolved.
And then apply it according to its manner, and repeat it if necessary.
In the case of a patient with pleurisy, water is administered, which has no transverse or vertical line, and is not administered unless it is filled with water and placed on the member alone.
And this is how it is done: And the more this wind bag is large, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members where it is impossible to position windbags, such as teeth and gums and similar parts; or in a naked member of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that have been found bloodletting vessels that are in the waters of clean ponds.
And they should be placed in water pond during the day and night, until they are famished, and there is no cause in the belly of those; and the body should be evacuated at the beginning with cupping and windbags; and the member of the patient should be rubbed before it becomes red; and they should be placed on it.
And when they are full and closed.
And if it is possible to suck out the wound with a pump, it is better to do so later in the process.
And if not, then wash the wound with warm water and a lot of it; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the body of the wounded person is extended, place it in a tub of cold water, and place that which is above where the blood is collected underneath.
And if the wound is multiplied, then powder over it with vitriol or similar substances to stop the bleeding before the blood is absorbed; or place the most mature beans that have been cooked on the wound and leave them until the beans stick to the wound, and then remove the blood.
And if necessary, repeat the process of removing blood, when it is possible to change those.
And if the blood is prohibited from being suspended, then rub the wound with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can escape; and place them until those that have some blood soon disappear.
When you want them to vomit, sprinkle some three-fingered aloes powder, salt, or ashes on those areas, and they will soon vomit.
Here begins the section of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh child, know that foolish doctors and the vulgar and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
And for this reason, this method of the sciences in our earth is hidden; and I have not done it before, but I am obliged to do it now because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding until I extracted the science of them.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
And I have already described all of that in this chapter that contains the greatest science and about which I have passed my best experiment; therefore, I open it to you others and deliver it from that occupation of elongation; and I open it at the end of opening; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into those forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collection of facts about bone fractures, including those that must be mentioned before we begin to remember the different types of fractured and varied limbs of each one. Let us then say what is said in the preface of this chapter; and the chapters according to the understanding of which it is advisable for craftsmen and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is advisable to begin with the examination of the affected part, or another, if no cause prevents it, as long as it does not weaken its strength, or it is the one that has happened, or is old and decrepit, or it is at a time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and do not eat large pieces of meat or fill up on foods and all food that fills the veins with pus, as long as you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter into the member.
And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually on their back.
And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are thick and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as their foods made of wheat flour, water, rice, and peas, and meat from cows, and hooves, and fresh fish, and large and similar foods to those, and this regimen is done by coagulation of fracture more gently and more.
And you should know that bones heal when they are in men who are in the first stage of a disease and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members from.
May nature adjust and anneal over the broken bone of every part, some cause similar to glue in which it is grossly used that adheres and strengthens that entrance which is congealed and joined together, through which venomous laughter comes from great strength and firmness, as with fire at the beginning, through which no cause prevents its work.
For this cause it is necessary to place the bandages of the patient, bandages in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of limbs, for example the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the shoulder; and similarly all other members are different from each other.
And I have remembered the type of every fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Great variety of fracture in such a case. There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are arcuate fractures, others occur in the stars; and some are longitudinal fractures: and some are fractures of the skull and stars and addictions that proceed and do not proceed, as is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a plague and disruption in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
And in all cases, there is a particular torment in the restoration of it according to what will come from the distinct remembrance of it in its places.
Great shock of bone fracture. And for that reason, bone fracture is known as: the twisting of it, and its elevation and appreciation to the sensation, and some are from the hand at your touch.
And therefore, when there is no twisting in the place and it is not made by your touch when you touch the bone in its movement and the patient does not have great pain, then it is not a fracture here.
It is possible that there is twisting or a small fissure, where you may not be able to place your hand and compress everything; then pause over the area of the medicines of which you remember at that moment; and then keep it straight by a subtle constriction.
You should know that when the place is curved and does not split into two or another, what does not happen in the same part of the body, as it is remembered from the whole part of the patient, then you should begin to correct the hand that happened to the apostema caut.
And if an apostema caut happens, then leave that for a few days until it ceases; and then gently move the hand in any way you can with lifting and twisting.
You should know that the restoration of the hand and its sharpness is more difficult than from the bone in which the accident happened to the body.
And then strengthen that which will come after the remembrance of the hand.
If the bone is fractured, it is necessary to extend this member bent in two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or if your hand is small, use two cords or one cord and your hand.
And if your position is such that you place the member in the same way as its natural figure, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then pierce those attachments with a needle and return them to their places according to each method that you can find in their locations.
And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or their injury; and pierce them according to your power that you apply the one bone to the other as a companion according to the best forms.
And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at that place, and if you see any different cause here, rectify it and equalize it according to the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as some foolish doctors who move their hands too much cause abscess by their operation, or they cause contraction in the member as we have seen in their operation of moving their hands too much.
And the quality of the member's stricture is that which I recommend; so that you know that twisted members vary in their position and size and in the shape of those.
And of those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to those, then make sure the covering is of very thin cloth.
When those who are obese have them with a cushion or a pillow, cover them with a cloth that is thick and durable, because the softness of the cloth connects the large member strongly to all parts, equally preventing any injury.
And then, begin your evacuation of equality, place a suitable bandage over the location of that fracture, with three or four layers on the member as soon as it becomes soft; and strengthen your hand a little to hold the bandage.
And then, approach that to the most elevated part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen your hand so that it does not break the structure that you have strengthened at the location of the fracture. And then, lengthen your hand slightly into the covering of the location of the fracture, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of it.
And then, take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the location of the fracture, and approach your operation to the structure of the covering and the softening of that second one which we have said in the first covering.
And if there is a curvature between the toes of the lion or the cloth that equals the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; otherwise, do not place anything on it for any reason.
And if there is another bend, place something on it that has been made decently of thin sheets, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; otherwise, place something on it that drains the abscess and reduces the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and later strengthen it with those.
And if the sheets are made of canna da lavanda raza, and they have been made skillfully; or they are of pi; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each sheet be according to this form and figure:
However, make sure that the sheet placed over the fracture is thicker and longer than the other sheets, and let the length of the sheet be according to its length and thickness; and strengthen it with another band according to your first structure; and let the layer above be made decently as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture and the longer it is, the stronger the structure.
And it is important that the threads be smooth and thin, and of good quality; and if the threads are thick, as she has seen in the operation of removing a cataract by pulling the thick threads of the eye, and this is a great error when the stricture is equal.
And very thin threads are not convenient, because you will not be able to sew through the stricture with those that you want, and it is not good if there is a gap between each stitch.
And if the patient is sewn up near the stricture with the ends of the needles in the wrong places, then pause and place a piece of leather or carmined wool between them to prevent injury.
Some fractures are caused by blows, and some occur in the spine, and she has found them to be remembered in that one in the second chapter of singularity.
And you should know that all broken bones are not immediately straightened on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not allow to be placed over the needles sooner than five or seven days, according to your certainty of the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the method of bandages used by ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
The method of bandaging for the treatment of fractures, which is most suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, where no heat or moisture is required: you should take powdered flour, and the middle part of the flour that can prevent the movement of the bone in the parts of the mold.
And if it is like that, you should crumble that bread into the wound, and place the compresses on it, which are not too thick or thin; and then use that.
Another method of bandage for treating fractures, dislocations, and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of aloe, and of myrrh, which is made from milkweed salt, of all one drachm. x; of manna and aloe one drachm v; alochil one drachm xx; all mixed with oil or bread if the wound of the patient is scalded; and then use this bandage, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more quickly, and confers strength to many people.
Another method of bandaging that helps with fractures and twists: take migrach and mix with white aloe powder, x; of myrrh and aloe vera powder v; of acacia powder vi; of Armenian bole .xx.
All these ingredients should be ground in a large mortar with contrition, and their crumbs, and their powders are administered with water or with egg white.
Method of bandaging for joints and separated bones at those places, and for accidental pain in those areas and fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and dip it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the wound.
The virtue of this plaster is not for healing, but for treating abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Another method of bandaging that heals broken bones: take willow leaves and wild poppy leaves; grind them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of bandaging applied to the healing of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the permanent inflammation of abscesses: take aloe root, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of eggshells, all ground together and x; grind all these ingredients and their powders with vinegar if the limb is not suppurating.
If it is bleeding, then apply a wet cloth or a cloth soaked in cold water to it.
Another method of applying plasters that is stronger in resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-standing abscess: take the leaves of althea and seeds of lime, balm, melissa, majoram, violet flowers, camomile, all parts of it, and soak them in cold water or warm water or milk; all of this should be ground into a paste and applied to the affected area according to the quality of the limb and its color.
However, Ypocras does not recommend using his own free will that it be placed on the limb that is swollen with gout, but rather a cerate made of wax and oil should be used; and he recommends that it be applied between the thickness and subtlety.
However, in Galen's opinion, it should be placed on the limb that is swollen with gout for its restoration and to treat the causes in which there is a slight loss of heat, such as sweating and similar symptoms to those we have recommended.
A plaster that soothes the injury and pain: Take equal parts of honey, water, the scraped skin or hair of a man, aloe, salt; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make a plaster.
The amount should be proportional to the severity of the wound and the location; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation, nor fracture the bones, nor is too close to the bone, then you should not apply for more than a few days. And if it causes pain, inflammation, or swelling at the location, then remove it in that hour and replace the plaster.
And take a cloth and sea sponge, wet with lion's humid urine, and submerge it in warm water; then wash the location until the swelling and pain are reduced; and let the member rest for an hour; and place a wool pad soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and cover it with a cloth for a night until you are sure of preventing abscess, and that the inflammation of the member is reduced, and that the pain of it is relieved.
And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently insert it into the area that is healing.
And if you see that the abscess and the swelling and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already been completely healed, and if you need to apply plaster and structure, then repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm has befallen the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared through the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust the structure more than in your first construction, and adjust it according to the swelling of the patient's wound, after the reminder of which.
If you see that the location of the fracture has dried up and become more exhausted than usual, then you know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply cold water compresses to the entire affected area for three days; and after that, loosen the bandage a little, and for this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more efficiently.
If that which the foolish restorers of the fractured limb do not return to its original state when it is not restored, according to its usual condition, and it is restored according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done incorrectly, it would increase the ancient injuries in their free movements and aggravate the limb.
And I have not seen anyone of them do that, therefore it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are different, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by the impact of a space, and the impact is throughout the bone, which is located behind the bone, just like it happens in the staff, and for that reason this type is called an "ascial"; or the space penetrates into one part of the bone, and penetrates into its flesh and does not pass through the entire back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the pain from these two fractures is either great or small, and the type of fracture is either contracted or atricious; and the cause of this is a strong blow or a fall on stone, and similarly.
And this fracture is either penetrating and approaching the periosteum which is located under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is either great or small.
And the type of fracture is that it occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason this special fracture is called hairline.
And this fracture is made either by a fall or by a blow on stone, and similarly, which causes some bone plate to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are hit and broken into pieces.
And this is more commonly made in the human body, such as its ribcage.
And all these special fractures are caused by such sharp objects as separate the bones. And you would like to remove everything that is in its place.
And you would like to detect all these special fractures by examining them and the foul meat that is on them.
And a special kind of fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and is cleaned, and is covered with the foul meat, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the tongue, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to the symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of it.
This is the cause why it happens that if it comes to your place on the first day when it was placed and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the osteology of the bone giving the day fourteenth completely disposed.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the bone on the seventh day, having that what was left of the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur which we have mentioned.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should scrape the small and atrophied part, according to what I will tell you.
And if you raise the head of the patient placed, and disclose over the bone according to custom and your possible according to the figure of the placement, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess caution, then you should pause at the patient's side and that what you cover, and it is that you fill the place with cloths soaked in wine and olive oil, and make a new placement inside before the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert a straight needle into the bone in this way: And then administer another needle slightly wider than that one.
And then administer the wider needle.
And you should have different needles of various widths, some wider than others, and some shorter than the others, with sharp ends of their tips, and made of iron or steel.
And use them to strike the needle with force so that it does not hurt the head and cause harm.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then pierce it around the circumference of the needle, using needles that are called "shallow taravals".
And these are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at which point you approach it, so that the taraval has a rounded tip or margin on top of that which is left behind, similar to the edge or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take many of these needles, as many as each bone requires, until it is in your present at all tests of the brain, where the end is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of this test.
And this is the form of three species of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and revolve it around its tips until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and place it where the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that area.
And then insert the fine forceps that you have between each part of the bone, and do it as gently as possible, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for disturbing the things that have appeared at that location, such as thin and fine forceps.
And be sure to guard against any cause that the forceps may touch the brain.
And thus, after you have circled the bone perforations, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that one extracted, be careful that it is as sharp and as fine as the other instruments used for such purposes.
And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that one with the instrument you should use for such purposes; and apply it to the wound and find those which we have said.
And the other method of operation is long and fearful, which Guilielmus and the Laurentius have praised greatly; and this is the word of it: necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and happy instrument of which this is the form:
And that the lens-shaped fragment is lion and does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is of the same length as the other in two parts in front in length, as sometimes; that the lens-shaped fragment is adjusted to the bone with the face of the sharp fragment penetrating into the bone.
Approach the incision with a small sharp knife in one part of the bone until you have completely cut through it, and be sure to not accidentally cut yourself in the accident that you fear in any way, and if the doctor was the most experienced of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
If there is any cause that attaches to the bone of the skin in other places of the bone, cut that one at the end of the incision that lens-shaped, and release that one with ease, which is released from its harm and its fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is cut or left on the bone is the surface of it, and it is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with razor-sharp blades that you have prepared for that purpose, in various quantities so that it is possible to administer them at all locations conveniently and properly, and the second one after that in which you lost your operation that bone broken and its figure.
And you should administer in your ratio the medicine that you used at the beginning to make the bones thin, and then use it closer to the most subtle part of it, and do not stop doing this until you reach administering the thinnest one of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and thin fracture, you should administer treatment according to what you lost for its correction.
And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And you should pay attention to what we have shown in large fractures.
And if the skin is torn when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge that in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first one, doing this as well as possible without causing pain to the patient; and then administer a thick layer of liniment, and do not strengthen it more than the amount that the wound has.
Let that patient rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of alum and aristolochia, and similar substances to those.
You should make these medicines into powder that is ground on a plate, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of property of which is to remove and not bite.
And guard yourself the second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the surdity of poison or other; nor do you let it aggregate virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts that and pollutes that, and it happens to the patient aforementioned that malicious malice.
And it happens in the cerebral cortex, where from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed on its cure, and it becomes black on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it happens to the patient these accidents that we have said, know that it is paranoid.
If no black magic is involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is due to the power of that medicine that it cures the black magic, then you should take a piece of honey and four pieces of oiled cloth, and place them on that part; and then cover that with a cloth, and care for that with the appropriate treatment until it is healed.
Chapter III.
About the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts, but rather into four parts, somewhat closer together, or one of those curved ones, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, but only bent and twisted and swollen.
If one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce a small splint into that part of the nose, and equalize that fracture by means of the two splints, and then cover it with the appropriate treatment until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this to help you, and be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not allow for vision, then cover it with a small, round bandage.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And cover the wound with a bandage for its restoration on the first day after the fracture, if possible; otherwise, then apply the seventh or tenth day to heal the abscess cautiously.
And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril.
And say to the ancient healers that the splints should be wrapped in cloth, and moved around the entire day, but not seen by me; having covered the piece with a piece of linen cloth mixed with powdered myrrh; and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
And some bandages should be placed in the nose, in place of a gag, or else they would be wrapped in cloth from the lion's mane; and that the fracture of the nose is more violent and that the patient should not be prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make bandages.
And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with beeswax or with a solution of egg yolk and rose oil, or with diachylon.
However, if no abscess occurs, then cover that deformed part with a plaster made of starch and powdered alum, and place it on the lion's mane, and do not leave the nose uncovered for any reason.
However, if the bones of the nose are broken or comminuted due to a small fracture, then cover those, and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and heal it with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters that are appropriate.
If there is a nosebleed, then apply pressure to the nostrils and administer a plaster of gum into it until it stops bleeding.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not bleed, look at whether the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces and curved to the parts inside, then it can be easily treated.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger from the patient's mouth on the right side of the jaw; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the patient's mouth on the left side; and push it against the softness of the fracture inside to facilitate the deformed parts, with your other hand on the part of the deformed bone; and hold it in place.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line until it is possible to realign them.
And if there is a dislocation of teeth to fracture, then use those that you hope will remain intact, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled cloth, and place a large steady sheet decently made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above second according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place a lemon on his lips.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then on the third day you should remove and discard it; and apply what has been altered from it with plaster of moli, album of egg, or cornstarch, so that you have the cedar of the patient, and place a lion's wool over the plaster.
And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave it until it is healed and strong the fracture; because this fracture is strictly in three months.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same remedies we mentioned in the treatment of that wound, and it will remain healed.
And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the bone has separated or is displaced. If it has, then carefully remove those displaced fragments with instruments that are appropriate for that purpose.
And if the orifices of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with a bodkin according to your need.
And after you have removed those displaced fragments and they do not remain in place, then enlarge the orifices of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the appropriate dressings over that area and keep it there until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
The scapula is broken in the middle of the part where it is attached to the shoulder muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is more difficult for its restoration; or if there are any complications in the surrounding area, and it is difficult to restore; or if the fracture is complex.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is complex, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken clavicle, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
And then align the fracture with the shoulders until it is made in the shape of the second rib, and not in the elevation or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover it with cloth or wool, and make it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the clavicle and tie it with your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
And if you cannot tie the end of the clavicle to the parts forward, so that it does not reach the shoulder, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a pillow of appropriate size over the muscle.
And the assistant will take the muscle of the patient to the parts that have been entered before the bone of the furcula is raised to be in the position on him, and then you will correct the fracture and equal it to those called the ties.
If you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that and remove those pains with ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you will make an incision on that with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, since you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron of which this is the shape of it:
And it is similar to a mallet of which this is the concavity; and its width is according to that which you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
If the length of it is according to what is possible to the operation; that there should be two extremities there, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
If the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone's suture is wide, and it is certain of abscess formation, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
If the disruption is narrow, or you fear abscess formation, then you fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
If an abscess forms, then pour in warm water mixed with rose oil and vinegar, and place it over the affected area.
And even if the splint above the broken bone is not well-fitted; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you replace the splint, then you should adjust it and strengthen the bandage.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow behind their back to support their back in bed at night; so that the helper can elevate the patient from the side of that person, and thus raise the fracture of the sternum at elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of that person.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an abscess in the place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that time, and adjust it in the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the sternum has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made more comfortable according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some treatments are done in men of that time.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder.
The spatula is broken on the side of the shoulder, but it is not broken through the shoulder, only its edges.
And when the shoulder is broken  and it is broken in the middle of the shoulder  and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture, prepare the shoulder and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
And then place powdered flour of almond milk and stopper on the shoulder; and then place pulverized cloth doubled over; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the spatula or more than a small amount.
If the layer is concave in any part of the spatula, then level that concavity with stopper and press the layer evenly.
And then apply strength above the stopper with a long needle and firmly fix the layer until it does not remain in its place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the times that it is softened, tie another bandage and strengthen it and straighten the leg if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their left side.
And the splint is restored in 10 days or in .25.
And then when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut through it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if this happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in some places of it and that ends there; but the extremities of it are not cut and comminuted.
When the patient's foot is broken, it bends in parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, and severe vomiting and diarrhea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the foot, adjust the ribs of the foot to the level of two times the thickness, and gently perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods that are appropriate and convenient until it returns to its original shape.
And then place the plaster and bandage over the affected area on a thin tablecloth or cloth, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and gently apply that to the broken bone so that it is not too tight; and then apply some lotion to the back of the hand, and strengthen the bandage with a proper structure; and consider the swelling in the whole hour, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
And if it is necessary to remove the bandage or plaster that has caused pain, swelling, abscess, or infection at that location, then you should remove and discard that one and apply a new ointment to treat the wound; and if you see that it is healing, then adjust the bandage until it is completely healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are bruised.
You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the larger, thicker ribs that are located on both sides; and at their extremities, near the spine, they do not occur due to contraction but because they are cartilaginous. And if you do not know about it, you should not hesitate to ask the doctor about it.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it matches the fracture as much as possible, until it is completely healed, and then apply an ointment and strengthen the broken rib with a bandage or splint according to the doctor's instructions.
If the rib fracture is declining towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture that occurs in someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, and this is difficult to cure.
The ancients also had devices for that great purpose.
They said that coverings placed over the patient's body that cause inflation and ventilation, so that the abdomen is inflated and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
However, we should avoid this because it may not cause the generation of an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we should help with that.
And they said that the covering should be placed above the windpipe and that it should suck strongly; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the windpipe may draw the excess fluid into the wound due to its weakness.
And they said to them: cover that place with a wool blanket that has already been immersed in hot oil, and place powders between their ribs until it is full, which should be the same thickness as when you wrapped the second bandage; and then cure the patient with the care of pains from food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences very strong constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones push the bandage at the puncture, cover over the patient, then cut open the area, revealing the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they should cut the bones to facilitate, and extract it.
And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with ointment, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess is formed, then you should cover and insert powders in hot oil and place over the area, and that the patient be cured with that which covers the abscess.
And let him be placed on his left side while he is sleeping until he is healed.
Chapter 9:
Concerning the recovery of a broken spine of the back and neck.
Sometimes, fractures occur in the bones of the neck and chest, and they are attached to their respective muscles, similarly to the spines of the back. And when such an accident occurs to someone and you wish to know whether they will be healed or not, consider this: if the bones are already softened, stupefied, dead, and cannot move or strengthen them, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases it is mortal.
And if they feel pain in those places when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similarities in the spines of the neck to what has been described and wish to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
When you see that it has already been softened, apply the same remedies that are used for these conditions, and when it is on its side, it becomes difficult to urinate and defecate, and sometimes some people lie on their side and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is dangerous, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of these causes occur, the cause is better and less severe.
The treatment of this is that you pierce the abscess with a sharp needle or a lancet dipped in warm oil or some other medicine; place some bandages on it until the abscess is sedated.
And later place one of the healing and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if it occurs that the tissue of the bone is separated from it or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and apply some medicine to it; if it is large, use sutures; and later cure it with some ointment containing blood.
If the lower back of the spine is fractured, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones as much as possible; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken ribs in that area, then perform surgery on it, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by it until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the jaw.
The bones of the jaws are broken, and if they are broken, then the fracture of those is only communication at their extremities and they are inserted lengthwise and decline to the parts within; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the bedcover is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is above the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should apply the second splint that you have available for equality, equal to the length that is necessary to be assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is long or declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have splinted it, place your hand on that plaster, and also on that star of wood or iron, and strengthen the structure over which you do not fear puncture of the fracture or removal of the star.
And splint the concavity with that which you have placed on it to maintain the structure according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or their back.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place on it that which was previously used; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which is there with a cover.
If the bones of the spine are fractured or broken, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
Humerus is that which is between the ribs and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, the first of which you grab hold of with your hand placed flat on the ground like this:
And if it is attached in two ends of two bands, then suspend it from the elevated position.
And follow the patient on a chair; and then gently extend their broken arm over the flat surface until it reaches the tip of the humerus in the middle position where the curve of the arm is attached.
And then suspend some heavy object, or the nurse extends it to its parts; and then the doctor places his hand on both sides of the fracture as soon as the fracture returns to its original position.
And the other handmaid should place the patient on their side and support their neck with her hand; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the other end; and each of them extends their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with your hand and on the other end with the other hand, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then place the middle of the cushion on the back and the other behind the fracture on the side.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the side, then place the cushion on that location and on the side.
Equalize it with the other and its work, and when it is equalized according to what is covered and applied well, then press on that side if there is no pus infection.
If an abscess occurs, leave the dressing in place until the seventh day, and apply warm compresses over the affected area until the abscess is ready to be opened, and then you should lance it.
The method of lancing it is to apply plaster over the fracture, and then cover the plaster with a layer of cloth; then place the arm on an assistant, and place your hand on their muscle.
Then place the cloth and lance over the assistant's arm to keep it in place, so that the arm is not dislocated, unless there is any reason why the broken bone should not be moved.
And then use splints.
And you should place the splint that is closest and strongest to the others over the fracture; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the thickness of the splints, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three inches on all sides.
And then place your hand over the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And your restriction on the location of the fracture should be as straight as possible. And when the fracture is more curved, the restriction is less.
And if you see the position of the splints and the restriction as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
And if you fear abscess, then leave the restriction and the splints in place as we have said on day seven.
And then consider the ligament in all its parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the wrong place or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to reach the member due to the disposition of superfluous restriction; and therefore, correct all this as we have said.
But if you are sure that no cause of this will occur, then do not remove the ligament for three days or more.
And the patient's pillow should be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant's full apron of wool equally, and consider at all times of night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament has softened, so correct that also with your skill.
And place the food of the patient according to the order we have given before, in such a way that the food is thin at the beginning until it is started to strengthen; and later cover it with a cloth.
Because the assistant and the pillow of the patient are usually strengthened in ten days; and later cover it with a cloth, wash it, administer it, and medicate it with the ointments that correct that.
And if the fracture is delayed in healing, then do not remove the ligament and the splints within ten days or two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; one is small, and that is the one that goes to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one from the elbow joint.
And if the main or small intestine is severely burned alone, or together, they are often severely damaged.
And when the small intestine is burned above, its repair is less likely, and its healing is more difficult.
And when the intestine is burned below the fracture, its healing is bad, and its healing is difficult.
Even worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its healing by keeping a short distance between them.
But if the large intestine is that which is burned, then it is advisable to keep a longer distance between them.
And if both intestines are burned together, then it is advisable to keep a very strong distance between them.
And it is advisable to place the hand of the patient over the intestine and extend it on a cushion, with the arm of the patient below, higher than all the others, and the ear should be lower than all the others, and the patient should lie on a pillow that has been placed.
And place a cushion under their head or back, so that the patient does not move too much.
And the assistant should extend their arm on the side farthest from the patient's head or chest, and another assistant should do the same on the opposite side.
And the doctor should straighten the bones as much as possible according to the best figure they can.
And if there are staggers in the bone fracture, then carefully remove all of it from its original location with your skill.
And if the stagger appears separate and pulls the string and does not respond to your hopes of restoring it, then do something on it and follow the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is in the middle, you have already treated something like that, and then take care of that cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a cloth made of roasted oil and white wax, and it should be between specificity and subtlety, and a strong cloth over that subtle structure until the abscess is cured; and then remove the poultice and place a prepared powder of ground mold and clear hoove, and place splints. And the cloth that is placed over that fracture should be the strongest one.
And you know that the number of bones in the arm is in the major dispositions, or if it is a fracture in one phalanx or two at once.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strongly and as tightly as possible, and when the bandage is more than a span above or below the fracture, place the bandage more loosely according to the previous remembrance in the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close by for several days. And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, as when the member itself is affected, and then make sure that you put the member in water before the problem stops.
And do not force the member until it relaxes, and then return the bandage.
If the constriction has already softened and the bone has been reunited and similar to those, then straighten everything with your skill.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, then gradually soften that one a little and leave it for a few days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
But if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it be discharged within the next 20 days or around those times.
And let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 42 days, or if it is strong, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the constitution of the body and the disposition of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the hand and its fingers.
When the bone of the wrist and the joints of the said hand are broken, do not move them, but only slightly move them in order to prevent them from becoming displaced.
And when the hand is broken or dislocated, let the patient lie down and hold their arm at the same level as the other, and place your hand on the extended arm.
And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them in good alignment.
And then let the assistant apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place your hand on the affected area, according to its size, and you have already covered it with a cloth of linen.
But if the splint is in the parts of the belly of the hand, then make it similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold it against their bent hand; then stretch the cloth long.
And the splint of the bone should be in the cloth in which it is elevated, so that the bone can be applied to the hand; and stretch it according to what is needed.
If the fracture is in the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on one side of the part and another on the other side of the part, so that the wound is open and dry; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up between the aforementioned bones.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the aforementioned parts, then if it is possible, apply a bandage as soon as possible to the palm and if desired, place a small, dry dressing on it so that the fracture is elevated and not moistened.
If the fracture is in the other aforementioned parts, such as in the wrist, elbow, ear, or ring finger, then apply a bandage as soon as possible to the same part; or all of them at once, which is better; or place a small, dry dressing on it, as we have said in the forearm.
And consider, in your restoration, and apply that, the arrangement of abscess care and opposition  to the aforementioned operation  to that which is appropriate when any cause of those occurs, according to the story of it.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of a broken bone in the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and are declared to be fractured when they are converted into the part that is highest and most prominent.
The restoration of it is done by placing the ligament over the fracture and another ligament under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
Then the healer extends the ligament to its entire length according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is near the knee, then the ligament should be placed at the bottom to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be done on it, and the other ligament under the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then the ligament should be placed at the bottom of the knee, and the extension should be done to its parts behind.
Then the doctor should equal the bones by pushing them back into their places as soon as possible and the bone is joined by a good connection; then cover it with a plaster and structure, unless there is an abscess in the member. If an abscess occurs in the area, then leave that person for several days until the abscess is ready to be opened, and then return to your healing work.
The structure of the fracture is as follows: a callus that covers the fracture, bends it twice or three times, and remains above; then cover the area where it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
Insert a long needle between the thigh and the bed, where the folds are, and the extremities of the needle should be on the most raised part of the two parts, and then rotate it over the bed and the thigh to remove any excess from the fold.
Then place your hand on the thigh in the area of the fracture, and place a stone on the bone of the bed.
Then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the thigh with many cloths, so that the fracture is coagulated.
Then begin to apply the fracture strongly from the middle over the area of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture area, your fracture should be smaller and more flexible and wetter.
And then approach the two extremities of the patient to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the bones of the other part so that the ligament is not left in its place.
And then place the structure over that, where there is no risk of corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar to those; and if any cause of those occurs, then count that you have removed it from there, and rectify what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said before.
However, if the bone that is broken is in the place where it should be, then try to align it as much as possible; and if not, perform surgery on it and replace it, and heal the wound from which the previous memory was made before it is healed.
And some of these fractures are strengthened by this bone or another that is adjusted to the bones, as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
May one not cause the patient to stumble in such a manner during their recovery; and if they are recovered alone, another cushion should be applied on the other side, as it is necessary for them to stand up quickly.
You should know that the cushion is strengthened in several days or a few weeks or a few months, and all of this depends on the variety of constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the recovery of the fracture of the patella of the knee.
You should know that a fracture of the patella of the knee often occurs, but it does not affect the muscles on the back.
If the fracture occurs, it is only a fissure or a crack in its parts, and this is a common occurrence, and over this, everything depends on the sensation.
And the recovery of it is not equal to what was broken from its parts with the said entrances, which should be attached and joined according to what is possible by equality and facility and construction.
Then place a poultice and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and stretch it tightly over the wound.
And consider all the arrangements that we have recommended in other fractures, as well as the abscess cautery and similar to those that would be placed on all possible accidents that are suitable for that one before it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You should know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the rib, and the other is thin and is called the sternum.
And it happens that the kind of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm is similar to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of that one is one.
And if those two bones are broken at once, the ribs are all broken.
And if the thinnest bone is broken, the ribs are converted to the denatal parts.
And if the largest bone is fractured, then that one is usually not mended by you.
And then administer extension, equality, and ligament of the bones according to that one.
But may it be, if the fracture of the leg is not healed by now, that the extension is less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the leg there is sometimes an operation on the arm, and it is when you equalize the bones and complete the entire operation, then you take weights of pi iron that is placed behind the causes that are placed in soldiers, and made entirely of palm branches; above those to the ones that have a small growth, and not from hands, and it should be the longest among them according to the longest of the leg, and the denuded part.
And then wrap it around each piece of cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and it should be from the denuded part up to the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the two sticks in three places of good extremities and at the middle one, where this structure is prohibited to lean on the right and left parts, and it is a good distance.
And then an appropriate amount of wood is given according to the length of the bed; and it is placed under the bed to keep it in place.
And more importantly, be careful when doing this in a fracture, and when that happens properly.
And then consider the bed in each day and study what happens behind it, and keep it away from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens of those, then pause at that moment until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Fractures do not occur to the talus at all; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them but rather in their joints.
And if the bones of the foot have fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above each other, then place the patient on their side with their leg prepared as if they were walking.
And then place the other foot on top of that which is lifted above those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them as they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage on top of that, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two lids.
And then strengthen the bandage on the leg with its structure descended, as you have wrapped it in cloths and other causes of which it is in need.
And if three or four days pass, then you should remove the bandage, as you found the bones equalized, or they were broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is similar to those with fractures.
But if they say those are broken, then restore them, and equalize them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of those of the hand in the treatment of the hand. And then place your hand along the length of the wound, and put a pad on it; then move the foot to this table that you have prepared, and strengthen that wound with a suitable bandage.
If the wound is deep and involves two or more bones, then place your hand on each part of the wound covered in a lion's cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have someone stand on one of the ends of the table to hold the patient's abdomen.
And it is important for you to remember that you should consider all the causes that have been mentioned to you in the other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause at every accident, what covers it.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone, the patella, and the kneecap of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, then perform that operation in a lying position, and gradually incline it to the side of the hip, and hold it there.
Approach the midwife and place her in the room with the patient, and do so carefully; then approach the woman and gently lift the patient's back, as all of this is done carefully until the part of the room with the patient is covered and the broken bone returns.
Then place a pillow on the patient's back, and when they need to urinate, turn them on their side and remove the urine, then return and place it according to the method used at the beginning, and return to the first pillow.
Do this for seven days or around those days, as it is restored.
If you wish, take a catheter and insert it into the patient's urethra; then inflate the entire catheter into the room of the patient, and blow into the catheter until the catheter is inflated with air, as the fracture returns.
Then inflate it with air and lie still for several days until it is healed.
When the bones of a man or woman's pelvis are fractured, it is administered in the restoration and puncture of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
And that which is drawn out does not remain hidden in these nearby fractures and what happens often is more to him who has some study and use of this my free writing; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via drayturiera in the restoration and structure of it, and therefore understand be.
In the wound of a man when it is broken, take guarguamela of cloth, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it with a covering of cloth, and let it be wrapped up, and let it be laid for three days or around those, and let it be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken in two.
It is convenient for him to whom the fracture has occurred, and especially if the bone is large as the bone of the thigh or of the helper, or similar to that, which you should know and follow those times when the conditions of fleubotomy are yours as we have said above.
If the pain continues, then hold the patient's tongue in your hand and sprinkle powder on it, if there is another cause.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that leg on that day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
However, if an abscess occurs, then leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before it bursts, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
However, if the bone is broken and protrudes above the joint, then pierce it and reduce it to its place, equalizing it with your hands, for ease and short extension.
However, if the extension is not at your disposal and the equality of it with your hands is not possible, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight palms, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
And make sure it is level, and keep it from being folded in the middle during the operation.
And it should be sharp at the tip where it meets the patient's own extremities; and its underside should be thickest at the bottom, and its upper side should enter into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called in Greek "labrys volente atelarem", so this is its name.
So that it can be placed on the top of the patient's bone.
And insert it into a groove that returns the bone, and be equal to some equality.
And then force you to equal the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it is thin, and not taken by the instrument for good reason, then force you to insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert it into where the instruments we have said; or saw it in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those that are in the bones of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, you will know that the bones have not returned to their natural place; and then do this thing that you confer on the patient a great benefit.
When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bones, and then immerse cloth in strong black stypic, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause burning and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound open until you have inserted the thread with forceps and used bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to stretch the wound over the fracture, because many times this is done by the folly of doctors, and it causes harm to their patients, which is dangerous. And if the ligamentous structure is looser, softer, different from the structure of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those harmful accidents which we have mentioned might occur, and there is great pain in the area, then do not place your hand on that spot, but apply that envelope of hard cloths to the wound instead of bandages.
And when the wound begins to bleed again after a day or two, then remove the cloth that you placed on that spot, and apply a poultice, using those remedies which according to our custom are used to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
And it is advisable for you to remove the ligament and consider the wound on each day at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the perspiration flows from it to the parts behind to facilitate healing.
If the wound lasts for several days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that this is a sign of small infections that cause the wound to fester. Of those infections, those that remain separated and extruded, those that do not separate and cause the member to swell and cause pain, you should incise those that are possible for you.
If the wound becomes black or yellowish, it is a sign of another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then you should apply one of those remedies that are appropriate for it, as described in the previous chapter on that subject.
And of that remedy in which you should apply your pressure: when the large ones are crushed, raise it above the member as if it were bones and similar to those of large members, and do not assume attraction or removal, because many deaths occur due to this, having left that for 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of nodes that occur at the site of a fracture.
Nodes occur at the site of healing of a fracture, and especially near joints, and are formed by the shape of the limb; and very often prevent the limb from performing its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stopped bleeding with aloe, and enses, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirm that these are very stiptic, or album of honey, or very astringent, and place that on the node in a cloth, and tightly bind it over the node for good compression.
And loosen the bandage that does not release it for several days; and remove that and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen on that layer of plaster, which has the property of regrowing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
If the joint is already hardened and narrowed and does not cause pain, it should be cut from the most accessible part of it, and the excess and protruding parts should be removed or scraped away until it is remedied; and cure it before it becomes healed.
Chapter 21.
When the fracture is restored and the limb is returned to its original position, it should not be set in a way that is not natural.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb is returned to its original position, it should not be done unless for several reasons: one of which is the solution of the ligament and the cord of the limb made not according to its time; or for excessive stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can run to the limb; or for excessive embrocation; or for superfluous movement not in its time; or for weakness in the body of the patient and for its debility.
And the treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make their body warm before the inflammation increases; and administer baths; and use hot compresses and laudanum on it.
And place a poultice on the affected limb, so that the poultice draws out the remaining moisture or continues to bring warm water to it, until the moisture returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22
Of the treatment of broken bones that are healing improperly and preventing their operation due to this.
When an accident occurs to the already healed limb, causing it to become crooked and swollen at the broken bone and joint, and it is thought that this will prevent its natural operation, you should not accept the word of anyone who claims that this limb is newly broken.
However, many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our time; and this operation is very blameworthy because it causes great fear, which can be fatal.
If the swelling and pain are recent, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of softening herbs such as althea leaves, rue, melliot, and similar ones; or make a plaster with diallaguilon that is well prepared; or use a poultice made of ground rue and mixed with honey or olive oil, and similar to those used for consolidation medicines.
Some waters are dissolved in frequent light friction with the most humid ones, and they are administered to move the limb in all its parts at all hours.
If the twisting has already become severe and is strong and turned into bone and causes the need for treatment with iron, it is recommended to remove the pus from above the dead tissue and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and use a sharp instrument to cut away any excess swelling from the affected area, and apply this to facilitate movement in that joint.
Chapter 23.
On speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an essential part of some joints of the body, which is why it is prohibited from moving, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is usually necessary to perforate it in order to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation at that time.
And to avoid this, it is not necessary for the limb to be maimed or stretched during the inflammation stage, because prolonged periods of time can cause spasms and slow pain.
When this happens, it is usually necessary to use the method of reduction of the patient's limb, and not allow the abscess to form; then, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then reduced with ease.
And every member should be treated with this remedy that will come to its location.
And I have already ordered the capital of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, enter into the part that is behind it.
Chapter 24.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw from behind.
If the lower jaws are not dislocated; and the dislocation of the others is made in one of two ways: that they are pushed back to their places by a slight movement, and they are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and closed, until they are softened at the part of the joint between which the saliva of the patient flows out, and he cannot hold it nor can he close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then in the major positions return to its place by itself.
When the dislocation is complete and closed, then apply reduction of it more gently, and do not delay for a long time.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the doctor's fingers from one side of the jawbone into the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together in the middle, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers on the cheeks, which should be equal; and command the patient to stop biting their jaws and let those parts come back to their place; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and press it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with warm water and oil, until it becomes easier to reduce both dislocations and not delay the reduction of both.
And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place some wool from the cloth on those parts, and make it with beeswax and oil; and apply it to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
And the patient's body should be placed on its side, with his head between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to turn for any reason; having his usual food, then loosen the lion's grip when the pain is relieved and the jaw is unlocked, then he will be able to open his mouth.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or defecation until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce the dislocated jaws at a certain hour and they are not converted to their usual positions, then use hot fomentations and frequent baths, and frequently belch the patient's stomach, and frequently vomit the pure bile.
And when you see that, know that it is a sign of death; and those who suffer from that will die in a few days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and its extremity.
The sternum is not dislocated from its connection with the chest; and some fractures are dislocated at the front, and this is called a sensation.
And its restoration is that the patient bends over their own back and extends their arms. Then apply a bandage to the wound with your hand with strong traction, so that it will return.
And place a poultice and powders on it and strengthen it.
If the extremity of that which is bent and continues to be connected with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it as we have said and according to what you have.
And place a bandage on that poultice, and powders, and compression, and command the patient to remain quiet and at rest until it is healed.
And in this medical treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its location.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the shoulder to the opposite side.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front of the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and pushed away from the parts behind the shoulder, especially in those where the flesh is thin, more easily than in those where there is much flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And it often happens to some men that the muscle is injured by impact or fall, and it becomes infected with an abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Then carefully insert that into them, and then proceed with the treatment of them.
And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant from their proper position; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because there are distinct differences between them; and at the head of the concave muscle, behind the deviant part, you should touch the head of the muscle as if with a hammer, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its proper position, or move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or move it, and then you should immediately distinguish between the normal and abnormal touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is called recent reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is when the assistant raises the hand of the patient above the deviant part; and then place your fingers behind the deviant part, and strengthen the joint in its proper position, and the assistant raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in the same way; and then place it back gently.
If it does not return, and since the beginning of the dislocation, for several days, the patient should be given a warm bath and administered a softening broth made with herbs such as rosemary, fenugreek, and melissa in water, and then administered.
Then the patient should be placed on their back and supported by a pillow made of wool that is equal to the elevation and restriction, and the doctor should place their hand on the patient's temple, elevate the head of the muscle in virtue, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not become numb at the parts behind, and another servant should hold the patient's head, so that it does not become numb at the parts behind, because at that moment it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert his muscle behind the pillow of the patient and elevate the pillow of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts behind its belly. If the patient is heavy, then hold them up with an assistant, so that they do not aggravate the condition, because the dislocation may return soon.
And it can be reduced alone by another method: place a long staff on the ground with a round shape, like a mortar, that is not too thick or thin, and place the patient's head on top of the staff; then cover the patient with a lion skin, and have the patient stand along the length of the staff, and extend your hand over their parts from the other side; and strengthen the joints of the other part, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce the joint for all the reasons we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a staff of the length of two arms, and its width should be four fingers, and the thickness of the staff should be thin at the top of the handle in this form:
And then place a lion's mane cloth on the patient's head so that he does not descend into madness.
And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, extend it over the parts behind, and tie the patient's chest and arm to the support.
And then place the arm on a ladder according to its height, extend the hand over the parts behind, and hang the other object from the other side, as the joint enters quickly.
And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover the part under the chin with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and apply prepared paste made of ground mold and album of egg over the entire muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place strength behind the chin with a bandage; and the bandage should be rolled up over the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and it should be left, and not be touched by the hand of the patient for seven days.
And the food of the patient should be placed on a table nearby, before the member is comforted, because it is more beneficial to their healing.
And the food should be given more frequently at 7 or 8 in the morning and some movement should be exercised; if it is stopped and not made flexible, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated by frequent moisture that has occurred to it or for some other reason, then it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all of this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and bandage are reduced over it some moisture, and it is not bandaged, supported, or elevated, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or made flexible, and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
When the dislocation is of the shoulder, elbow, or hand, reduction is done by impulse and extension at the joint, until it returns.
And apply it to the other affected area, and cure it until it is healed.
If the healing process in the limb is slow and delayed in its movement, then the patient should use bandages that are moistened with warm water until the gravity is relieved and it returns to its original condition.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of shoulder dislocation.
You know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part where the arm meets the back, and the dislocation of the arm does not occur from the removal or from the touch according to some figure that is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, it is clear that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
When you cover them and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until the abscess is ready to burst, if you see the abscess ready to burst, reduction is difficult and often not healed at all; and more so when it is in the back parts, because it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and longer recovery from death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the hands of the doctor should be on the back and behind the patient, and he should push the joint towards the palms of his hands evenly, or at the root of his palm until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the back parts, then return as soon as possible by bending the hand towards the other hand, until it strikes the back at the root of the palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and two other assistants hold it in place to prevent it from moving during extension.
And then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth on the patient's chest or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, he should apply some oil to it so that these causes help in lubricating the joint and facilitating its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
And then the reduction of the fracture should be supported on that pad where there is stiffness and execution of the album of hooves, and it should be extended from the descending stricture, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for a few days.
And then it should be removed; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage from it and leave it there.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it there for a few days until it is extended; and then remove it.
If an injury occurs near the joint during reduction, and the position of the joint is in movement, then apply moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compress it until it is relieved; or place a fat pad over the joint, and leave it on the affected part at night. And then place that (the fat pad) in the bath; and when you remove it, apply gentle friction to the joint with cold friction, and repeat this over the affected part, a daily, second, and third time. with the bath water, until it is lukewarm.
And if you wish, place a wet and burned cowhide over that (the affected part), and apply some pressure on it; and do this several times, as that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the shoulder.
Sometimes the shoulder is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is true for other joints, but nevertheless, it is important to have speed in reducing the shoulder when it is dislocated, so that the joint does not become infected or something happens in the joint infection.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's shoulder joint on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm from that, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its proper place.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already on the patient's chest, then the patient places his back on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is on the other side of the arm, then the position of the arm of that should be intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then press that arm so that the pus drains from it, and leave that; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, there is no way to reduce the shoulder without causing more damage.
When the joint is second in its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot bear any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then do not engage in it but strengthen it with a pointed cautery for the wound of which and strongly apply that to it.
Then, when the wound is returned, place the bandage that we have recommended over it, and let it be left alone and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be left alone and the muscle of which should be exercised.
However, if the movement of which is obstructed and something heavy has occurred in it, then apply that with some warm water and some friction for a while until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at all times.
And when one of these dislocations occurs at the back of the hand or on the belly of which, then strengthen the dislocated part and push the dislocation towards the thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the said person, and suspend that devil's device to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that and extend it until it is equal to its own day.
And when the pain subsides, apply the second remedy according to that description, and do not cease to move it during the day and exercise it, and at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same thing if it is dislocated in the belly of the patient, and apply that to that part and do that first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly do that when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When something happens to one of the dorsal vertebrae or neck dislocation complete, and some other vertebrae from those places remain, in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
When that happens, it is the patient's will that their excretion is forced out, and they cannot hold it back; and if softening agents are applied to their members or their bed or their pillows or one of those, or if a sponge is placed in that place, then the softening agents are removed in four parts.
Then it is already in the parts behind and is not called diarrhea anymore.
The cure of that is that you should consider whether the diarrhea occurred due to pregnancy, because in that case it is not a cure for that nor a healing of that at all.
In that case, which occurs due to caresses or percussion or something similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in such prolonged speech, which most returns to profit; but I already have and have been improved from that from which few are excused from the too much of it, because of its proximity to the understanding of the matter, which he has exposed and formed with various instruments of that, which will show him and explain that.
And of those, none are cured except for the one that happens naturally in the back, which is what I would recommend.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face on a flat surface as close to the wall as possible, and then extended behind that, with a moist instrument so that it does not lie on their chest.
And then place a straight stick under the patient's back, with their head on the ground at one end of the table near their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the table.
And the minister should hold the stick, and not be stationary in a ditch; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
And then wrap the patient's head with a firm bandage, like a lion's mouth; and extend the end of the bandage to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other bandage on their ankles, below their legs, and support their abdomen; and then adjust all the bandages and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
And the assistant should extend the bandage to the part of the wound, and not leave the two wounds and the bandages of his places in which they were placed, but rather not stop there as we have said.
And the doctor should place his hands on the spine at the strongest part until he returns, or place one on a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table with a width or length of three arms, and dig in the wall where we have said that it is proper for the patient to be in a place between the end of the table. And then place the edge of the table on the spine, and the doctor should place his feet on the other end, and start to press until the spine is pressed and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the back that is rolled up around the body; and it is that you should be on the ground with the head of the patient in the back of the two thighs, the length of which should be an arm, and the head of the patient in the back of the other two thighs; and the length between each thigh should be a palm, and it has been done in each thigh where the back turns, and each one should be held fast on the ground so that it is not injured.
And have a soft cloth ready in which to place it, and rotate it between the two ends of the two poles.
And at the end of it is a loop in which the cloth is formed, the length of which is one palm and a finger, and similar loops are made on the other two poles.
And then strengthen the bands that you have tied in the patient's chest in the loop that is to be placed on his head, and the bands that you have tied in the patient's thighs in the other loop are to be placed on his feet.
And then each loop should be placed and a servant should twist it around his hand, and the doctor should tie it according to what we have said.
And after the bone is returned and the wound is closed, then apply an ointment made of honey, and cover it; and place a cloth on top of the ointment that is about three fingers wide or slightly less than that, and the length of which is the quantity that filled the wound, and on the part of the bone.
And then tie the bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then follow that medicines which moilifico and liniscan be administered for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
And some wounds occur in the back of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not happen that something is done to it because of this medicine, which would be very harmful to you.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also those that occur to those other joints with slight removal and concavity.
And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, which is dislocated at the parts inside, or at the parts forward, or at the parts down, or at the parts behind.
And it is mainly dislocated at the parts inside, and less often at the parts down or at the parts behind.
And when adjusting the cushion of the sick person to the healthy one, the length of the affected leg is longer and thinner than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee, but must lean on it, which is where the wound becomes infected with an abscess.
And the less common cause of that which occurs is at the parts forward, because the injuries of that are opposite to this accident.
And the less common cause of that which occurs is at the parts down, because the cushion on that side is extended according to the complement, but it does not bend towards the knee where the pain is, and if it is pierced to go out, it cannot be put back; and the urine of that is retained, and the swelling of that is infected, and you must place the bandage of that on the ankle.
And if the person to whom this dislocation has occurred cannot extend their elbow, nor can they bend the elbow of the other arm that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that location.
The reduction of these species of this dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been cured by having it near you, then administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure for all; and therefore do not expect that in that it be done hastily.
In the one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should apply that which turns the joint and extends it to the parts behind and the parts in front, and to the right and left, for that which returns very well does not require another cure.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you should expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part that is furthest away from the patient's elbow, or to the patient's hands, or to the bandage which is tied over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister extends the hand of that above in such a way that it supports the patient's hands behind the elbow; and then strongly hold the lion's tongue on the edge of the cushion, and have another minister clean the end of the bandage.
And if the extension is from the patient's arm to the armpit, or from the back to the shoulder blade.
And if the extension is of all those in a single movement, so that the patient is raised to his own side and then lowered.
This particular type of extension is particularly common for all four.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to direct the appropriate treatment.
In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, place the patient on his back; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that location where the head of the cushion and the location that is placed below meet; and extend the ligament from the armpit to the next part of the furcula.
And another assistant strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large part of the patient's back and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its own location.
And this special case is one of the most difficult cures for which this member is reduced more than other cases.
However, if you excuse yourself from this case and do not obey the entrance of this healing, then bind the two feet of the patient together with a strong, thick bandage, covering both the soles and the toes.
And the length of each should be four times the quantity, and the patient's bed should be extended more than the other by twice the quantity.
And the patient should be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of it from the ground should be twice the quantity of a cubit.
And then command a strong young man to lift the cushion, and suspend it under the patient, and another young man to lift the other cushion, and the other young man to strengthen the support, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the shoulder, cover the patient with a blanket according to what we have recommended in the case of a frozen shoulder; and strengthen the bandage on the patient's bed properly and over their chest.
And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one at their feet and the other at their head; and adjust the chair at the side of the bed where the patient's body is covered with a blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their thighs, because you should extend the parts behind them without pulling.
And then each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then make sure that the cushion is extended further, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the patient's body, and another hand covers that, and the other hand covered with that extends to the parts behind at the part of the hollow.
And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and lift them up on the ground; having made a hard cause underneath, as we have said about the bedding of the patient between two pillows; and place it on their face and extend the limbs, as we have said, without causing pain.
And let a compression bandage be applied to the part where the joint is located.
So when the reduction is completed as we have said, and the assistant of the reduction of the patient is not removed from you, and you extend two pillows under the patient, and when you see that those are equal and the patient extends one pillow and expands the other, then you know that the member has returned as we have said - and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bandage so that it is not too tight in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one arm and another under the other.
If you see those joints in their correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its original structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and make it walk in a wheelchair for as many days as necessary until it is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, either it is dislocated forward, or backward, or to the sides more than to the back; and it is not dislocated downwards.
And the sign of dislocation of the shoulder is that you order the patient to place his cushion on the ground; then know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless you have already extended their bed, then you can do so; hold your hand to the patient's face, and place their foot between your feet; and then make them hold their hand to your palms, and bring those between your hands over the patient's shoulder, and another minister extend their leg into the place where the patient's hand returns.
And if you have a bed that does not slip, then the patient's bed should be attached to the cushion and the elevated part of the bed.
And then apply that plaster and make the bed stick to the cushion, and then tie those in place with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand mentioned earlier, apply strong extension to the ligaments.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of talipes equinovarus.
The talus sometimes becomes dislocated by small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated in the second complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the posterior or anterior parts.
And the cause of the talus' dislocation is that sometimes it inflates and proceeds to the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of the talus' dislocation is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and returned quickly.
In the cure of it when it is dislocated in the second complement, the patient should be placed on his right side, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from the posterior part behind his back.
Then you should take your left hand on the most superior part of the foot, and your right hand on the part farthest from the foot in the position of the calf.
Then draw the foot to your right hand, and hold it with two fingers, and extend your left hand; and press the sole of the foot towards the right side of the calf.
And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
Then place the patient's chest on the cushion, and you are at the cavity.
Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if the foot is even, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation, as it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it by that method, then place the patient on their back on the ground, and put a flat stone under them, and place a cloth between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not become cold.
And the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and the assistant extends each according to the extension of their own part, and the stone is extended between the thighs of the patient, retaining that, so that the thing of the patient does not slip away from its extension.
And the doctor approaches the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage, and bind the foot to the leg firmly.
And be careful not to harm the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that area is not too tight and does not hurt it strongly.
And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third day or fourth, and forbid the patient to walk for fourteen days. But if it is necessary to go that space, do not do so until the dislocation is fully dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
And if an abscess occurs in that area, then be careful to administer in the cavity of that in which our narrative precedes, in another place of healing and embrocation, until it is re-opened.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cure for the dislocation of those of the feet.
That which is dislocated should be extended by a small amount of force; and this is not difficult, before it.
If the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then cover the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be present there with him.
Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand over the area where the joints are, and gently push against that, and wait until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
Then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two lids, and gently strengthen that against the structure in a decent and firm way for three days; and then remove it and let him rest from ambulation for several days, until it is restored and assured.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by a fall or fracture or any other way.
When any of these causes occurs, and you perform the cure and restoration of that, then various complications may lead to death.
And for that reason, do not assume the cure of that, but rather the one that is known in the art, of long use, mercy and pity, late, not hasty or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for relief from suffering, and in which some hope appears. And therefore, try as soon as possible to bring it back to the beginning of the cause, giving that it leads to an abscess.
And then if the member returns as they want, then administer the regimen that leads to an abscess and heals the wound with the ointments that are suitable for it.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents occur in the bones of the spine, then perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
And guard and avoid that which you have in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded; for that is better for you to do to your Creator, and more lasting to your glory, and more salutary to your health than those which you will see in your time. And end the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed. Amen.
