Oh children, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, because of its completion, and because of its explanations, and because of its declarations, I think that you will have completed this treatise, which is part of the operation of surgery.
The operation of surgery was completely absent from our region and our time, until the science of it was greatly forgotten, and its existence was only preserved in a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were mostly destroyed by those errors and hesitations until the understanding of it was closed and its power and art lengthened.
And it seems to me that I will live by this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation.
In ancient times, the reason why a skilled surgeon was not always present in this time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which Gualia discovered while knowing the joints and forms of members, and their conjunction and separation; and understanding of bones, nerves, and ligaments, their number, and their location; and of pulsating veins, quiet veins, and the locations of their excretion.
As Hippocrates said, that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and more so in the art of medicine.
We have not yet mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not be able to avoid the error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor was once folly enough to have incurred an abscess called hydrophobia in the neck of a woman, and had incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed into her body that she died between them.
And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had suffered from it in his state, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and passed it through the urethra, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already called for someone to remove it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient he knew that she would die.
And another doctor who took the wound of a duke of our land for surgery, and was to a skilled blacksmith who was supposed to set the fracture in the joint of him; and because of his ignorance, he removed the fracture, above the wound, with pillows and splints with strong structure, and did not give the wound air.
And then gradually remove the dressing according to his wishes, and then remove the bandage, and then remove the leech for several days and command that we remove the bandage; and this should be done while the wound and foot are still fresh, and it reaches perfection.
And then apply it to him, and arrange for the bandage to be removed, and thus achieve peace and alleviate his pain.
However, if decay was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be restrained from that, and did not cease to spread corruption in the member until the patient died.
And then another doctor came who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerated nearby in several days, until the great heat of it killed the patient.
The reason is that the cranium is clean of melancholic humor, so it does not cause it to reach the patient at all, but rather that it be in the member that suffers from all of it, and all of it should be held.
For that reason, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts: one in which health is associated, and the other in which it is performed in the best possible positions.
And I have already experienced this in every place of this book where the operation is performed in which error and fear occur; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside the one who causes these things, so that the fools do not come to speak to you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and closure.
And use the best way by the grace of God for the salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and leave your weapons of that which makes you fear, so that your position in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and more later in the world and after your sanctity.
In some cases, gout affects certain joints: Do not treat the patient badly, because evil doctors may be recognized.
And I have already dedicated this book according to three chapters.
The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section. The first chapter ordered from the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the handles of cautery, and about what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, about drying and puncturing, and about ventosas, and about plasters, and about the extraction of herbs and similar things, all chapter ordered from the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, about restoration and dislocation, and about the cure of torsion and similar things; chapter ordered from the foot, and from the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those tools and their cases, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore, I say that the speech about the quality of the tool and its case is a long and elaborate, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there, many people have spoken greatly, and they have been divided, and among them, a small part of their speeches is sufficient for me, because of length.
And therefore, I say that cautery compares to all complete conditions universally, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are tail-like complete conditions.
In the tail-like complete condition, matter is dry; therefore, some say that cautery is useful for that, and others say the opposite of that, which is that cautery is not convenient in illness that is due to quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness be dry and tail-like.
And tell that one who says the opposite of that one, that it is greatly beneficial for all kinds of tail diseases and dryness that are in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man with the moisture of him to the appearance of the fire, the body of a man becomes wet.
And I say by the word of that one, that he has experimented with this thing in some ways discovered.
May it not be that that one who has already been proven and exercised in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their diseases in their bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time of those.
May it not be that in other appearances, you do not fear, and more especially in moist diseases, because all the doctors have agreed on those, and they are not disagreed in the benefit of cauterization in those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and its goodness is only in cauterization, because the fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other member unless it is a small harm.
May the action of medicine has brought them to that in the members which was previously absent, and it frequently brings it into the sick member with difficulty and often causes discomfort.
However, the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this, but rather exceeds it. And we have known this through experience and the length of service in the study of the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of the speech. And if it were not that it is not read aloud in this pause to you in secret, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels the sicknesses, the philosophical demonstration of the sermon, which would be sharpened in your troubles.
And you should know, sons, that they disregard the time in which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause at the best time of primeval.
And you say that cauteries are convenient at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of it which is thrown on the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and forcefully, those that cannot bear delay because they fear the malice that comes from those who will enter, which is greater than small harm through time.
And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only understood by the general people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization does not require it all the time, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not always present that they fear for that, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which are the cause of pain.
But nevertheless, cauterization is used excessively over medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of his malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of the superfluities in him, and that which is acquired by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady in a member of few superfluities and moisture, such as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
More commonly, the pointed cautery is considered the last resort of medicine, and this language is correct, because I do not understand what they mean by that, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would require cauterization.
The cause is opposite to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when administering methods of treatment in certain diseases, and those remedies do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer the same cauterization, and it is effective for that. And from here they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, not as they understand it, which I understand from the common people and many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold cauterization is better than iron cauterization, and they did not say that except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I already have some that are good and others that are bad, and cauterization with that is good and better than with iron, but rather when you make cauterization with fire of gold, it is not to your declaration, because it is ignited according to the amount that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive the cold; and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts in the fire, and some sheets for that the craftsman can do for that.
And for that, a pointed cautery made of lighter and more conveniently placed iron is used to approach the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery in the second chapters, and have ordered those between the feet, so that they can ask him what he wants for that.
The first chapter.
This cauterization gives relief from the dampness and cold that cause this accidental condition, which is caused by so many and various rheumatic fluxes, called corissas, from the head to the parts of the hands and feet, and many sleeplessness, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and generally from all evils that come from cold, such as paralysis, hardening, and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
And then command the one who is holding their head to shave it, and then do that shaving between your hands on a chair that is lowered and place your hands over their chest.
And then place the razor from the palm of your hand on the nose between their nostrils. However, when the place you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then ignite the pointed cautery made of olive oil in this form:
And then place that on the spot well and hold it steady, gradually increasing the pressure until it is strongly held, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the quantity of a grain of sand, then lift your hand, and if it does not return, put your hand back on that iron, or another of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place your hand on the side that is burned and let that one be the one that destroys the scar of the fire. And then heal the wound with the four-drug ointment until it is healed.
And they say that as the plague is opened, so much more honey gets into it, so that it is better and more useful.
And they say that the tail should be cauterized into the bone, and it should be held with the cautery until some part of the bone is stuck to it.
And then remove that which is stuck to the bone, and then heal it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the back, until it enters the bone strongly enough to cause the bone to break, and this is the way to make small drills: And they estimate that from that wound the fumes of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries used in all people, but only in some men who are second in line for fear; and let that one, if possible, be better for health when it is done, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which there is as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, I advise you to do that work for health.
Second chapter.
Of the head cautery.
When there is chronic and long pain in the whole head, and it continues in the patient for a long time, and it uses garlic, wormwood, capipurges, ointments, salt, leeches, guaiacum, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they have not been able to remove from it in any way, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not free and atrophic, but rather a great swelling, then use another cauterization after that one. And if it is necessary to cauterize that on the surface of his head, do so with a pointed cautery where the hair is divided. Cut the hair and discover the bone in the amount that we have found and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the part behind the head in the place where the wound is located, which is called the mastoid process, — and that is the place where the bandage is placed. And place your hand in the back of his head, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will feel great pain different from all other cautery pains on his head.
And I say that this cautery in its place, where it is located, covers the part that is cauterized on the forehead and the back of the head is more subtle cauterization than that which is cauterized at the middle of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter third.
Of ancient non-anterior cauterization.
When the pain in the part of the head is sharp, or the pain extends into the wound, remove the medicines that make the head swell, and administer the other cure, which I have said in the chapters on diseases; and all is not improved, then cauterization is done in two ways: cauterization with an acute medical instrument, or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to grasp a splinter and remove it by scraping it and then applying ointment to its ends. Then make an incision in the location of the pain on the temple with a sharp knife that is inserted into the wound and hidden.
Then apply pressure to the stopped area with constant constriction, and leave it for three hours; then remove the splinter, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area that makes the wound bleed slightly.
Then heal it with that which cures it when it is healed.
And if you wish, do so with some medical tools that I have written about in the other treatise on medical tools.
May the cauterization be done in this manner: Ignite the cautery with this method:
and it is called a "claw-like" cautery, the head of which is shaped like a carnation in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a slightly protruding point.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and stretch your hand - to prevent the joint from being stuck - and move the small iron quickly.
And if the amount of the limb that is stuck due to the condition of the ligament is such that it covers the main part of the limb, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck - which is already there - so that no bleeding occurs.
And then apply a piece of cloth soaked in salted water on that location, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a warm compress around the border, and then care for it with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the scalpel according to the cauteries, and be careful of the incision of the artery in this particular case.
Chapter Four.
Of the cauterization of an ancient wound.
When you treat an ancient wound, as we have said in the previous cure and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the cure, and sometimes due to the disease that does not allow you to use the first cauteries with medicine or the cauteries with fire, then wait until the scalpel is completely albified, because it means that you should place your hand on the location of the pain along a line that is the longest part of the wound, or that part; and place your hand firmly inside the joint and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged during chewing, and that the jaw not be held shut and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasmed.
And if it is about the custody and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is abscessed, where in the abscission of which there is fear, and especially for those who do not know what to do and are not studious or skilled; and leave the operation until the beginning.
And you will find the memory of the regimen for the flow of blood from an accidental wound to the artery according to its own method, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this malady that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head where we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you apply this cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a cauterizing needle having two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conformable.
Chapter V.
Of the cauterization of the pains of gout.
When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold and is treated with active causes and the other treatment mentioned in the division, and the pain does not disappear, then ignite the cautery, and this is the one without points, of which the following is the form:
And then apply the points to the fire, and bring it to the area around the big toe as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each one if the pain is in each one. And along with the cautery, apply it to the tip of the big toe little by little until you can reach the location well without hurting it.
And if the cautery of all points in the big toe, and it is necessary to do that, and then treat the locations until they are healed.
Chapter VI.
Of the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and cannot be treated except by the special causes that come from flexion, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the specific part that causes dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that part of torture that is called jerky and capripurgi and guarguarismes, and does not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first one must be at the golden ratio, the second one a little below their temple, and the third one at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected part, as softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that part with the cauteri in the right side of the golden ratio, a little above the corn on the head, and in the temple another, the longest one which should be second to the length of the said corn, and place your hand on the cauteri before it burns out the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the code.
And this is the form of the cauteri, and it is a special one for the cutellari, the form of which is given below. May be, however, it is more subtle to have a few drops of that in the eye; and cover it with a cloth in case of excessive greasiness.
Then cure the area with that which is given for this process until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with that which we have said and does not conflict with your medicine and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cautery: on all the horns of his head; and with the cautery and the middle of the head, as we have said; and with the cauterization in the crown. And the manner of the cauterization is done as it is said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more posterior; and then cure with that which processes.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
Given that large and flatulent pills are customarily given to the patient at the beginning of treatment.
And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the affected area, as described in the treatise on plasters.
And place some cautery needles there, which is the method of cauterization. Do this second method as described before.
And if that does not work, then do three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most superior part of the head into the most inferior part of the head. And place between each cauterization the entire thickness of the described cautery, and then care for the cauterized area as it proceeds.
But if you feel pain and the patient can bear it, then do the cauterization on the middle toe; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on the two toes.
And care for it until it is healed; and if the cauterization is made with olive oil, do it according to the form given.
Chapter 9.
Of cauterization of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
That you proceed in the melting of the head and that you have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that pointed cautery at the middle part of the head, and cauterize all the corners of the head, and cauterize on the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening of the body, and the patient tolerates three of them, and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery four times on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize inside where the sound of the throat comes from, and raise the left arm. And then care for that until it is healed, and this is cauterization oil.
Chapter 10.
Of cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is caused by flesh.
And therefore, at the beginning of the patient's illness, apply wet compresses to one side of their head and dry compresses to the other side, which we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerant of exceptions to the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then give them soothing and cooling remedies, such as good food.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that area with a pointed cautery at the middle of the forehead according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of their head, and over each hair of their head. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the pointed cautery as I have mentioned, having a paralytic and softening effect on their body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And use olive oil as prescribed.
But if the patient is a child, then place a thin cautery according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and flabby, then cauterize those with the cautery that we have called in the previous chapter.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then make a torture device decently made from it on top of the circle, and then place that in the middle of his head.
And the patient should be tied down, and held down from all parts.
Then place a liniment; and it is more fitting for an ancient sheep's bladder. And scald that over the fire to warm it up, which the one who suffered it says is sufficient when it is in him. Then put that in the middle of his head on the circle, and let it be mixed with him until it is dissolved.
And do this for the patient in every week a cure, or the other regimen until they are healed; or if you want, burn those parts with small points as much as possible, but always hold your hand on a cauterizing instrument: this is a special kind of cauterizing instrument that moistens the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen part in between the buttocks or on grayish-white skin.
Chapter XII.
About the cautery of descending water in the belly.
When you declare the beginning of water in the belly by symptoms that I have mentioned in the division, then start and give the patient that which melts the head of him, and keep that from all moisture.
And let that sweat in a bath for several days.
And command that patient to shake his head, and burn that part with the cauterizing instrument in the middle of the head; and then burn those two parts with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one belly.
Incite the pointed cautery across all veins and arteries that are located below the chin; and place those cauteries in that distant area on the side of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding, stop it with some medicine that is available to you.
And you should have knowledge of the skill that is in the extraction of arteries and the treatment of those and the prevention of blood flow.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck below two bones and two cauteries previously produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tear ducts.
When the tear ducts of the eyes are ancient and manifestly present through the veins and arteries that are in the location of the forehead, and it is verified that such a thing is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that one with the pointed cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the eyes, and place the cauterizing needle in the middle of the head and two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and two cauteries in the neck below two bones. And if there is an urgent need for bleeding, then burn that part of the vein on the forehead with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cauterization of bad breath.
When you treat that person who we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove their head, and burn it with a medium-sized or large cautery iron. And then burn that part of the cautery iron on both temples, just below the hair.
And be careful not to burn that person.
And this is the shape of the cautery iron.
Chapter XV.
Of the cauterization of the eyelids to soften them.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then burn that eyelid with a cautery iron in the shape of the moon.
And if you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on both temples, they will lengthen and become less painful. And the length of each point should be according to the size of the temple.
And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the eyelid is glued shut.
Chapter 16
About the cautery of the eyelid when the scales are converted into parts and the eye is pulled out.
When the scales of the eye are converted into parts and the eye is pulled out, cautery should be applied in two ways: either by burning or by medical means that cause combustion.
If cautery is applied with fire, command the patient to close his eyes and open them again, while they are prolonged and equalized; and if you pull out the eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that they do not become misshapen until the scales are born.
Therefore, when they are born and have grown up, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelids, following the second figure of the crucifixion, and the beginning of the sign of the cross near their ears.
And then place a soft cloth in the patient's eye or in the mucous of the eyelid over their eye.
And then remove the cautery that is in this form from them.
And then cauterize the figure that you placed, little by little, in turns, until the surface of the skin is burned, which is like a piece of bread, appearing properly.
And the sign of healing from the work of the eye is that your hand has already raised the eyelid and the ears of the patient are elevated for the pricking of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave them for three days, and then place it over the eye until the scar is healed. And then care for that wound until it is healed.
But if it returns through the eyelids due to some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do another cauterization on that same area as you had done previously.
But if the eyelids are already in the eyelid and it is lowered to its natural position and equalized, and the eyelids do not press on the eye.
But the cauterization of this medicine is not as you command the patient to lift the eyelids and equalize them, and then make a fold of cloth in the shape of a bandage of mercury.
And then take some sawdust and freshly ground charcoal, mix them well with the other ingredients, and make a paste of it so that it is not crumbled; and then spread this paste on the cloth that was made in the shape of a bandage of mercury, and place it over one eye; and place the other eye in a bowl of egg white, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
And place the medicine on your hand and press it gently onto the patient's skin without causing pain, as if you were applying a hot iron.
And if the patient's skin is still painful after applying the medicine, then remove the medicine and your hand from the affected area; afterwards, wash the affected area with clean water; and afterwards, consider whether the skin has been lifted as it would be by a cut or burn, as it is now; and if not, return to applying the medicine to the area where it did not cause pain and was not damaged before washing.
And afterwards, place your hand over the affected area until the tumor of the abscess is completely eliminated, and then cure it with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance in your treatment that no medicine falls out of the wound, and if the skin around it becomes soft and some cause of the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on the area where the skin has become soft, and as you did at the beginning, and do so until it is healed.
This is the method of extracting urine.
You should know that the thighs of men are varied according to their size and proportionality, therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
Do not obstruct the correct path to the person who is being studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the thigh.
When you treat a fistula with this method that we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and do not confuse your treatment, then command the patient to lie on their back with their head slightly elevated, and hold their head at some distance from your body in such a way that it is neither too close nor too far away.
And then place a poultice of bread or mustard on the affected thigh.
And then use the cautery of this form:
which should be hollow, such as a cane or pen knife, from one end of which the cautery is made.
If you see, it should enter into the other extremity. And if you want to come out with a probe.
But it is better to use a thin one for that work.
And if the fistula is opened, place your finger inside and drain the pus from it. And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the puss from there.
And place your hand over the hot cautery that is burning, and with another hand hold the patient's nose, so that your hand or the patient is not disturbed, and then remove the cautery from the patient's nose and clean it.
And if at the beginning of the treatment, the cautery goes inside the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be there for three days, and place your hand over that area to keep the wound dry until it heals.
If the wound has been open for several days and has not healed, then pause over it with an acute, corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its capital.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described as follows: place the cautery in the location of the fistula and make a small incision in it; then apply your hand to the area, holding it well to prevent the plug from entering the wound; and ensure that you apply the cautery on the outside of the wound so that the plug does not reach the bottom of the wound; and cover the area with albumin or water, which will adhere to the loc of the fistula and heal it by miraculous means.
And if the fistula is healed by the method we have described for the cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a tracheal tube and reduce the fistula to the patient's own body when it returns to its proper location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Muggy weather often causes tears in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, when you treat those tears with the same cautery that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not extend your treatment, then ignite the small pointed cautery of this form:
And place it according to the thinness of a spoon.
Then place your finger carefully in those tears until the cautery reaches the edge of the tears.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and a breach is made, and it is broken, and it is old, and blood comes out and a fistula is formed, and then you treat that and do not extend your treatment, then cover that you ignite cautery according to the amount that has been recovered in the fistula, and place that ignited in the throat of the fistula, and then place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and on the other side make a wound or two; and then treat it with the same ointment that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And if the sin is removed and healed, then it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cautery of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and you treat those with medicines and do not confuse, then place the patient's head on your knee, and hold the cautery in the shape that will come to hand, and when you have placed the tube on the tooth and inserted it into that cautery burning fiercely, and hold it for a moment until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth has reached.
And then raise your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that when the decayed tooth is closed and the softened jaw is strengthened and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter 21
Of the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the usual medicine does not cure it, then cautery is done in two ways: either with the border of a cow's horn, or with fire.
Cautery with the border of a cow's horn is to take the border of a cow's horn and heat it in a fire, then grasp a cloth and wrap it over the tip of the tent, and quickly immerse that border, and place it on the painful tooth, moving it around until it is heated.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cloth in the border above that, and place it on the painful tooth, and place another on the fire, until the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
May the cauterization with fire be done when you wait for the tube of iron or coal, and if there is any impurity in it, the heat of the fire should not reach the patient's mouth.
And then ignite the cauterizer in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth, and your hand inside while the cauterizer is being heated; and do some maneuvers so that the pain remains or on that day or on the other day.
And cover that with the pressure of that cauterizer that the patient opens his own mouth with good border, and hold that for an hour and then remove it; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
And cauterize where you want to extend according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of protrusions.
When protrusions are due to swelling and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to dissolve them slightly, then ignite the cauterizer with the shape of which is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cauterizer can escape through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess one maneuver, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the top of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply heat to it according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days, and then place it over the affected area, poured with boiling water until it has been burned by the fire.
And then care for that wound and apply bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the application of a pointed cautery to warts and its removal.
When moisture comes over the lower part of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then make sure that the patient is evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply a pointed cautery to the center of the groin in the affected area.
And be careful not to apply the pointed cautery to the groin or burn the skin of the patient, but only a little.
And apply a pointed cautery to the joint of the neck at the lower vertebra of the back. And the pointed cautery of the patient should be used in the same way as before.
Then care for that person with that remedy before they are healed.
Chapter 24
Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
When a cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tachycardia, and it is an old disease, then apply two cautery needles on the sternal angle of the chest; and another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
And if you want, your cautery should be made with the pointed needle called "puncta", whose form is described in the punctation of arthritis.
And their points should be inserted into those; and then care for that person with that remedy before they are healed.
And now the cautery should have three points because the cautery is made in this way:
Chapter 25.
On the cauterization of the nipples, which is a helpful remedy.
When the dislocation of the helpful remedy is caused by excessive humidity and is not stopped at its return time, it must be returned before it returns to that usual state, and with a slight movement, it can be moved as we have testified, so that first you reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on his back or on his side; and raise the chin, which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the said of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
And then apply the cautery, which has two points; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the chin until it penetrates between the two sides; and the figure of the cauterization will be as follows:
And some cautery needles are adjusted according to this count and because they are the eight cautery needles.
And then place your hand over the cautery points with salt, and make the patient comfortable without causing any pain for a while until they are comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and below, then make that incision, and then cauterize over the muscle with a clavil or pointed cautery needle, where the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that multiplies inside it and causes pain, and if you continue with the treatment methods without confirming, then the patient will be on their back, and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize with three cautery needles: one needle is placed at the chest for the length of a finger's width, and two needles are placed on the sides of the cauteri, forming a triangular figure; and stretch those that are not adjusted to prevent them from being pierced.
And if the depth of the cautery matches the thickness of the two tires of the horse's cart.
And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, then if you wish, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this should be a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form.
And if the stomach is to be cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens him: and it is that you should put your hand on the stomach puncture according to the amount you wish to apply, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then care for those parts with the healing remedy before they are healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot.
When pain arises in the foot due to coldness or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive discharge, and the patient is cured with the remedy we have mentioned and not otherwise, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on their back, and then apply three cauteries according to this form and this amount on the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a man.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said cautery, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
And do not understand the movement of the cautery.
And if the amount of that which is adhered to the quantity of the main part of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient stands on their feet, then extend your arms, which have already been extended, and raise your shoulders.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cautery with a surgical knife, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and let the main part of the codex be adhered so that the whole body is adhered and reaches into the intestines, where the codex is thin; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of perforation of abscess in the thigh with a pointed cautery.
When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh is severe and you want to know if that abscess is in the muscle of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the muscle of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often exhausts the doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, the patient should be placed on his side; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which was described in the other page. And then cauterize it with that and continue to puncture it until the entire chain is completely burned, until it reaches the bone, until it exits safely.
And then care for that as for the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And it is not recommended to use this form of cauterization except for the one that has been studied in the art of medicine and has known many illnesses; however, this one has experimented with some methods on this operation, but rather leave it to those who know better.
Chapter 29.
Of the cautery for foot pain.
The ancient cauteries of the needles of astrology for foot pain should be made in this way, and this is the one you should take from the needles of astrology, a long dry needle that is found, and it should be of the thickest of the same.
And then submerge that one in oil and place the other one in the fire, and then cauterize with a cauterizer in that place which is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and two small cauterizers on either side, one slightly declining to the part where the beard was left, and two cauterizers in that place which are declining between the fifth rib and the cizena, declining slightly to the parts behind; and another cauterizer in the middle of the chest; and three cauterizers on the back; and one cauterizer in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauterizers on the sides of the chest, after the cauterizer which is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not grasp your hand with the pointed cautery, but rather in the manifest part of the wound in work.
And they say that ancient physicians used pointed cautery similar to a needle and ignited it, then placed it in the place between the ribs, until it reaches the swelling and the pus is removed, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
In this puncture, the pointed cautery does not cause fear, because it has often happened in the place of the fistula that did not heal.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the gums.
When treating the gum disease, you should not compare your treatment to what has been said about division, but rather cauterize in the same way, in three main ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cautery strokes along the length of the gum according to the shape of the cautery of the foot, the shape of which has been described before.
And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a bit more, and the handle of the cautery should be the handle that we have said in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
Another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two matches, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the codex that is at the end of the meal, which prevents the patient from turning over on their left side.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the codex according to the length of the body, so that the cautery is made at the same latitude as the body.
And then insert the two matches, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the codex from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four cautery are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery that has three matches.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, as it is more harmful than other previous causes in treatment.
Chapter 31.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteries should not be used in dropsy, but rather on the appropriate spot.
When you are treating dropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division, and do not compare your treatment, but rather place four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the chest, and another on the belly, and two cauteries between the spine of the back, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cauterization in place so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
And do not expel the patient from treatment too soon with that pointed cautery which is used to help them recover, and let them rest in order to aid their healing.
The shape of the pointed cautery that is used to cauterize the belly should be like a hook according to the form mentioned above, and the one that is used to cauterize the arms should be like an olive branch according to its form.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are inflamed with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, then cauterize the feet over the back of the foot in the area between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; and then raise your hand again, and do not return to that spot, because the water sitrina will ooze out.
And the cautery should be made in this form: And then make two cautery points on each thigh, and in each thigh make a cautery point at the end of the cautery blade. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place one end under the patient's neck and the other at the lower part of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time to allow any remaining liquid from it to drain out.
Then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
Of cautery of wounds in the abdomen.
When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that penetrate deeply into the body, this is the digestive and retentive power, which is in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these methods of treatment and not by medication, and sometimes the patient suffers from a powerful cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteries in the circumference of the abdomen, with the clavilh subtil; and with the cauteri over the liver over aloes large, or with two cauteries.
And if you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices above the stomach and near the groins, which will greatly improve the condition that you should not err in.
Chapter 34:
On the cauterization of ancient varicose veins.
When there are varicose veins in nature or one of thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted moisture, and they are cured by the method we mentioned in the division and do not compare it to another cure, then cauterize with three cautery devices above the small of the back, and with a cauterizer below the belly through two such.
And if you find that the stomach of the patient is ulcerated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cautery device as previously mentioned; and with one cauterizer on the throat, and with another cauterizer on the lips of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauterizer for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of cauterization of the arteries near their opening.
When you incise an artery, then you apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that lit cautery into the incised artery, and finally introduce it until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do that one or two times, if they are too thin, then cauterize each of them as soon as you have recovered, and then care for those that you apply to the wound until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over something, it is more harmful.
Chapter thirty-six.
Of cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
When a vein is naturally blocked in the back, and it becomes old, it causes insanity and corrupted humidity, and that which is put in front of it to pierce it subtly, and then know the amount of its depth from the front part.
Then apply the cautery that resembles a needle. And then insert that lit cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount in which the tent enters it.
And repeat with that cautery entering it, so that those corrupted humors are burned away quickly once or twice or three times, according to your need.
And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then guard against all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then cure the place where it was healed.
If the wound is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it for a long time, then you will know that it has been completely healed.
If the matter is not removed from it and remains there for a long time, then you will know that it has penetrated into the bone or rotted the bone, or that it is due to one of those causes from which it will return in memory to its location.
Chapter 37.
Of the cauterization of the teeth.
When pain occurs in the teeth due to a blow or heavy grinding, and the patient's mouth is closed, then you should cautiously cauterize that tooth with a pointed cautery on each tooth, using a clavilh of which you remember the remembrance.
And if you cauterize it too strongly, then do so after a short time, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to injury and moisture, and the patient is unable to hold their urine, then cauterize that part of the bladder which is closest to the urethra, using a heated iron, and cauterize another part diagonally opposite, and another on the other side.
And the length of each cauterization should be according to the thickness of the skin; and cauterize that part which is closest to the back, or use two cauterizations if necessary.
And use a heated iron according to the procedure.
Chapter 39.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When there is injury and moisture in the mouth, and it is prohibited to use compression, and the teeth are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs due to their presence, then it is necessary to cauterize that part with three cauterizations around the navel, as we have mentioned in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cauterization on the closest part to the back, or with two cauterizations, and use a heated iron.
Chapter 40
On the cautery of the dislocation of the shoulder.
When moisture enters the shoulder joint and causes pain in its location, and it is not possible to compare it with the other when they are together. And the location of the dislocation is at the top where the arm bends.
Then cut the patient on the part of the shoulder with a similar pointed cautery, so that you have enough to feel around the circumference of the joint as it is rotated, and so that the joint falls into the middle of the circle.
And the pointed cautery that preceded the shape in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this pointed cautery is not at your disposal, then use three pointed cauteries or a large olive one.
And make the pointed cautery according to the thickness of the entire sinew; and cure that which is not healed.
Chapter 41
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the buttocks, and its cause is from the vein being wet and humid, the patient is cured by what we have said, and you should not compare it to anything else, and this remedy is ancient, so that you should let the patient sweat out heavy humors through foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
And the method of cauterization in this case is one of two: either with a cauterizing iron or with fire.
The second method is one of two known methods, of which the first is to cauterize it above the buttock of the patient with three triangular cauterizing irons in this form, and do so well with good depth. And if the space between each cauterizing iron is equal to the thickness of the said pill, and if the cauterizing iron is olive oil or large.
Sometimes several wounds should be made on the back of the buttock so that there are four cauterizing irons.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, so that the circle contains and burns all the tendon.
And this is the method of cauterization in joints when pain adheres to the shoulder and does not extend into the space.
But if it extends into the space, then cauterize those two cauteries on the space over the area where you wrap the patient that has the pain; and one cauterie on the chest for four days called the left side.
And if the cauterie cuts through, and the depth of the cauterie is according to the quantity of the tendon.
And if the patient wraps that the pain extends into the area mentioned for the feet, then cauterize those here where you wrap with a cauterie for three points or four or more if necessary from that.
And if the patient wraps pain to be left behind the knee in the space, then cauterize those here with a cauterie cut through.
And be careful in all cauterization that does not burn the skin too much like fire or great scarring, and that for that reason it is harmful to the patient or causes contraction.
And I have seen another of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed on fire inflated before the tumor is achieved, and fire perforates and corrupts the whole foot. And then a strong solution of stomach, and then that death.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise ones in the cauterization of any cauterizing instrument of which this is the method: make a circle of iron from which the circumference is the length of one palm; and it should be its orifice according to the thickness of a date or a few.
And let that circle be another third; and let the space between them be the thickness of a thumb; and let those circles be placed in two parts; and let the length of those be one or two thumbs, and make in those iron edges well covered in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Approach the fire until it warms and produces sparks, and place it on the affected area, the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that spot with three cautery points in a row.
And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that spot and keep the wound open for several days; and then heal that spot with medicine until it is healed.
However, my sons, we have not used this type of cautery for this purpose because of the fear of its effects on it, and because we have found some that are harmful to it.
But from the barks of trees, apply those that are harmful to it, and find that spot on it.
But from the barks of trees, apply those that are adhesive medicines that you make two circles with a needle perforated in which the tongue of the iron door is inserted; the length of the needle should be two nuts or those that are like them.
If the space between the patient's legs is equal to the width of the bed, and it is covered from below and above, and contains something in between according to this form:
Then place your hand on the part of the water where the patient is lying, and cover the area with your hand; take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be gradually increasing in heat, and you should do this for the duration of one hour, and suffer the patient from the burning and adhesion of it — that is why this burning has such a strong effect — until the burning stops.
Then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the hot water from the patient's body, and wash it with cold water.
And leave it for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adhesion remains, and then wash it again after several days, and apply poultice to it; this is a good remedy.
Then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the cushion or leg, place it in the position that contains water second to what is made in the tank equally.
And this is the method of water bath, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from the remaining part of one, and triturate it in a new bath of which the remaining part should be perforated by a small trough according to the amount that enters into it.
And place the bottom of the other bath in another boiling water, and pour over that alkali and living caustic of two parts of which those take by a certain amount, and put those on the tieua ma for good compression, and leave the bath that remains from the quick water in the remaining part to the boiling water.
And adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living caustic and other renewed alkali, which is of strong acidity, the one that is used in other medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because the operation is of fire.
And some medicines are known to be cauterized widely, such as thyme and myrrh, causing pain that is not necessarily known.
And Guillia reported about an old man who had undergone the operation and cure for which he was healed of pain in all limbs and sciatica, and praised it as being of great benefit, and said that no other cure was necessary, and that it was cured by a certain method such as recommendation, which he knew well about that.
And it should be placed near the affected part, and if it is not fresh, take a recent fig; and it should be trampled by a few gray men and placed on the painful part, whether in the water, or in the cushion, or in the chest, and left.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for as long as the patient feels the effect of the sweating.
And then place that in the water, and when the body of him is soaked, put it into the ground, where the pain ceases and he is healed.
You should know that no one uses this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
However, it is said that when a goat wound occurs, the vein should be cauterized with this method: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot of the patient and the floor.
And then take dry goat dung and apply it to the wound with fire until it is burned; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing it until the sensation of pain reaches the end and the pain subsides.
And this method of cauterization is called the cautery of cattle.
Chapter 42.
About the cauterization of pain in two places.
Sometimes pain occurs in the two places due to various causes, such as impact or puncture or excessive evacuation, and due to similar causes, by infusion of wet and ground material.
And cauteries do not cut except in this specific case where it is made for the discharge of broken matter.
Then, to evacuate the patient's body, use flat, similar pills, which are made in two rows where the pain is located, three lines apart, and then try to insert one or more cauteries, according to the patient's tolerance and the effectiveness of the pills.
And make sure to use a pointed cautery for cauterization.
And if you want, use three or four cautery needles in this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
This disease often affects small children; and similarly at the beginning of this disease in children, it occurs on their structure in the joints, causing elevation and movement.
And later in the lower spine of the back and in the knees, where it begins to overcome the other spinals.
And therefore when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery that is circular in the following form: which grips the cautery over all part of the sacrum equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the sacrum with two or three lines of the pointed cautery. And place the points between them.
And care for the area where you have said that it is healed.
Be careful that the cautery is not applied in a state of paralysis that is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore when gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not return, then use the cautery again.
And if it is necessary to cauterize that area near the joint of the foot, use a pointed cautery.
And the shape of this cautery is as follows:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the other joints or is not relieved, then cauterize each ankle with three or four points from this pointed cautery.
And if you need more cauterization than these points provide, then cauterize that area and do not press your hand too hard against the cautery before, only around the shape of the wound.
And if the pain spreads to both ankles, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the calves and is called sciatica, then prick around the circumference of the tendons as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then prick around the base of each nail and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pain spreads to other joints or muscles, then cauterize all parts of the help.
And do not evacuate the patient without proper care and reception of medicines, as if proper care is given and flatulence is evacuated, this cautery may heal, God willing.
Chapter 45.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When the fracture is in the lower extremities and the intestines are pushed against the abdomen, and if this begins to happen, then let the patient lie on their back and use gentle cautery to prevent the wound from opening from their belly.
And then place the patient between your hands on their back, and command them to hold their breath until the hole is made or the intestine or hernia appears.
And then return that hand to the patient's thighs, and try to feel the rupture on the bone of the femur, at the end of which should be similar to the shape of a circle above the lower parts of the body.
And then remove the cautery that has this shape:
enter through which there is a hole and remove the needles. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that part of your hand that is correct, and enter through that hole where you can reach the bone of the femur from the inside; and repeat that other way if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
And observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so as not to burn that intestine because it does not come out over the patient and cause great harm or death.
And know that when you have the pointed cautery, do not press the bone, do not ruin your operation.
And note that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
Then take care of the location of the cautery for three days until the wound is healed from the fire.
And then take care of those other wounds until they are healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for fourteen days until the wound is closed and healed.
And note that the patient's nourishment should be given according to the length of time of their treatment, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort to heal.
And after fourteen days, give them soft food appropriately made, and keep them on it for another fourteen days.
And if they are tired from labor and food intake and drinking, and from violent vomiting, because when they follow this regimen of healing, the whole person is cured.
And if you want to cure the ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and do not want them to reopen, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to its size, and remove that which is exuded from the wound as if it were a clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
And it has been said that the first ruptures should be cauterized with a triangular iron according to this form, rather than with a tent.
And a line is placed that is higher than the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a claw iron, but the first iron is thinner and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cauterization for torture.
When the joints are affected by gout or after an injury, and the pain persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is customarily called chronic gout by doctors.
And the cautery for each member should be of appropriate size and temperature, and its effectiveness and duration, and the location of the pain and the torsion of it.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cauterization, good; otherwise, repeat the cauterization on it, because according to the custom of those pains, they are points of the member that approach the one that is affected, so that you can obtain those cautery within that patient before he is healed.
Chapter 47.
About the cauterization of leprosy.
Some leprous ulcers are cauterized with a great deal of care, and if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of flax and melancholy.
And therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy has come and if it is the same as we have mentioned in the division and do not delay, and be careful on the patient that corruption may comprehend all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one at the back of the head, and with the second one behind it, turning the face to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with one behind, on the nape or neck.
And finally, your hand should hold the cautery a short distance from the bone, and then move the scales away from it, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from there; and cauterize on the melon according to what is prescribed.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter; and with a pointed cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cautery needles on both ears, and two cautery needles on two spinal bones of the neck, and two cautery needles on the spinal bones of the back, and one large cautery near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's hands; and cauterize all these joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of his feet, and on the fossils of his limbs.
And be careful of the nerves that are above the ankle, do not burn those.
And some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the bones of the jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the throat.
And know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more certain it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like those who are asleep, because their body is already stunned.
And remember that the cautery should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the tools of the species.
And apply care to the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization of stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its location.
And insert the pointed cautery into the neck's hollow a little bit. Then take care that the poultice inside is healed.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized, which causes pain in the arms and feet, and in the spine of the back and the flexion of the nerves that move that member, and the pain remains.
Do not presume about that, but rather what is known in the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves moving the body.
Chapter 49.
Of cauterization of warts that are malignant.
When warts are ancient and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize with a pointed cautery inside that little bit according to the quantity of the species in the neck, until the whiteness and color of it remain and its color is changed.
And take care that the poultice of barley and lentils with olive oil and leaves of myrtle, and salt of columbine or salt of iris, each part is a separate piece and all are mixed, and then let it be a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cauterization of the knee.
When a tumor begins to form and you want to remove it, then cauterize that circular cautery around it as it is turned.
And they say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become an ulcer, and I have already seen such cases.
It is better to be cauterized around it as we have said with a circle, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of the abdomen.
When some abdominals are late in maturation, and they are due to excess, or due to the patient's old age, or lack of strength, or time, and you want to hasten the maturation of abdominals; then cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery, and place a poultice on that which will hasten its maturation.
If you want to puncture it with the pointed cautery, then you should hold the cautery in this form: and pause it at the middle location of the abdomen before it penetrates the intestine.
And if the cautery is left in that location where it was placed, so that the arm of the patient is relieved; and then care should be taken to ensure it is healed.
Chapter 52
Of cauterization with a corroding agent.
A corroding agent is a corrupting substance that moves within the body, which corrodes what it comes into contact with like fire eats dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corroding agent in the location where the cautery was made with fire, then you should hold cautery needles of various sizes, and large ones as needed in the location where the corrosion is occurring.
And then you should cauterize it from all parts until you remove all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then let it rest for three days, and apply a mixture of oil on the cauterized areas until all the scars have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
And then carefully remove those flesh-like growths that are forming.
But if three days have passed and the flesh has not healed in that area without corruption, then repeat the cautery on that spot where the corruption is present.
And apply some acute medicine in the form of ointment, which is halfway between the cautery and the ointment. However, if the cautery is too harsh and causes more harm than good, then use a milder method.
And you have already mentioned the treatment of that area with acute medicine in the division, and now take the one that will be needed there.
Chapter 43.
Of cautery for boils and other similar conditions.
Boils are often found in the parts of the foot behind the patient's illness, which is called a boil, and this causes great pain, entering the foot; and cautery is applied to those areas in two ways, either by burning or by applying a hot cauda.
May the pointed cautery be ignited like a torch, similar to a pen of wax, which should be made of iron according to the quantity it contains for all parts, and also of fine marges.
Then place that lit cautery over the key, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the key until the cautery reaches the depth of the key. And leave it for three days until it begins to burn. Then apply that with wild marjoram crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on for one hour, until that creature is eradicated from its roots.
Then care for the area with generated meat until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and if there are sudden accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you should apply those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or of wax or of a pen of wax, and place that over the key; and then pour a little water into the syringe, and place your hand, and rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe on the root of the key, and find the water flowing to the tip of the key; and wait for the patient for a short while until the bite of the water flows for an hour, and then remove that, because the key has its roots eradicated.
And they did this, and then brought the other into the room where all of them were in the body.
And then they cured those who had red spots on their necks by applying this to the gums, which the flesh absorbs.
Chapter 44.
Of cautery for trembling.
When someone has trembling due to a disturbance in the nerves or from fever of a similar cause, it is customary to apply four cautery points or one large cautery on the spinal vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra, and also on the chest, and on the stomach, apply olive oil.
And the trembling of the patient ceases and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Chapter 45.
Of cautery for accidents to the body.
When in the body there are sharp accidents, and wounds that are made of thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, that it should be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a thin cautery, the end of which is extended to the fire; or on the long neck of the erection; or with a round cautery.
And sometimes the intestines are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and they do not believe it, but those who do this break the excess and heal from that.
However, one should perform this before the evacuation with a catheter.
Chapter 66.
Of cauterization of fluxes of blood due to injury by cutting of the spine.
Too many wounds that cause blood flow due to cutting of the spine, which leads to deformed scars, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to remain like that.
Therefore, if this happens to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the opening of the spine, and press over that one which you said is already open those wounds inside so that the blood flow of the spine does not come out.
And then press on the wounds with many small and large olive leaves, and blow over them until they are almost healed.
And then approach the second location where the pain is, on which the artery is broken, above the vein, quickly and as soon as possible before it bleeds again, and insert the cauterizer into that wound and restrict it.
And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the first cautery and extend it, then take another cautery regularly from the cauterizers that are in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and let another evil come over the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either cauterize where the bleeding is coming from, or extract it when it is not being extracted, because when the extremities of the veins are burned and the wound is restricted, it is held with a cloth or bandage for strong structure, or they are placed on medicines that have the virtue of restricting the wound; and they are strengthened by a cushion or compression.
May the one who administers a proper restriction of the patient's arm and stricture of the cloth or by position of causes that are burning and similar, does not compare but rather tarts.
If this happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open a pause of the indicated one on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that it enters into the great contraction of the patient until the sane is not separated from the superior part of the plague, and over the arkeria it should not remain; and over the arkeria it should be sprinkled with water of a great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and more cover in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and incisions and of bleeding and of wounds and of their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all illness in which cauterization by fire or medicine is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which it is necessary to have the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subordination of the head to the feet.
I will process in this chapter for that kind of case, so that the one who wants it is helped, about which he will ask.
And since I will begin that, child, you should know that in this chapter it is for fear of that which is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And since you should be very careful about that, because in the operation which is in this chapter there are many evacuations that are very dangerous, such as aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of exsudation or purification of the plague or extraction of a stone or incision of a petra and similar things. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
And I warn you that that does not happen to you in which there is danger, because some evils are caused by human mistakes. And some of them you will go to your disease and it is caused by death, and because of the violence of that which you find of your disease, and because of the length of the disease of him, and because of the disease there is fear of that which means death.
And of those who give you this advice, you should listen to them and hope for your healing, as their illness is dangerous.
And therefore do not believe in anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your haste; and do not presume any cause about this unless you have certain knowledge that it is good for you, and to which a successful sequence brings praise.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases of prophecy and indication to which you are converted, because in that one there is help for you above acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God inspires in you His understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in His hand.
And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is good for you to ask about that and of which you have a need.
First chapter.
About the cure of gout that is contained in the head of children.
You know that this disease is caused by children from childhood and when the moon starts the head of the child is sick.
And some are caused by an unknown cause.
I have not seen this disease except in children; and all those whom I have seen are accompanied by death, and because of this it is my opinion that the work is left undone in them.
And I have seen that a child's head whose head was full of gout, and the head of which was always swollen until it could not be touched because of its great size, and more than the moisture increased until it died from fire.
And this moisture is added between the sinews and bones, or it is added behind the bones on the skin.
Because the operation in that case where the moisture is between the sinews and bones and the abscess is small, you should cut in the middle of the forehead with a slit in the latitude, and the length of the slit should be two nights until the moisture runs out, and this is the shape of the sponge:
If the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is on the bone, then you should open the commissures of the skull in all parts and let the water out when you understand that your hand is on the back and not to the sides. So that you cut in the middle part of the skull with three incisions according to this method:
And remove the incision completely to extract all the humidity; and strengthen the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply that which is on top of oil into the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and strengthen the skull with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until the member is restored and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, which sometimes are more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do that which is most possible.
And observe that you do not cut the artery and engage it with a bandage, as this would cause the patient to suffer from gangrene and death due to the loss of moisture.
Chapter II.
When a catarrh or abscess occurs in the thighs or chest, and it is known that this is the case, and you do not confuse it with other treatments, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for this.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that run along the patient's neck, and you do not want them to appear, then rub the area with a rough cloth to prevent their appearance, and strengthen the collar of the patient with a cloth; and consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each of those arteries that are close to the earlobes, and they are hidden in only some people.
And then approach the back with a probe, and insert each one into the space of each part that has been incised so that it reaches inside the bone, and that is for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut it at the incision of the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is too short, when any vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which is often stopped by frequently applying pressure.
But if the back does not appear at the incision, then measure the thickness of the gold leaf and insert it into the space of three times, and then approach the probe to the bone.
And that which is removed from the blood is about one drop, and it does not remove more or less, and all of this is according to the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the backbone of the patient.
And then consider the cause of the pain, and if there is any reason for the bone to remain on the bone, then incise it so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
And then strengthen the wound with feathers and strips of cloth, and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
About the extraction of tumors that are in the temples.
When an old or sharp tumor has formed in the temples due to humid and hot qualities, and is painful and similar to those, and is not cured by medical treatments, we have shown in these ailments the extraction of tumors from the temples, or cauterization of them as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient feels pain in the temples; and understands the tumor that is apparent on the temple where it is shown by its side, and is hidden only in a few people due to the force of pressure.
And if it is hidden, then press the patient's neck with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water until the tumor appears clearly to you. And here is the form of the spoon that you will use: And then you will scrape the codex with this one until you reach the arch; and then get into it and extract the upper parts until you remove the codex and discover the parts of the tunics that were left there, from all parts.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with this one at the end of the needle, and then cut off a part according to the quantity by which its ends were stretched and contracted, and do not leave any bleeding, because if they are not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
And then remove about an ounce of blood in three.
And if the arch is large, then you will cover it in two places with strong double-sided tape or with cords that are long enough, and do not let it touch the putrefaction that prevents the consolidation of the wound and does not leave any bleeding.
And then cut off the excess that is between two threads; and do that at that hour or at another time.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with the pointed cautery until it reaches the inner part of the bone, and it will be in the place of that wound work.
It is better to do so if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; for cauterization is one of those causes that help to finish the moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
And cover the removal of the ribs that press on the old wound site, and place them over the clean bandages made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
And if while working on another wound, blood flows from the rib, at that time you should apply pressure to that blood, or with the pointed cautery, or whatever fills the old wound site, and press your hand until the blood is stopped. And if any of those causes is not present, then place your hand over the location where the blood is flowing, and apply cold water to the area with great coldness until the heat subsides, and then press it as appropriate.
And the thing that is more useful in extracting bone is to cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have sensed the two places where it enters and exits, and pause when they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the part between its extremities does not become consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows. But if the sharpness of two points is not enough, because if they approach each other too quickly, they do not cut the flesh but rather tear it.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to those places and the flesh should be cut more easily.
And this work is better in all works and more useful.
And the space between the two points should be the thickness of the aforementioned.
Chapter Four.
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic wounds of the wounds.
When the acidic wounds are on the body of those who have veins above their forehead, and there is no cause for medical cure in that area, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels pain in their forehead as if they were suffering from a migraine, and the wounds of that person are extended, humidified in any way that their hairs are known, and their eyelashes are scratched by the acidity of their tears, the old remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure as the spread.
And if you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then incise three equal fissures along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the fissure is two as mentioned: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the eyelids that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And beware of the first ribs that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jawbones. And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers, adjust it.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloths, use them to absorb the blood.
And then place the flat of two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Scrape all the scar tissue that is between two incisions, and remove it from the incision towards the second incision. And then spread this flat and enter it into the first incision another time with another instrument called a lancet, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of the lancet on the flesh attached to the scar tissue, and the flat side on the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
While continuing to apply this remedy to the affected area, and then do so between the two fissures.
And when enough quantity has been expressed from the bladder, express the places of the feet of the bladder congealed.
And then place your hand in each fissure, and place your hand on those powders that are in vinegar and oil and vinegar, and make sure that it does not become an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for it with an ointment made from basilicon and rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of gravels by cataplasms and the humors descending from the parts affected by the chapter.
When any pain from gravels continues and the humors descending from the parts affected by the chapter, and sometimes the eyes of the patient become weak and their sight is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the eyebrows are falling off, and in the beginning of the chapter there is an acute pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you know for these accidents that the materials and cataplasms do not come from any other veins but those descending from the parts affected by the chapter.
And the best cure for those is this: order the patient to turn their head, and then insert a small incision on the left side of the forehead (and start the incision from the right temple towards the left; and the incision should go through the bone), until it reveals the bone.
Dry all the pus with gauze or dry cloth, and then fill between the two lips of the incision with old cloth or cloths. And then clean the wound with warm water and oil to prevent it from becoming infected.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then scrape the bone until it begins to touch the flesh, and then apply the drying regimen that is made of flour and collofania mixed together, and apply it on the wound as if it were a natural part of the flesh.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of that which catches in the arches.
The entire cause that catches in the arches is one of four species: either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant such as celery or fava, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and vinegar and its similar substances, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone catches in the arch or other similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the arch, and if the arch is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, it is distilled into some cause of violent oil or sage, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the patient sneeze by conditioning, and open the nose against the coming of a sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the arch, and extend the arch to the parts above, because these remedies are often forgotten in these causes.
If it is not obtained, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicaricatory needle of this form:
If the needle is obtained, then it is good; otherwise, administer extraction with the thin needle of double puncture.
If the needle is not obtained, then make a needle from iron and insert the end of the needle into the ear canal and seal the area around the needle with wax and softened beeswax so that it does not fall out except the needle. Then extract with the strong attraction of the instrument that we have found.
If it is not obtained in this way, then take a piece of raw or prepared alum or the amount that is taken for the tongue, place it at the end of the needle, and cover it with a clean cloth placed on the side where it was placed. Then insert that into the ear canal and facilitate the ear from moisture.
If all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should cut away that part which developed into an abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting away that part is to first bandage the patient's wound with the vein septic and remove the second bandage according to the method of the virtue of the patient, and then make a small incision between your fingers and convert the gold thread to the parts above, and do not put any grease in the location where the patient is most sensitive. And if the incision is in the shape of a crescent until it reaches the bone, and the bone is found, then cut away that part which can be removed with appropriate instruments; and then make the incision in that hour at a fast pace, and cure that part before it is healed.
If the cause is one of the gases that we believe and it is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then you should take a thin spatula in this form: And administer to that person the abscission of that stone which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do that when you think that that person is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place them in comfortable positions, and protrude those areas where there are nails or subtle gestures, or ab initially have such a thing, which is praised for the extraction of it.
May one use water that has entered the ear canal as a condition for sneezing, and fill the patient's ear with old wool, and put it over the ear in which the water is, and if it is expelled by that, it is good; and if not, take many thin needles according to the length of the said, and cauterize those in the fire a little, and the patient should insert one of those in the opening of their ear canal and strike it with another needle over the water in the ear. So do not stop that until all the water is expelled.
So do not stop that until all the water is expelled. And then the water is poured into a container that you take with paper or cotton, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
And then put another cotton and do this many times until all the water is boiled, and remove that which is under the name of the extraordinary stone.
In the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, it is cured with oil and a similar remedy, as we have said in the division; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the brain, then administer the extraction of it by gestures and oncis, and the cause of it is more dangerous than all the other causes that are found in the ear.
But in the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you cure that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your remedy, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle, like this is the shape of it: And insert the thin end of the needle into the earhole according to the amount that the patient can bear; then pull out strongly with that one, and make those movements, until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey you with the instrument, then open and close it in the circle of the candle as we have said; then administer distillations that have been previously prepared for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion is the one that you use to pour the medicinal oils into the earhole with this instrument, like this is the shape of it: And make that of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and put it on top.
And so it should be as if they are in the cavity of the catheter of continence here where it is necessary to insert. And if you wish, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil or some herb or any liquid from these medicines into the catheter — and that is in the syringe — and then insert it above and express the oil onto the patient's abdomen so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil penetrating.
And that which is in the syringe should have already been heated by fire for a short time. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the syringe is not too cold, because the medicines of the syringe cannot withstand such cold.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of obstruction of catheters.
Some children and some older people who have not been perforated in the abdomen, and that has happened to some men, obstruction in the flesh of the catheter by plague or by no meat at all in that; and this obstruction is sometimes made in the entrance of the catheter which does not allow the excrement to pass, and sometimes in the parts forward.
And in the case of a patient who does not understand the language, it is in the most difficult positions for treatment.
And in the case where you succeed in understanding the language, place the patient's ear to your lips and look at him. And if you see an obvious sign, open that with the thin spatula of this shape:
If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is two lion feet long so that it does not touch the ear.
And if the sign is caused by flesh born in the ear or in the chest, then use that thin and sharp needle to pierce it all before it is fully formed.
And if the sign is in the front of the ear, then take a thin and sharp needle and hold it over the fire for a short time, and then put it into the flesh of the ear.
And if the sign is caused by that which the patient finds difficult due to its weight, then press it with difficulty; and be careful not to press the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth of the second quantity, as wide as the opening of the wound that you have covered with the Egyptian poultice; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any other and insert it into boiling water and powder over it according to the triple recipe, and use it; and if you see that the cloth is already infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerate that is made with melted rose oil, until the infection has passed; and then care for it until it heals.
If there is an outflow of pus, then submerge a cloth or towel in cold water and place it over the wound, and use the other remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
When certain symptoms occur at the pores of the skin, some are wet and others are dry.
Therefore, you must hold the patient's hands or feet, and remove those spikes from their wounds, and place your hand over the affected areas accordingly.
If there is pain due to the flow of unclean blood, then you should cauterize those parts with a thin pointed cautery.
The best cauterization is to remove the wounds and dry symptoms when they return to the cause of their wounds; and when the fire has been cauterized, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9
Treatment of large swellings that come to the eyelids.
Symptoms that occur in the eyelids are similar to large swellings in their strength and hardness, and because they increase, they are called so.
And there is a collection of thick humidity under and over the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the greatness of it comes from what appears under the eyelid and is magnified to all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Then make an incision in that place through the fissure, and remove all parts that facilitate its escape, and suspend it with a cord and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and heal it within that it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which the oil of it restores it and encases it.
And if the greatness is declining to the parts under the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with a cord, another that you indicate of incision, and press it on all parts, and if the eyelid by the incision is elongated, then it will not be noticed in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and care for the area with that which is inside that will heal it.
Chapter X.
About the treatment of swelling above the wound.
Swelling is gray, which is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in those who are more affected by it, aggravating the wounds of those and causing them to lose their sight; and they cannot look at the light of the sun because of that which tears fall on them.
And so you see them always speaking to their faces, and always speaking to their sleeping faces; and they have their eyelids closed with humid ones, which have already covered inflammation, and immediate danger of infection is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with those, you center infection within those.
And some way of operation is in that which the patient pauses his head on the pillow, and then pauses a cloth from him and from it makes a circle, and makes of it a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and then pauses that over that and press all those that are in the middle of the circle, and then do in the middle of that humidity is incident on the fissure by latitude, and the fissure is not greater than the fissure that is made in flaubotomia.
In the previous cavity where you are cutting the cord completely until you reach the arkernach, in the most common procedures, arkernach is done through a fissure according to the form of white glass.
So extract those wet cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs called parts of the forehead and rotate between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to adjust in the fissure so that the space does not reach the wound and those below it.
But if you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small wet cloth in the fissure until you reach the arkernach; and then extract those we have mentioned; and then submerge cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those wet cloths.
And know that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that that which remains of that wetness is removed.
And then cure that which is unhealthy.
But if an abscess occurs in the area, then treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and are antiquated, then those methods of harmfulness are used as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and bandages until that which is the cause of destruction of the wound, which is called touching the wound, and cure is done in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by sharp medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by making an incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will say.
And therefore cover that you place the cap of the wound on your left; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the wound is closest to the edge of the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate from above, and that which is - near the margin of the eyelid where there are no hairs - near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
Approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes and insert the spatula into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it under the eyelid, wiping it with a small piece of cotton or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with your finger, as if holding a fan.
However, it is important to note that the shape should vary according to the degree of eyelid elevation, as this varies among men, and those who require a greater incursion into the eyelid should do so according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then approach the spatula over the two lines that you have pressed, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lower lacrimal canal. And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes and is as large as the king's.
And then place the cotton in one of the two angles of the wound, and remove all the skin from there, and adjust the incision with the two lips of silk or thin wool, and remove the pus, and let any excess hang over two small strips of cloth, if you wish to do so, or not, it does not matter.
And after three or four days, approach the wound stitches.
And if you want, leave the wound stitches open, and treat that area with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is raised due to the sealing of the wound and its attachment; but stitching is better. Therefore, do as the ancients did.
But rather, be attentive to the patient's comfort, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you should place a figure like a shield on the eyelid, and then lift the eyelid three fingers away and gather it according to this form:
If it is not possible to do that, then take three fingers away and place the other end of the needle in the middle of the figure, and insert the first thread into the lacrimal major, and the second thread into the lacrimal minor, and adjust between those threads with the same thread, and then lift your hand up to the same level, and lift the entire eyelid on which it is recommended to be placed.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside to be healed.
If an abscess occurs at the beginning or end of your incision, cover that abscess with a plaster and similar ones, and apply ointment to it.
Sometimes eyelids are turned inside out by their own hairs, so cover that which you have mentioned at the beginning with the same thing; but stitching in places where it is more artificial.
To bandage the legs is done in this way: and you should turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have mentioned; and then make two narrow strips of cloth or narrow straps of the same length as the eyelid and their width being a little less than the width of the spatula. You have already made an incision at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each narrow strip underneath that which superfluously covers the eyelid of the eye, and tie the strips of each part very tightly, and leave it for several days, until the skin by the tightness will die and become blackened and rotten.
If it is too late, then break the joints with hammers, and then cure the pain before it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
About raising the prickly hairs in the eye socket when the hair is hard.
When they are unnatural hairs, hard, sharp and prickly, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in the soft silk and lemon, and then adjust the ends of it and notches them in a way that is very subtle. And the length of the threads should be the quantity of one palm.
And then you should put another thin thread next to it in a short time, and if you want, cut the ends of that one.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires suture, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid so that it does not come out naturally from the eye.
And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelid attachment, and use one to three or more but not too many.
And then pull your hand away from that which is outside the eyelid attachment in the eyelid and the eye naturally.
If it is not attached to the eyelid attachment, then attach it to the parts that you have composed to that, until it is attached to the eyelid attachment when the trauma occurs.
And then apply it to the view of the wound, as you will attach it to the eyelid attachment and the eyelid, and grope around and clap the wound, and leave the cloth on for two or three days until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals over that good flesh.
If the penis is too short, then you adjust a longer artificial penis than the natural ones, and elevate it to where it should be, or until it becomes long enough to fit in the space, and then elevate that.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of ejaculation that occurs in the eyelid above.
When it occurs in the lower eyelid, and the contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left part, due to poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, and this is called leprosy, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the eyelid or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May the method of the operation in that be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use cures that dry out the causes of which they are dehydrated and constrained, because if you do that, it will return worse than at any time when they had no fire.
Use those of causes that soften like fenugreek, and embrocate with the water in which they are soaked and cooked, or with dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply it to the affected area, and cure that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all the matter that is not consolidated according to the form in which fire begins.
And this operation, which we have said, is nothing but a certain correction of exacerbations that do not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of exacerbations that are made in the eyelid.
This exacerbation that is made in the eyelid, which is not called a vertical exacerbation; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Accidents can occur due to injury, cuts, burns, or other similar causes.
The method of the operation for that is to take a needle with which you can make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and let the thread pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with one hand, and insert the other hand into the wide space. And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the needle and place it on the broken part, and convert that into an eyelid, and make the two cuts on the side of the eyelid.
And make the ends of the two cuts into two angles at the beginning, which you have made when they meet, and make an angle from them until they form a figure of their own.
And this figure is the Greek letter lambda: λ
And then place the flesh on that side for the amount that is left of it after being cut off from it, which is called the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and sew them with thread; and then care for them with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if the wound is caused by a tear or suture or cauterization, then you should cut the flat suture on the eyelids according to what is prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of wounds when they are above or below, that it should run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of wounds, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the artisans always prepare everything in any way that is possible to do so within the time that they make the figure return to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what is suitable for the operation and the tools in the best arrangements.
Chapter 15
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, the eyelid is adhered to the lower part of the eyeball, and it is prohibited from moving freely and performing its natural works, therefore you should insert the eyelid extender behind the eyelid, and raise it above or extend it towards the eyeball.
And then you insert the adherence into a thin space, which should not be sharp, having obtained a small amount of it so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remain the space that does not descend the eyeball from its acuity.
And your incision should be made with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and that the entire adherence is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eye, which you wash; or distill it in the form of a solution in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the swollen area under it, place a cotton pad soaked in warm water on the eyelid, and use the third day's tincture of strengthening remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI:
On the beginning of a fingernail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal bones.
You should know that the fingernail is of two kinds, either nervous, which is similar to a thin, hard shell; or non-nervous, which is like white moisture condensed, which when it touches the skin, often causes it to become infected and the skin does not heal in it.
And the non-nervous ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal bone, until it gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
If the fingernail is working at its beginning, then the patient should place their head in your lap, and then raise their eyelids, and with your hand lift the eyelid, and then gather the fingernail from the infected area and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or cow hair or swan feather or similar, or strong silk, or gradually double the tip of the needle until it reaches the middle of the nail, and push it into the nail, and hold the nail firmly; and extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the nail with the hair on the side of the nail which is the pupil. And then continue to push it into the back of the nail.
And then insert the thin wire or small forceps into the corner of the lacrimal canal and lift the flesh of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become blocked and cause continuous flow of tears.
And also some of the nail on the side that was extended or firmly held, as we have said, and then scrape it with the lion's tongue-shaped instrument which is the shape of this.
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunica with the instrument and that it does not cause a rupture, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or saliva mixed with sage, and leave it there until the next day; and then care for that which has entered by that means to be healed.
And if the nail is not tender and you cannot insert the needle, nor does it stick on that spot, then this type of nail is cured by medicines, and it is healed as it would be with honey and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that, then you begin the thigh of the patient and take a thin lancet of sharp acuity according to this form: with thinness. And if you see that it is rarefied and confined and has entered into that spot, then sprinkle your urine in the thigh of sage mixed with sage or salt or saliva, and cover the thigh until the next day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is in it has been removed, unless the opposite abscess is cauterized in the thigh, wherefore you leave that and heal the abscess when it is ready to be healed.
And continue your operation until they are healed.
If the lacrimal gland is noticeably swollen and causing great discomfort, it should be removed with an onion; and incise a part of it, but do not completely remove it to prevent excessive tear flow.
And then apply a drop of rose oil into the lacrimal canal until they are healed.
Chapter 17.
Of incising gazzenic and of that which is born from flesh adjusted in the wound.
Some flesh sometimes born in wounds is red and is over-padded until it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches on the eyelids and strongly holds the eyelids together at the parts of the wound and is assembled like a balustrade rose.
The operation is performed by placing the patient's head on the table; and then open the wounds of that and collect all that flesh with an onion, and that with a forceps or a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the cutter, and guard yourself from the wound that you do not descend that which is your operation.
And if you have inserted a needle or a small forceps that we recommended in the beginning of this chapter, or small scissors, collect them as soon as the shape of the bone comes close to this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and the entire flesh has been removed, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or sprinkle it with powdered herbs similar to corrosive medicines, and place a piece of albumen into the wound before ensuring that an abscess does not form.
And if there is any reason to suspect infection and you are not sure of its cause, and you fear an abscess forming, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with whatever remedy is appropriate for that type of abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat any affected flesh that occurred in the wound of this kind.
But if you have any doubt about the complete healing of the wound from natural or accidental causes, do not use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that that member has suffered this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the collection of blood in the wound.
Blood vessels that are turgid over the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the wound with the passage of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which there is blood is strong and in it there is no other disease than blood, then you collect that blood.
And if you command the patient to place their head in your hand, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of soft double thickness according to this form:
or two bands gradually in one layer according to this form:
And then those veins are collected with soft elastic bands, by their softness, and wipe away the sanctuary hour by hour, until those veins are again visible from the wound and are turned over.
And be careful that you do not injure the wound with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the morning gives light, and you are motivated to continue in your operation, then do not incise only those veins.
And when you have completed it, you will dilute the remaining white or red wine in the empty vessel to cool down that which remains from the sable.
If you cannot obtain all of it at that time, then apply all the remaining wine to relieve their pain, and leave them for several days until the pain is relieved and they are protected from infection.
And then repeat the process after the swelling has subsided until they are healed.
This is the form of forceps:
Chapter 19
On reducing hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with cauterization or acute medicine after the story of it has been told and it is not healed, do not insert into it but cut through the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument:
And if it is named an acute head, and made of iron, and the cap is redone with a sharp point like a lancet or a needle for subtle puncture (like in the following form).
Then place that over the corrupted part of the bone, and slowly rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
And that should be done several times, and then restore the place with drying and hemostatic causes.
So if the place is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the wound heals for 40 days without recurrence, without abscessation, and without accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and in this way: and you should use a sharp iron or medical instrument, and when it is revealed like this, then take a tribe in this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its end is first extended into the extremity as much as possible.
And place that one on the bone, and the other near the lacrimal; and move your hand a little bit away from the hole, and then rotate your hand inside the tribe until it penetrates the entire bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if he were breathing through his mouth when you touch his hand.
Therefore, the area is restored with astringent medical remedies that are similar to those you have used before.
Therefore, since the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts of the body returns to its source, so that is less painful for the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the elevation of the hole.
When the hole elevates to its totality and does not occur in the excretion of harm or reduction, then cover the patient, and make sure that it follows, and place some bandages on the neck for good success; and place a liniment on the hole made of acacia, aloe, and sarsaparilla, and strengthen the plaster on the hole with some powders.
The method for treating the feet is to use cloths from lion's manes, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; then make those cloths into what is needed.
Then place one over the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose. Then apply strong pressure with a durable, tightly wound cloth; and repeat the successive applications of the incisions; and then remove the cloths and let the affected area rest straight for the day and night.
However, if the tendon becomes too soft, then it should be kept straight.
Then remove the cloth and let it rest as we have said.
And if the affected area has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the feet and the pressure and the cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 21
About the beginning of the eminence of the uveal membrane.
When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and it emerges and protrudes out of the eyelids as if by a grain of sand, and it takes on the shape of a man through that, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, which is that you insert the needle into the uveal membrane from the part below upwards, and then insert another needle double the length of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate, and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the doubled-over part and lift it away from the uvea along the path of the needle, and apply pressure there.
And then carefully remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in a solution of alum and vinegar until the thread is completely absorbed.
And then take care to apply that which comforts the one who is suffering from the disease until it is healed.
And some women gather all the pieces of cloth together in a circle and adjust them to be large enough, and then pierce it with a thin needle that reaches the bottom of the cloth, and remove the moist alumine, and lower the cloth and put it inside quickly.
And then apply strength until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of gout.
This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the cloth like descending water and is not that one.
The way to work in it is that the patient should lie down on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in your two hands and hold that which enters when the disease reaches the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and stop the blood, and the patient will see the causes as he used to.
If it does not descend, you will know that it is a fever.
But if the descent is not prepared, then have the patient lie between your hands and take a thin spatula and put it on the conjunctiva and continue until the edge of the cornea in the corona (where the eye is), until the fever is gone.
Then, when the fever is gone, you will pour in the dragon's blood water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
And then cure the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22
Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that one.
Then make sure you have the patient lie between your hands on a pillow and hold their eye shut tightly.
And place your hand near the eyelid of the patient's eye, if the eye is on the left side; or place your hand directly over the eye if it is on the right side.
And place your hand with a sponge on the right side if the eye is on the left; or place your hand with a sponge on the left side if the eye is on the right.
And place the end of the sponge near the cornea for the large canal in the eye's corner on the side of the lower lacrimal gland; and then wet the sponge with virtue and rotate your hand over it.
And penetrate into the eye's corner and feel that the sponge has reached the cause of the view.
And make sure that the length of the sponge is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyelid, which is the cornea of the eye; because you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place your hand in the location where the water is, and then throw another cloth over it, and if the water descends, then cover the patient with a blanket over which they can see, and then place it on their own bed.
And then pause for a moment; if the water is descending, then pause at that other cloth in front of which there is not yet any soiling.
And then when it is dry and not descending, then you remove the cloth gently, and rub it with your hand a little at a time, and then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the bed with that; and then place a clean, dry cloth outside the bed, or a linen cloth infused in rose oil and album of egg and bind it to the bed.
And also those that we have used in our time on that comb with album of egg.
And if you do not obey the cloth to the instrument of the bed because of its hardness -- which is one of those men whose bed is hard --, then cover it with the spatula that is called the backrest of which this is the form:
And then pierce that joint at that point, do not leave your hand in the wound, and see if you are not making a shallow incision.
And then enter the second joint as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for their bed, lying down comfortably on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on that part of their body to prevent it from becoming sore and not irritate their head at all.
And the bandage should be according to its position by the third day.
And then remove that from the dark room and expose the free view, and make them see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not do that during the time of healing or soon after the infusion. Having said that, you should remove it so that the water can flow more freely and strongly through the vein.
If a boil breaks open, remove the pus underneath it within seven days, and treat that area with something that will help heal the boil.
Then you should observe the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to prevent them from vomiting for several days, as they are in a state of darkness.
And gradually remove that hand and discuss with them about their causes.
And know that in some cases, the disciple of sight does not excuse any visuals, and then you should be careful about the operation.
And we have heard of some of those who are in Arctic, and some say that they make fire in the Arabian desert by piercing a hole through which water comes out.
However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it may be new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can control those who do not know about those things:
If the joints are naturally made of bone or iron, and their outer parts are this subtle triangle shape, with the sharp end like that of a triangle.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of meat in the nose.
When in the nose there are different meats that are adjusted from among which is some cause, such as a scorpion-like bone or polyps; and this disease is called polyps because it resembles that animal represented. And from there meat cancer, the black one, of dark color; and from there it is meat lion not of dark color.
Therefore in that which is among these lion meats not fraudulent or cancerous, cover the patient's hands and place them in the sunlight, and open the nose of it, and pick out the meat from those. And then extract that from the parts of the body, and then cut that which you have understood from those sharp space subtle of one part into which you know that all the meat is already stopped; because if there is any cause of the reason for which the abscission is possible, then you will remove that with one of the small instruments to facilitate it. If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has not been opened, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cover and cauterize that part which has been completely drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then gather some salt and vinegar or water. If the nose is opened and moisture is introduced into the palate, then know that it is healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate after covering, then know that there is no flesh in the bones of the nose to the places where it has not been drained.
Therefore, cover that place where there is some swelling, and blow in the mouth noses, and pause between each blow the amount of the said or word, and engage the patient and introduce one end of the tube in the nose with the ray or another cause which is possible at that time.
And as soon as that is done, draw the smell into the nose so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit on the same side, because too many children at school do the same action, and it is the cause of that which one wants to do.
And then place the two outer parts of the patient, one part that is on the nose and the other that is in the nose, and then administer a lock of meat at the patient's nostrils, and do this when you know that the meat is already at the patient's nostrils.
And then extract the patient, and place in the nose an abstraction of salt water, and do this for three days or more until the rotten meat is completely removed from the nostrils.
And then at the end of the cause, place in the nose a tube of lead to prevent air from entering for a while until it is healed.
But if the cure does not work, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled oil and medicines in the nostrils:
And do this with silver or copper, which is similar to a small lamp covered, and the meat in the same way.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with cane, and the cannula of the instrument to purge the nostrils and it is flat, exposed; to which has a handle at the back of it, which you hold when you insert in it oil or water that you want from the sucs and from the sucking causes.
Chapter 25:
Regarding the noses outside the nostrils.
If the nose is not straight outside the nostrils, it is considered magnificent and often in other days when it is looked at from the side.
And for that reason, you should incise that at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it. Then place your hand over the area or use a cautery or medicine that burns where the disease was.
But if the incision is made late before it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it is hard, black, of little sensation, and does not touch that which is a postema crancos; for those who incise this abscess until it is completely healed by the great malice over that which it had.
If the abscess is yellow and not black in color, and it is possible to incise it entirely, then evacuate the patient and incise that same spot, and cure the wound with a mixture of dry and tightly packed material until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of sutures of the nose and lips and ear when their continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
You should know that when the continuity of one of these cartilages is dissolved, it is not advisable to perform that operation on another person.
Therefore, if there is any cause for those wounds, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then you should adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that area until it is healed.
And if the lips of the dissolved continuity are already separated, and each one is healed, then you should examine that each part of their external skin does not have a wound. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and tighten those, and above them sprinkle powder of dragon's blood and three grains of triple powder, and place a plaster of diaphinicon or any other consolidating plaster on top, leave it on for two days or three, then remove that and replace it with another plaster and leave it on until the abscesses are healed, and then cure it with ointment.
The solution of continuity or needles that you add to the stitches should be the same as we have recommended in the abdominal stitch, or add the solution of continuity as you see fit and let it be known.
Chapter 27.
On the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts divided.
Some abscesses are found in the divided parts of the lips of some people, similar to hard pustules, and sometimes they are smaller and sometimes they are larger.
Then cover each of those hard parts with a bandage and fill the wound with healing ointment until the bleeding stops, and then clean the area with warm water and treat it with a remedy that has styptic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the beginning of flesh that is adjusted to the gums.
Then cover that area with a bandage or hold it with forceps and insert it into the place where the tooth was, and let the blood flow or leave the wound open.
And then place a compress or powder with styptic or astringent properties on the wound.
If that flesh returns, then insert it again secondarily and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
About the reason for teeth made of iron.
When sharp, rough, and sometimes black scales are adjusted to the surface of the teeth of the dead and of those in the forum, and between the gums, they are made of iron and are yellow or green inside, and they are the teeth that are left behind.
And so you should apply a warm compress between the patient's thighs and place their head on your lap, and remove any teeth that appear to be causing similar damage, such as sharp stones or other objects that have not caused any harm. This is done with a black cloth and lemon juice and other substances that are known to be beneficial.
If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you should repeat the reasoning on those parts on the other day and the second and third until it reaches the end of that which you wish.
You should know that teeth require different shapes and sizes of tools according to the operation you are performing. In order to prevent the tool from damaging the surrounding parts of the tooth that is being cut and another tool used between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of tools you should prepare as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of Tooth Extraction.
When you cure the tooth from its pain, it takes a long time and is completely removed, because there is no cause that replaces the essence of the tooth when it is removed, because the substance is sublimated into which the extraction is made.
When the patient is lying down to have that tooth removed, you must be certain which tooth is causing the pain, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and they think it is a healthy tooth, and you remove that one and the pain does not stop until the bad and painful tooth is completely removed, as we have already seen in the operation of the wisdom teeth.
Therefore, when you know which tooth is causing the pain, and if you do not know, then you should incise around the tooth in a place where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum on all sides, and then remove that part with scissors or fine forceps little by little until that part is removed.
Approach the patient's head with large hands for good communication or to stop strong bleeding, and place your cap on the patient's head so that it does not fall off, and approach the second tooth in a straight manner that does not cause more pain to the patient or the doctor.
And if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it under the patient's body to facilitate and ease the removal of the patient as it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or damaged, then cover that wound with cloth and tighten it with a thin thread at the end to prevent it from being broken during your construction over that area.
And cover that wound with cloth and guard the strength of your instrument so that it does not break during the incision around all part of the gum and return over the patient for the greater evil than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity on the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for those who are vegetarian cause great harm to people, which are more difficult than being broken, and the reasons of their removal are all, or some of those, or that extracts that area with the bones of the mandible as with those who have testified.
And then the mouth is cleaned with water or with vinegar or salt.
And if there is a flow of blood from the wound, then use vinegar or sage and sprinkle some on the wound, and if it does not stop bleeding, cauterize it.
The shape of the forceps and how to hold them subtly are those that are used to extract teeth at the beginning of long extractions, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when you have to perform such actions.
And there are times when using a thick handle is necessary until you have to perform such actions, and then the extractions are short.
And they are made of Indian iron or straight extraction tools, and in the extractions of those, there are teeth of which some are inserted into others and are extracted with great force, and sometimes they have the shape of the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and the extraction of bones from impacted jawbones.
When you have to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand on the location where it is stuck for a day or two until that location becomes soft; then insert forceps with a beak shaped like the beak of a bird called a ciconia or guanat, the shape of the forceps:
Their beaks were made with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey your command to open with these forceps or scissors, then place your hand on the jaw and dissect all the flesh and insert the instrument that has the name of atali, it is a small lever, its shape is like this:
And if it is short and has a thick end, use a small one, and not too thick so that it does not stick.
Therefore, if the jaw is broken, it is good; and if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular forceps with some roughness:
The form of the second instrument should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
And you have already helped with this instrument having two prongs, such as the following is the appropriate form: And other instruments that will be needed for tooth extraction; since it is made like a large awl, and this is the form:
of the triangular tip bent or short, which should be somewhat thick, and not too thin so that it is not broken.
And other wise that the teeth extraction tools are made like the other instruments.
May the craftsmen be skilled and subtle in the art, at least as much as they know the operation and various diseases; for some of these diseases are of such a nature that the ancients did not say or describe a proper instrument, because of the different forms.
May it be broken if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth, or if it is decayed, then carefully remove it from its location and use the appropriate instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the teeth roots, and help you with this tool, which is the following form:
And if there is any swelling, do it little by little, and string it or hold it at the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely drilled; and then restore the place with appropriate medical remedies for that.
If there is a small hole in the bone, then remove that and its black matter, and cure it before it becomes healed.
Chapter 32.
About the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not naturally follow their own course, and this is especially common in women and more so in older women; therefore, consider whether another tooth is close to it and if there is no possible way to extract or remove it, then you should remove that tooth. But if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should use this instrument to remove it. It resembles a pig's tusk, and it should be made of Indian steel with a sharp edge.
If the tooth is inserted into the gum for several days due to its hardness, and it is not accompanied by other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominently exposed to the gum, then use this Indian iron file of which this is the shape:
And it is all made of Indian iron and the edge alone; and it is also of small pointed needles, like those that are made into needles, by which the tooth should be filed a little at a time for several days to facilitate its removal, so that no other tooth becomes attached and falls out. Then line up the tooth with the gum, and remove it with an elevator.
And if the tooth is one that has been touched by saliva and the tongue, then cover it with a cotton swab to prevent the dental fragment from becoming rough and breaking off, and to fill it completely so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents occur to teeth before concussion and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which hurts, and you have cured it with medicines of styptics, and your cure has not been successful, then use gold instead of silver, because silver turns black and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
And if the gold is of such subtlety and roughness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of the repair is that you take the gold and double it between two healthy teeth, and make sure that the two ends of the gold fit between two decayed teeth, or if one or both are missing, until the thread reaches the tooth of the other side. And then repeat the cementing to the part where you began, and strengthen your hand with skill until it is not decayed.
And your strong string should be used to pull out the teeth that are stuck.
And then carefully remove the excess tissue around the tooth with forceps or pliers, and place those in each location to hold them, and turn those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not cause damage to the tongue. And then carefully lift that narrow space with a Roman instrument.
If it is broken or cracked, pull out that or those with another tooth in such a manner that it is strong in all its time.
And this is the shape of healthy teeth and the figure of the straightness of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as shown in these:
And when it is returned to the cavity of each in such locations, and they are re-created as we have recommended, and they remain strong.
And only skilled craftsmen and wise people do that.
And some wedges are adapted to some cause of the cow's bones, and they are made from them in such a shape of a tooth, and they are placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and they are strengthened as we have said, and they remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter 34.
At the beginning of the tongue, which prevents speech.
This ligament that connects the tongue to some muscles, which is sometimes natural or accidentally caused by pressure, and has already been consolidated.
And the operation on it is to open the mouth of the patient, his own head being present; and he raises his tongue, and then inserts that nerve ligament according to the latitude until the tongue is released from its previous position.
If there is some difficulty or stiffness in that area, and this is due to consolidation of pressure, then you should cut it with a knife along the latitude until it has been incised and the stiffness has been dissolved.
And be careful not to make a hole in the front of the meat and that you cut here an arc and blood comes out from the wound.
And then wash the footprints of the incision with fresh water or vinegar or clean water; and then place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving, as this is the one that the patient held in his mouth in each new position so that it is not consolidated again.
If the intestine is perforated, pause over the location of the wound with a triangular piece; if the intestine is wounded, then cauterize the location with a silver needle that suits that wound. And approach that cure with the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 35.
About extracting a ranula from under the tongue.
Sometimes, due to the tongue, abscesses similar to a small prohibited name occur, preventing the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is often magnified until it fills the mouth.
And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
And if it is declining to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and incise that with a thin spatula, and incise it from all parts; and if the intestine bursts during your operation, then you pause over the triangular piece, which is the vetriol, until it is restrained.
And then return to your work before the patient has recovered from the treatment, before they are washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one while you cure the other with this treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36:
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and of that which is in the groin and of the other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to cotton, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division and are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of black color, of little pain, then do not touch that one with iron.
And if it is of red color and the pus is thick, then do not touch that one with iron for fear of infection; leave it until it is matured, and then either you will burst it or it will burst on its own.
And if it is white in color, smooth, and its surface is thin, then this is what should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, depending on your operation, if the abscess has completely healed or if there has been any reduction; and then squeeze the patient by the sun, and the head of it should be in the palm of your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, leaving the instrument, which is a very noble tool:
And it should be made of silver or of iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, and catches on that your palm, then take lancet and place that in the abscess, and pull that to the parts forward as much as possible. Or another thing that you pull from some of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the shape:
Or another thing that you pull from some of the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the shape: And it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts are curved, so that the tip of each of those is at the end of the other, sharp, which should be made of iron and sharp.
And if this instrument is not at your disposal, then insert the blunt end of the following tool, which has the shape of this one: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And since you have inserted one nail, insert the other following this method of insertion, and then remove the insertion from the patient with clean water.
And if there is a flow of blood, wash the wound with water from the decoction of milled barley or of marsh-mallow and similar to those of the hemostatic causes, within which the flow of blood is restricted, and then apply care until it is healed.
And sometimes, some abscesses are also found in the groin, or other pustules like those two aurelhas, and insert those following what I said in the insertion of two nails equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her groin, the abscess tended to a dark color, with little pain, which had already closed her groin, and the woman was breathing straight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
The abscess had become so large that it had made two openings through the skin for two drains.
Therefore, I made an incision in one of the openings, and pulled out that one, and poured out a large portion from it, and then I incised the other part of the wound, and closed the mouth of the abscess, and covered her tongue, and then I placed the opening in that abscess.
And then I drained a large part of it, but not all of it, just a little of the pus. Therefore, the groin of that woman was completely healed, and soon she started drinking water, and then she began to eat food, and I did not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which I incised when it became large.
Therefore, you should apply heat and cauterize the wound of the patient, as needed; then approach and do not clean what God has done in that area.
Chapter 37.
About the beginning of an abscess when it is formed.
When catarrh affects the abscess and it is formed and long, it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind, thick and round, it is then called a boil.
When the abscess is cured with what we have said in the division, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that the pus has been removed from it and is thin, then cut open that which is aggregated round; and if it is at a length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and not at the center, then cut into the beginning of it, where there is fear over the patient.
And when you see that which follows the method that I have said of its whiteness and length, then make the patient lie down and prepare the instrument by which you process its shape and place the opening on the new one, and draw it out and cut open that with one of two instruments which are called in the beginning of two needles.
And make sure not to insert anything else there, but only that which is adjusted according to the natural term of its addition, for if you insert more, you will cause it to speak again.
And then, use what we have recommended for the incision of two moles, and cure that before it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, then use anesthesia in the cauterization of it, and the manner of the cauterizer is not just sharp water, but you should place the head of the patient on your thigh, and take the tongue of the instrument that we have said, and take the water that we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it to the living cause, and do not press too hard or thinly, and from this fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
The external part of it should be filled with the cavity in which the medicine is placed like the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument on the wound, and the patient should lie on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person enters through the intrinsic medicine, so that no cause remains on the surface of it and that this is not caused by that.
And then bring your hand to the medical instrument, and express it onto the uvula for several hours until it becomes denigrated and sedated by the bite of the instrument.
And if you wish, take a swab and wrap that over the end of the ray, and submerge the swab in the medicine, and insert the ray into a super-thin needle until the swab adheres to that needle, and do this so many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and after the cauterization clean it in the circuit of the uvula with a soft cloth, and modify what is in the circuit of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure it from the inflammation, and give gargles until it is healed.
And this type of cure is better than the beginning and longer than the fear.
Some wounds are cured with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and begins like this: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scorched Arabic pepper, camomile, broth, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and they should be submerged in hot water and boiled; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a small hole in the middle of the bowl where an instrument made of brass according to this method can be placed on top.
And the tip should be inserted into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula on the tongue, before the uvula becomes blurred.
And then repeat this treatment until it dries, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of an abscess, because it would adjust too much in the abscess, and do not think that you should do this, but rather declare the presence of the abscess carefully.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a cane and place a piece of charcoal at the end of it, so that the mouth of the patient is covered, as the charcoal prevents the smoke from burning their mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter thirty-eight.
Of the extraction of splinters and of what sticks to the wound and other causes.
Splinters or other foreign objects stick in the wound.
Then cover what you see with your eyes, as you use an instrument called a probe to examine the wound, so that you can determine what is inside it.
And what is not visible and is hidden in the wound, cover it with a piece of bread or rice or a cloth, or take a sponge and squeeze it firmly onto the wound, as when the cause of the wound is expelled by vomiting, or when the patient swallows a piece of bread or rice or a cloth, or when you use a sponge to absorb the blood, the hidden splinters are also removed. And then take an eel and cook it with a little salt, and remove the bones; or take a porous substance and place it on the wound and cover it with a bandage.
But if you do not remember those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
And it should be a bit larger than a small one, and on the outside of it, there is a cavity that you can place in the patient's mouth to facilitate.
And the patient's head is elevated in suspension, and be careful that the touch of his jawbone, so that it does not cause any damage to him or the needle, or what the doctor places on his hand.
But if the patient knows where the cause is located and can place it on the ground, and pull his hand up to the instrument, all this should be done according to the amount that is prepared for him before he forgets.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood attached to the jawbone.
When bloodletting is performed with the method we mentioned in the division of the cure of medicines and not with the lancet, consider this at the gullet of the patient while sunbathing, as you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see bloodletting, extract it with a small or precisely made instrument.
And if it is not possible to extract that, then take a concave canula and insert it into the gullet of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the canula, and do this for as long as the bloodletting is dead and does not come out of the gullet, and keep the patient without water all day.
And then take a full wet cloth and open the mouth of the patient with that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause touch it, and let the water remain for an hour, then another on their hand, where the bloodletting is now as if it were the water.
If the recommended remedy has not been forgotten, then sprinkle the patient with chamomile or asafetida using the instrument recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do that, in four steps.
Another way of performing the fumigation is as follows: take an open container filled with burning coals and cover it with a cloth that has a small hole in the middle; place this instrument in the hole; then stop the fumigation; place the patient's mouth over the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not wasted until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, as the lungs are quickly affected.
And if it does not catarrh, then repeat the fumigation more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this diet should be forgotten.
This is the form of the instrument used to treat gout in the foot; it resembles forceps at times, but has some curvature. which is placed on the foot, and its end resembles a heron's beak, which grasps, in which it is rubbed with a file, so that when any cause is found, it does not leave it.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the treatment and incision of abscesses.
Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of them from each one in this book.
And they are different in incision and section of them by various methods, one of which is for the special kind of abscesses that penetrates into itself; and because it understands the moisture.
And the second method is for the locations where the disease occurs in the body, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a proper treatment.
And moreover, some abscesses that are not perforated before maturation of the pus in them or their completion.
And other abscesses that are supposed to be punctured when they are ready, and are not matured according to their completion, such as abscesses that are near the joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged inside until the pus in it is drained, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will cause damage to the principal member; or it is near the anus, so puncture this unripe one; and do not puncture it crudely, from incomplete digestion, but the one that is near the anus, so that it does not drain the stool of that member and is prolonged to the parts inside the anus, and it is made a fistula, or that it is made in the term of it that is not healed. When you know that you are aware of the time for the puncture of the abscess, and it is when it is ripe.
And you know that it is ripe when the pain and fever subside, and the reduction of swelling and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you know that the puncture should be made in the area just behind the abscess and where the pus is coming from the inflammation.
And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bone of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the legs or feet, and in the location of the tendons, nerves, arches; and at the back, in all places equally in which it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to delay the puncture until after the digestion of that part according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that part before, the duration of the poor's life and movement is prolonged, and greatly increases the swelling and depth of that part.
If the abscess is not perforated according to the size of the flesh or the urgency, or according to what the member needs.
And if you administer a small perforation, in large abscesses, a large and wide or deep incision according to the size of the abscess.
And in other abscesses, where the cord is in the abdomen and is incised, when it is done so that the pus is removed and the wound is closed, as in the case of a hernia and a bubo.
And of those that have incised sections with three angles; and of those that are incised as if with the shape of a belt of myrtle, as in the case of abscesses in the groin.
And of those that are incised with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
If the one who does not have any incision similar to those is suffering from superficial abscesses, then you should make a shallow or just a simple incision.
When the abscess is large and has already collected a lot of pus, do not hesitate to pierce it; take out a part of it, and on the next day, remove a larger part, and gradually continue this process until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, or has a broken bone, or is a child, an elderly person, or in advanced old age, where the animal spirit is more mature and resolved with the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus from the abscess is little, or is a flat section; then you administer drugs of it or of a similar kind; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are wide, then gradually continue this process until they meet.
If part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or if it has been cut in that area, then cover it with old or new cloth, as when you have treated wounds or sores, their moisture; and strengthen it with a third day; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the ointments that enter before it is healed.
However, if there is bleeding during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in those cloths, and place that cloth over the location of the bleeding wounds.
However, if the bleeding persists, then cover it with a remedy and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in various places of this our book and of division.
However, if it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then cover it with powder in vinegar and oil, and place those on the locations.
If it is in summer and the wounds are fleshy, then cover them with powder made from ground bread and oil or vinegar and oil, and let this be done on the third day, as we have said, and then remove the pus and clean that area and administer to the patient whatever is appropriate for their healing within the time it takes to be cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, each abscess is cured differently by its own specific means.
Chapter 41.
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
Small abscesses in the neck, and especially those that contain tunics that are specific to them; and their species are their names.
And some of them are pointed, and those that contain moisture similar to honey. And some of them contain moisture similar to honey and pollen, and those that are rocky and hard.
In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one does not fear, as one should not make opposition to the extraction of those.
And the operation in the section of those is that you should use an instrument in the form of which you can approach it, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
If what contains is moisture, then split that instrument according to its length by section on the surface in this form:
And begin in the section of the line of B until the line of G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many wounds return, if there is any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian wax, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that the plague and leave it inside for another day, because that water corrodes all that which is from that layer.
And then repeat the process of applying the Egyptian eggplant second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that skin condition; then cure the problem with the eggplant until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it with this form: with a sharp cut in the shape of a cross, and then make an incision between two lips of the cut and scrape that from all parts, and exert your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
But if your surgical skills are not up to par, then do what I have previously told you.
And similarly, treat the abscess with incision and healing as we have previously told you; incising over an abscess that has already been drained is less painful, because it has little pus and little moisture.
And some people have such abscesses that they never get wet; the cause is that when you incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeeze the abscess, it feels like a deaf stone, rough, white, which cannot be washed, and if anyone touches it, they will be harmed.
In other cases of abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons of the haloes, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them so that the matter of the insanity to the lower parts.
And apply that which is appropriate for that of cure.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
And those which occur in the neck, and those which are engendered between them, and all scrofula of those is within its own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the special types of these scrophulas are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you see of good disposition in the Touching, the color of which is propitious to the color of the codena, and is not afflicted at all parts, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribs, and is not prone, but rather raised, cut that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the backbone between the lines of .G. and .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend two blades of the codena to the skin, or to the moles if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
And it is more caution not to cut the vein or nerve.
And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; because if you were to cut a vein or ribs and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the tissue trissat or other powders which keep the flux of pus, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the acuteness of the abscess and the tissue is becoming softened and is beginning to be suppurated. When the bone is removed.
Then return to your operation before you complete it.
And if there is any cause for the other small scrofulas, then enter those and cleanse those.
And if it is in the root of the large scrofula vein, then do not enter that scrofula from its root. Before you cut it with a sharp knife and cut it within so that it does not harm itself or others.
And then fill the wound with old cotton that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then heal that.
And if you enter that scrofula entirely, then cut the two lips of the wound and squeeze out as much pus as possible so that there is no excess remaining.
But if you see that there is excess remaining due to the size of the scrofula, then cut the root of that and drain it and administer sutures and that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains humidity, make a superficial incision where you see the location of maturation of the swelling, and stop the incision at the bottom of the neck, as we have said.
And then administer the incision with ointment and similar substances to those used for wounds, in order to corrode that which is causing the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then cure it with a generative ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess through the skin.
The ancients used this method in the abscess, and no one has seen any man in our land who made it that way.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have curvature, be careful that the extraction of the abscess is not done so that it does not cause damage to all the veins and major parts of the patient.
When there are boils in the mouth or throat or two eyelids, when the illness is not in the bone, cut away the section of the skin to prevent the loss that is caused by suppuration.
Therefore, when you want that, cut away the skin in three circles of the skin's circles, or four small sections for the length in the area between two circles by quantity, which the section is in cipher, not in cartilage, and this location is suitable for incision, which is private from flesh and the sinews of the bone are softened.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat outwards, and cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the sinews of the bone if there is any cause from those.
And then cut the sebaceous gland as we have recommended; and it means on the section of the canal through the flaccidity that is from that eye which is from that which is disrupted and by the abscission of the mouth.
Let the wound be open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour comes in which such piercing is feared, add two flaps of the skin of the wound, and let it alone with that solely as the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh not decay until it is healed.
And as Albucasis says that the summary of this speech we have recommended is an explanation that when such pus from those abscesses has filled the entire body of the patient, and the patient has died, and his mouth has been opened, and they insert a sharp instrument through his throat so that he can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that commander, let the wound be open until the evil of the patient is consumed; and that evil lasts for three days; and therefore, for that commander, thus the wound, and cure it within that it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant holds a knife and inserts it into the patient's chest, and that part of the lung tissue, and it was called a puncture for its treatment, and it relieved the pain as if it were the groaning of the dying, and it uncovered the plague and relieved the pain which was caused by the plague.
Therefore, it was confessed that there had been no incision of vein or bloodletting, and the wind was from the plague, and it was cured within that time when it healed.
And it did not happen to the servant unless she was bitten in the neck, and then return to her own dispositions.
Now I say that in the section of the appendix there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of the incision above the abscess that occurs in the groin, and it is called a hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And there are two types of pain, either natural or accidental.
In the natural type, there is no cure.
In the accidental type, one is similar to gouty nodes, and the other type is similar to abscesses caused by artery blockage, which is feared. Do not make assumptions about it like iron, but only in the case of a small one. And you should examine that one and compare it to the other, and if it resembles gouty nodes and is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise it like the nodes, and extract what contains the pus and bursa; otherwise, you should examine its entire condition and apply a remedy with something that is known to cure before it heals.
Chapter 45.
Of the section of the types of gout.
Of the types of gout, I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And it is difficult to distinguish between a node and an opening with such uncertainty.
So you say that an opening is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the superfluity ceases; and it is a putrid condition that now stops the fever, the pain, and the heat.
However, a node is not heat, fever, or pain, and it contains the cipher of Leo which is in the abdomen.
And if the color of the body is second, and its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, that one is fatty and contains moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
So, when you reach the cure of a node, extract that and inquire about that which is at the beginning of the instrument called the introducer, according to its form, which is approaching this.
And it is a matter of inquiry about abscesses and all nodes, that you take this instrument and introduce it into the wettest place that you find in the abscess, and you rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the flesh.
And then approach the last measurement of the abscess's size, and extract the pus and consider what is left in its footprints.
And if the current moisture, of whatever color, is forgotten, then you insert it with a dry, superficial section as I have mentioned in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the footprints of the pus, then you know that it is dry.
And dry on it with a section in the shape of a cross according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that with an ointment, and excoriate the cord of all parts to facilitate it, and keep the bandage or bag, if possible, on that and extract that pus from its root.
But if it is broken during the operation, it cannot be extracted, and wounds may occur due to that, and then you extract it before any cause from there.
But if it is broken by any cause, too much or too little, the root returns according to the most.
And if you see that some small part of it is missing, then apply some corrosive powders to the wound, strengthen the bandage, and place a poultice on the affected area, and cure the other from the other treatment until it is healed.
And if it is a large wound, then cut both sides of it and cure that one with that which contains it.
If the pulsatilla is present at that place, or not, then cover and fill the wound with three parts of tartar and leave it for two days or three until the wound begins to heal and the inflammation subsides; then return to incise that which remains of the wound.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and puncture.
Of those that are the forms of the instruments, and of three kinds, which are large, and of them some are wide, and of them some are small.
The form of a large probe is this:
The form of introducing the small instrument is as follows:
Made of iron, of silver, of well-rounded ends, in order that the instrument may be inserted into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named the albed, and one of them is called the berid.
And there are three species, of which one is large, the middle one, and the small one.
The form of the large experiencer, shape of it:
The form of the middle experiencer, shape of it:
The form of the small experiencer, shape of it:
It is convenient for those abscesses and wounds and fistulas and boils that enter among them, as they are of the bones and other causes.
And there are needles, large, lions, as with great needles that are used to sew the wounds, and they are made of bronze, or of iron, or of silver, and the best are when they are made of bronze.
And the black plum is made into experiments, which are said to have been opened for those who had fistulas in the cavity of which they were reflected, which were reflected by their levity at those reflections.
And there are three types, one of which is long and thin, and the other is short and thick, according to the size of the fistula and its stricture.
The large plum experiment form:
The thin plum experiment form:
The small plum experiment form:
The forms of the needles are of special types, one of which is simple, and has only one curve, and there are three types: large, medium, and thin.
And there are also curved needles, and there are three types.
And of those, some have two curves, and there are three types.
And of those, some have three curves, and there are three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single small nail, shape of it:
Shape of a large nail with two curves: Shape of a medium-sized nail with two curves: Shape of a small nail with two curves:
Shape of a large nail with three curves:
Shape of a medium-sized nail with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the sharp and pointed scalpels that cut and lance boils and abscesses, and they come in three kinds, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel:
Shape of a medium-sized scalpel:
Form of small scalpel:
The edges of those that are cut are sharp and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it is done well in the excision of the nodes, to avoid tearing the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and brings tranquility through a small incision, which is due to the excision of the abscess.
And these are the forms of needles, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as shown in the images.
They are made of iron and are similar to a needle, which is made of silver.
And it is in the edge where the puncture is made that the space is hidden and in that corner at the parts of the intestine and the abdomen, when you want, as shown in the images.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the aforementioned ones for the puncture of abscesses and do not perforate the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of wounds from which blood is removed, and there are three kinds; large, medium, and small; the forms of them:
are round shapes, somewhat circular, and some length, and they are thin.
And you must know that these kinds of wounds are large, medium, and small, because for those from which blood is removed at great speed in urgent cases, and when you first see them, there is no medicine.
However, you should not use these to remove blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the ribs of the chest and thighs, and on the ribs of the arms, and breasts, and belly, and groins, and similar to those of fleshy ribs.
Some veins are made of other small instruments similar to those of fish, according to this form; through which blood is removed when it is done by flebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
Some wounds are made round in this way:
Chapter 47.
About the care of men's nipples, which are similar to women's.
Some wounds are inflated to make men's nipples similar to women's, and then they inflate the nipples, and they assemble them with women's nipples, and they are distant.
And to the one who has that, cut those parts with a sharp blade according to this shape, from line B to line G, and then excoriate the whole scab, and place the flesh medicament on the wound, and adjust the two lips of the wound together, and cure it before it is healed.
But if the nipple declines to the parts below and is softened by its size as it is with women, then cut it in two at the base, and make two sections similar to the lunar shape, each of which contains the other at the end of each, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line B and the line G. And then excoriate the scab that is between the two lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure before it is healed.
And if you do not complete the initial treatment of that which enters due to the patient's discomfort and due to blood flow, then cover the wound with a plaque submerged in corrosive liquid and leave that inside where it will eat away at the gray matter, and cure that which is inside that.
Chapter 48.
About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the glans.
These abscesses that come from the glans are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pouch.
And of those, some contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be punctured with a lunar crescent-shaped section according to this figure: from the line .G to the line .B. And as soon as all that is inside the abscess is evacuated, then complete it with new skin and leave it until the next day.
And as soon as the skin has healed and has been treated with an appropriate liquid, it will be cured.
And if the abscess of the neck glands or scrofulous nodes is present, then you should lance it as we described in the section on scrofulous nodes equally.
If the plague is extended to an area that cannot be reached by cauterization, then administer it as we described in the section on that.
Chapter 49.
Section on the section of abscesses that occur by fistula or vein.
When the fistula is broken, and the cord that is above it is consolidated, then abscesses and signs such as inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by fistula, it is longer attached to the front of the body; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a crackling sound.
And the one that is by vein is located at the front of the body.
And section on this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are after the ribs, and in the angles, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is a great wound, therefore cover that its cure should be avoided, and those that are on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
When over the part that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the dry section in length; and then remove the section with tweezers, and remove the arch, and remove the tunics that are inside to be discovered.
And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with a double force in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
And then push the place between two ribs with a space inside that is enough to be in it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in the place where pus is generated before the ribs fall; and cure that with a suitable remedy to that before it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to section of a vein, then cover that you have your hand on the place where the abscess is, and introduce the needle behind the place where you have had your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that place double before you extract it from the other side, and tie the abscess with a thread according to what I have told you in the rib of a grape of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you fear that the thread might come out, then introduce the thin thread into the abscess at the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Then dry the abscess at the middle part of the patient before it is filled with that which is inside, and insert the excess of the thread, and leave what is left behind.
And place your hand over the powder that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure which is made from cloves and garlic before it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, when abscesses occur in the arteries and veins, and similarly, abscesses occur in nerves when they occur due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made in the place of the assistants or the tailor, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And if the abscess is large, and resembles the color of the other body, and is in the upper part of it, and when stretched quickly, feels like a great shock to the patient.
And if the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and therefore it is left to its own devices, and it is maggot-infested throughout and does not go to the wound or behind.
Therefore, those that are in the joints should not be punctured with iron, because it often causes contraction.
But those that are on the head or on the forehead should be pricked with a needle. But if the abscess is small, then use a pair of forceps and cut off that part.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an onion, scrape that part, and remove it; and place the bandage over the wound, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 51.
Of the section of the abscess that occurs in the mouth and occurs in the abdomen.
When many men have moles in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal because of their similarity to mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large body; and their labia are also converted, and they are from those that are small, and they are from those that are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller size.
And their labia were inverted and they bled, and moisture ran from that time.
Therefore, I inserted those and again in the one foot twenty-one inches deep, and the other six inches deep.
And the operation in their insertion is that you consider whether the patient is humid, and the color of the skin is white, moist, of subtle size; then you insert it with a spatula, and keep it in your presence, cauterizing it in the fire, because many warts are expelled from its section, which is very sanguineous; and if you find the blood, cauterize that.
And if you see the patient is purging and afraid, take care not to use iron; instead, take a recent plaster, strengthen that hand, which we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the stricture of the plaster strip; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, dirty plaster on the hand until it is removed and falls off by itself.
But if the hand is of large size, there may be some cause of fear and terror, especially in that which is in the belly.
But it is possible that you incise the hand of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then care for that until it is healed.
And be careful not to incise the hand that is of dark color, with little sensation, and regularly regrown, for that is cancer.
And when you come to the memory of cranes, stop.
Chapter 52
Of the cure of a high fever at the navel.
High fever at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the navel, which is on the abdomen, and the cloth or intestine follows according to what happens in the other ruptures; or by a scar that flows with blood or with an artery according to what is called this, or by constricted breathing in it.
If it is by a fissure in the navel and the protrusion of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is a lion's pain, and it appears in different positions. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then its position is similar to that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press that, the aforesaid symptoms are concealed, and then return; and very often it is like that, and it is a great miracle that it should be introduced into the bath and with great labor.
If it is due to moisture, then it is not hidden when you press your hand on it, nor is it constrained or crushed.
And if it is due to dryness, then these signs appear on the abscess, which are declining in appearance.
If it is due to flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and forms after a certain amount of time.
If it is due to tenderness, then the touch of it is soft.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the umbilicus is due to dryness of the sinew, or of the vein, or of tenderness; therefore it should be prohibited from treatment, because in those cases there is fear and fear as you were taught in the chapter where he said about abscesses due to dryness of the sinew and of the vein.
And if the prominence of the umbilicus is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you should command the patient to hold their own side and be extended; and then you should examine the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command it to be facing towards between your hands on the side, and then circle the span lat around the circumference of the umbilicus over the area where you have properly examined the tent; and then extend the membrane of the abscess to the parts above the inch great; and then tie in the circumference with a strong or weak thread and the manner of the ligature.
And then approach the abscess with a needle extended over the skin and introduce the said needle into that indication and try to puncture the intestine; and if you have not done so before or do not do so through the skin, then you extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts inside the belly.
And if you have found the sac, then take that lancet and scrape off its excess.
But if it is against your incision or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and introduce two needles into the circuit that you made around the abscess in the manner of crochet, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh extends and falls down; or scrape off that which is subtle and can be removed, and then care for that which covers the mucus inside which it should be healed.
If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no infection or moisture is present, then cover the wound as we have said and drain the pus or moisture from it, which causes the infection, and then cure that wound with a suitable remedy that covers and heals it.
Chapter 43.
On the treatment of the knee.
We have already said, in the division, of the special case of the knee and how to treat it with medicine, and that it is important to avoid ulceration in it; and we have said that the knee generates in the most and careful treatment of its cure.
The ancients said that some knee gangrene is in a location where it can be eradicated, such as a knee that is on the breast or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and more so when it begins small.
But when it is old and serious, do not cover it with yourself, because one cannot heal from that or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
And the operation in them is as we have said, that you precede by descending and lifting the patient and purging them of black bile for some time, and then sign it if you find a clear recurrence.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit any movement in those parts; and then explore every part of the body thoroughly without causing any reason for their complaint. And let the wound bleed, and do not open it again, and express the affected parts, and cleanse the wound thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from the instruments.
But if you find that the wound is bleeding profusely from an artery or vein, then cauterize it as soon as the flow of blood stops, and then care for it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 4
Of the cure of hydrophobia.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropsy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is not just the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to iron for the species of temporalists or the species of hyposarca, because that is deadly.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropsy temporalist with your medicines and do not combine your treatment, then consider, because if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropsy, such as in the lungs or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear of that.
But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydropsy only, and not in children or the elderly, then the method of the operation for it is that you raise the patient between your hands, and give it the exact position of its abdomen with your hand, pushing the water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take a sponge according to this form:
Should be of two sharp parts long, from the sharp extremity with space; but moreover should be in some brevity short by short, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and that it does not lead you.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, as it is customarily believed that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three digits below, in the right side of it over the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the intestine, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to a disease of the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not make your section over the side on which you wish to place the patient so that the excess fluid does not flow to that place foul.
And then perforate the entire cord with that instrument, and enter into that section, and lift your hand between the cord and the spine, and you excise it; and if the quantity of one finger or about.
And then pierce the skin until it reaches the space where the water is. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin iron, with which at the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on both sides of it there are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at the end like a quill, as follows:
And at the end of it there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, then the cotton on the instrument should be pulled out, and then the water is evacuated in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much water at once, it will cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of his spirit animal, or an accident may occur.
And then evacuate the water according to the quantity of the medicine and according to what means to you the patient's dispositions of the virtue of his leg and of his goodness.
Approach and extract the instrument, and retrieve the water that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you remove the one that is over the cipher of which and recommend to you that you pierce that second in that manner.
Approach and repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days, and guard yourself from error until not too much water is lost.
However, if you are afraid of the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then cure that one with burial in sand tail, and moisture in bath, and under the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the melsa and the finger close to the extraction of water, according to what I have said before.
Chapter LV.
Of the cure of children who are born without pierced urinary tracts.
Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or twisted straight or not in its place).
Therefore, cut the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a very thin blade according to this form.
And place a thin nail with a flat head on the twisted part and tie it for three days or four times a day.
And when they want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
If you do not place the flat head, the urine that passes over the wound may not clean this closure.
The one who has the twisted part should be treated with a flat nail, as we have said, for three days until it is straightened out.
Those in whom the twisted part is not in its place, the cause of which is that those who are born with the head of the umbilical cord in the wrong position cannot urinate at the proper times, until they raise the umbilical cord to their chest; and it is not at conception, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a malformation caused by lack of strength.
The method of the operation is that the patient should lie on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards your left hand with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the place of the pericardium at a sharp angle, as if inscribing with a pen, or not cutting any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the tip of the knife and that the blood flows into the second place after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation of flushing, four things may happen; and pause at that moment when you are cutting the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the knife and in the foreskin and black and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the knife.
Four things happen to this white matter in the knife and its sharpness and the flesh of the meat.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is not.
Not malignant, cover it with a thin oil and cut into that which the entire body of the monks; and place your hand over that which is submerged in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with the oil inside that it is healed.
And if the tumor is malignant, of red color, then cover it with what you administer cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if the tumor is on the prepuce of the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is in the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with what you remove which is inside the prepuce before it consolidates; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not ensured that it will not be three.
And already, accidents have occurred in the genitals and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover it with what you conquer all that which is already blackened and which is voluntarily corrupted or which is already corrupted; and apply lines on top of that with this ointment, which is beaten with flour of millet and of thistle and crushed.
And then care for the other wound until it is healed.
However, if there is excessive blood flow, then administer the following cautery in this way:
where the helpful cautery is placed at two positions apart, near the wound and on the surface when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and is destroyed completely at once, then place a urinary catheter in the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is known, and it is not required to be circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess), then excise the blunt spatula until the ligament is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those extremely, then excise the spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and then carefully insert a thin needle through the foreskin, which is very thin and easily perforated by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a delicate instrument, which is already soaked in water to prevent other germs from adhering.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding until it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
On the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and it is properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that better operation and via the least painful way to save them from harm.
Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of the free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experience that the cause is that I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a spoon; and they use a bandage and a finger.
And I have already tried all these methods and none of them has shown better improvement than the use of forceps, or a thread that can be used like a nail, which can escape the sutures from above, where the foreskin is attached to two tunics, and the tonics are placed behind, and often it is necessary to have another incision and certain pain. And the method of healing that is done for cauterization and digital, which is used by surgeons, is not secure at the incision of the member's extremity, as it often enters into its wound.
In the operation, a nail is used, which can cause harm and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and it has been stretched in such a way that it does not require any suture, and I have seen such cases.
More than the suture that is done with forceps and a thread that can be used like a nail, the goodness, as I have discovered to myself, is because the forceps have a proportional incision, for which reason the sharpness that is above is equal to the sharpness that is below; and so when you place your hand according to two sharpnesses in one time, and the incision is made at once; and it is done by compression of the nail according to a figure containing the foreskin of the penis in all parts, which does not make any mistake at all.
And the first step of the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, and do not make him move more than necessary, and let him lie on his back until the next day.
And then try to make him as comfortable as possible in that position where he receives his understanding. And then make him as comfortable as possible in that position where he is prepared to hold his hands; and do not let him see the forceps; hide them in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on his back and blow into the crown of his head, and pull out the one that is sticking out from under his back, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
The one side of the forceps should not be sharp and the other side should be sharp, so that it does not damage the nail, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two thumbs.
The mistake in extraction is that it often escapes the entire or part of the internal neck, or it should be started from the beginning.
Therefore, cover that of your hour with your finger at the abscess of the place and that you insert it second equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and insert it.
If they have passed three days, and that swelling which is behind the malleolus has become inflamed, then you should let that swelling come out cautiously, excoriate it with facilitation, and incise the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful of the malleolus, so that it does not come out to that swelling.
And then cure that wound with those powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised from the tendon above measure, and observes the parts below, then that does not come out to that swelling.
And then cure that wound which we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
On the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to stone or congealed matter, or by sand or flesh, and similarly to those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
And if that liquid is not dissolved and you see that it is very hot, then apply the remedy above the patient, so that you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and sharp like a lion's claw, with a thin pen needle at its end, similar to a palm leaf and a sickle, to which a thin needle should be attached at the top.
And the way to collect the urine from that person is to bend and tie the end of the needle in the exit of the urine with wool or cotton for good adhesion; and insert the ends of the needle into the part behind the siringua, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce it into the needle, but into the canula with force. Then absorb the siringua in the border and in the album of honey.
And massage the patient on the bed, and apply a wet cloth to their forehead and back, and rub with olive oil and vinegar.
And introduce the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the area of the back; and then bend the catheter over the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is how the patient should be positioned so that the cause of the problem can be found, and not done in any other order, but in the way that it goes to the correct position.
And then extend the thread slowly, as the urine soaks the thread.
Then remove that and do for the cure of urine, and use a catheter, do not stop doing that and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
About the quality of bladder catheterization with the clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is congealed in that place, or it is constricted by a peduncle, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the cystoscope, and this is its form:
but it has a narrow opening, so it is closed. And in that place there are three parts: two on one side, and sometimes.
In the beginning is a cavity where that which is injected is placed, and it should be as much as that which is inserted, so that when any cause draws out the humors from there, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid should be drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then the instrument should be cleaned with naphtha in the battles of war.
Therefore, when you want to draw out humors from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw out that liquid which is injected into the parts above, so that the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the cystoscope.
And then introduce the catheter into the urethra as we recommended in the circumcision; and then apply moisture with that water, which moistens the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the catheter that is used to irrigate the bladder, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the shaft is inserted into the urethra.
And then take the bladder and place it in the water that you want to irrigate the bladder with, and then tie it tightly with a strong double knot, and then boil the water over the fire.
And then introduce the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the water as it begins to enter the patient's body.
If you do not see the bladder, then take a glass and make a circle from it; and then perforate it completely; and then introduce a strong rod through those openings, as if it were rolled up; and then add the circle where it was attached, so that you can place it in the water that you want to use for irrigation, and smell and taste it.
And then you bring that instrument to him and do it as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture from the bladder into your hand.
Chapter 60
Of the extraction of a stone.
We have already discussed the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone that requires surgical operation and incision.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
And I will describe it briefly and clearly.
Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mostly occur in children; and among the symptoms of this are that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its thinness, and appears in the sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower abdomen, and it is treated with oils.
And it is the healing of children who have reached fourteen years of age; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In young people, it is caused by something that occurs between those.
And of that which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is rare, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call cristeri, which removes all the fissure that is in their intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the formation of the stone through investigation of it.
And then press the intestine against their feet and hold it tight and strong so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it jumps out from some other place.
And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are placed under the patient, so that the bladder is entirely made to lean down towards the parts below.
And then approach that one and all of that one.
If you feel the stone in the abdomen, then immediately perform a section on it.
And if you do not catheterize the entire bladder, then apply oil to the bladder's left side, if the patient is a child, or the right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum. And approach the stone while it remains behind the bladder. And slowly bring that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that against the bladder's left side, and expel that to the parts of the abdomen where the section was made.
And command the assistant to press the bladder against his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand over the parts above, and his left hand to remain on the edge of the abdomen, which is behind the thighs, in the part where the section was made.
And then insert a thin, sharp instrument of this shape: And divide it in that place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, but towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision be made on the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse section, so that the incision will be wide enough and narrow according to the quantity that the stone occupies in that place, and not too much, because it is difficult to remove the stone which is in the buttock, and it has its disadvantages.
And you should know that there is a stone with sharp edges and margins, for which the extraction of it is difficult by that.
And that one is like a lion's claw, and it is round, and it is made of that material for easier extraction.
Therefore, if it is that one with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the incision.
And if there is not such a disadvantage, then forcefully push it over that, or gently pull it out with a handle of a tool that is similar to a knife, which does not slip from it; or insert it next to the tool with a curved end.
If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly widen the incision a little, and if you want to draw out pus, cut strongly through that with vitriol-triad.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise around it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is customarily said that you incise that with a great section, which causes the patient one of two causes: either death or because of the continuous distillation of urine, because the place is not completely solidified.
If you administer the expulsion of it before it is forgotten, or if you induce it through the fracture with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointments of aloe and of dragon's blood, and strongly that. And place that cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from bursting.
And then gently lay the patient on their side, and do not let the bandage come off until the third day.
And when those wounds have come off, rub the area with water and oil, and care for that abscess until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in the same place, it is adhesive and corrosive, and if it is similar to when the wound is in the bladder frozen, and for that reason the urine is prohibited (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the said wound and extract that wound, because it can cause the bladder to rot and decay.
And then wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and apply ointment to all of it, and use what is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And cover all the hours of the entire treatment that you have placed on the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urine cannot be passed, then cure that with this remedy that I will recommend so that you reach separation, because too many troops are said to be used for this treatment; and already I have extracted it, and it is that you take a piercer of iron, of which this is the form of it:
of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
And then take lithotomy forceps, and place that bladder under the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating until the piercer reaches that stone. And then rotate the piercer with your hand in that small stone little by little, and you perforate the hole of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because urine is already released.
And then place your hand on that area where the stone is lodged in the urethra, which is urinated out, and the patient is cured.
However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two faithful men on either side of the stone. And then carefully cut into the stone in that urethra between two blades. And then extract it. And then remove the surrounding tissue and modify the wound with a poultice made in the following way:
It is not necessary to place faithful men near the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other layer above should not be removed, for when the faithful man removes the tissue of the stone, the egrecian returns to its place and takes on the poultice.
And for that, when you have removed the faithful man above, you must lift the egrecian to the parts above, or return it to its complement and take on the poultice as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of kidney stones from women.
Kidney stones in women are rarely generated.
However, if one of those has a kidney stone, its treatment is difficult, and it is forbidden to use force.
The first method is for the woman to lie on her back.
And the second method is to find a woman who knows how to disrobe when the surgeon is casting, or to have one of the women who are having menstruation.
The third method is to find a woman who knows this art, mainly the operation is done by the surgeon himself.
And the fourth method is that the incision location over the kidney stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision, and in that there is fear.
However, if you need to do so, then it is necessary to find a wise woman who knows how to treat it.
However, if you are not allowed to do so, then find a smart and subtle woman, or present a wise woman who has experience in the matter of women, or a woman who has never left this art.
Then do that presently, and command the patient to do everything you tell them from the examination of the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover her with a cloth and insert the stone into her anus.
If that happens, cut that off from there and then command the patient to scratch over it.
If she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the stone into the patient's vagina and examine the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and feel around there well.
If that happens, then cover the patient's vagina with a cloth and gradually insert it into the opening of the bladder towards the parts behind the base of her virtue until it reaches the place where the cloth is.
Then scratch over that position of the patient's vagina at the place where the cloth is located and insert the stone into that part, and do not remove the stone from there until it is completely inserted.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then place the ray on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity you know the stone is located in.
You should know that the types of stones are varied: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have projections.
Therefore, you should know how many types there are of that stone for what you mean by that stone.
And if you want to draw out the sand, place the three-pronged spoon in that location and hold it there for an hour until the sand is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure to prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
And if you want to draw out the sand and know that the expulsion of the sand is from the arch that is incised, then place powder on that location and loosen those tools and structure, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will die. And then treat the pain.
Since the intensity of the wound decreases over time, and the wound becomes better, then return to your operation before the stone is completely forgotten.
Chapter 62.
On incision for hernia.
Hernia is not other than an accumulation of moisture in the white cord which contains the gut, and it is called a hernia.
And some veins are in the proper pancreas which nature has prepared in the part of the gut, before it becomes another gut; and this is the cord of the gut between the white cord which we have said, and it is not that but a scar.
And the generation of this hernia is due to the weakening of the gut, because that happens to the gut, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by an impact on the gut.
And this moisture has various colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or to blood, or red, or black, or white, or watery, and that is what is most common.
And the symptoms by which one can recognize this aggregation of pus: if it is in the white phage, which we have called, then the abscess gradually declines in length, like the shape of a bird, and appears at the genitals, because the moisture comes from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the patient's own flesh, then the abscess gradually declines from the shape of a bird, and it is estimated by some to be another bird.
And if the moisture is between the folds of the genitals and the white phage, then it is often hidden.
And when you want to know the color of the moisture, then you extract the color of the moisture from the abscess and compare it with the color of the bird's foot, which precedes its form; and if that color is found in the bird's footprints, then judge that it is from that bird.
Therefore, when it comes to the cure of this disease, then command the patient that they be bled if possible, and sometimes examine the wound.
And then place him supine on his back for some reason, and place something under his neck.
And then place yourself on the left side of him, and command the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to about one span from the coccyx to the division of the buttocks.
And then take a wide spatula and cut the coccyx from the inside to the length within the perineum.
And then make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be on the buttocks, until it reaches the white knee cap.
And then scrape that, and observe, and be careful not to incise that; and your scraping should be the same as that which is suspended above and subtly scratched according to the amount possible.
And then perforate the knee completely with water, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the incision with one finger, and extend the knee to the parts above; do not touch the coccyx that is included, and incise the knee in that way that is possible for you. And insert that into its entirety or in parts, and especially its subtle left side, because if you do not carefully examine the insertion of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the wound process of that part of the skin has been removed in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the cipher, return and adjust the two lips of the skin of the genitals with a sutura, and cure that as with the other wounds, until it is healed.
And if the wound is corrupted by another disease, then cover it with the veins that are above the suspensory, and remove the wound, and cure that as we have said.
But if the water is added in two parts evenly, then you know that those are the hernias; so insert that part second that you have made in the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you should clean the wound, and insert into the incisions wool submerged in oil or rose-scented oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and spread it over two genets and the navel of the belly; and cover those with folded cloths and powders, and tie them with a strip of linen that is second to this form:
And then take two pieces of cloth and their folds of wool carminated according to this similarity; and make them into the shape of the parts that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and add them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and the first one takes hold of the buttocks entering through the back, and the second one takes hold of the part of the underwear, and two extremities on two cushions and two other extremities on two ankles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
And some wedges are used to medicate this hernia artificially with a pointed cautery instead of a cut in the section; and it is that you take a fine pointed cautery and insert it into the crease of the thighs, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be covered before it is discovered that the white cipher contains water, and then you take a cautery in this form: e it resembles Greek lettering
And then puncture that abscess, and ignite it so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the abscess with fingers, and lance it with fingers, and lance it with a fine cautery burning; and scrape out that second one as much as possible until you remove all of it; and guard yourself from the heat so that it does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than other operations.
But if you find that the abscess is in conflict with the operation at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or if there is a flow of blood, then cover it and cure the contradiction that it causes for you, according to the treatment that is appropriate.
But if the patient is unwilling, and does not want the second operation because of its horror, then administer puncture according to what I have recommended; and when you are certain about it, because of what we have said about the meanings, that that hernia is painful.
Then carefully lift the patient over a raised cushion, and then make an incision in the lowest part of their abdomen, parallel to the length of the body.
And the incision should be wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water flows out continuously. And then care for them until the wound is healed.
But if there is resistance in the flow of water at that time, you should not make the incision: because if the white cloth in the orifices of the wound causes resistance and prevents the flow of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water can be extracted from the hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small tube in the pressure of the wound.
And you should know that the water returns, and is collected in vessels or jars; and as it is collected, then make an incision according to the same method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Chapter 63.
On incision over fleshy hernia and its treatment.
You should know that in incision over this hernia, there is great danger of perforation into the major organs; therefore, I see it best to remove it and save the patient.
And you should remember the operation in that case and the characteristics of the abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are attached and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive sharp aggravation, which is found in the muscles, or due to impact.
And its color is according to the color of the part, and it is not dark in pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And often it is a calcified abscess, of which the color is dark, and it does not cause pain.
And some wounds are made by the narrowing of the arteries, and by inflammation of those which already exist, or by inflammation of the veins.
May that which is caused by the inflammation of the archils be known as the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it at that place; and not that touch.
May that which is made due to the inflammation of the vein not be dispersed from it by any cause of compression at that place.
And it is possible that on this species and on the other flesh; and you insert the codena of the genetius, and bring the hook to the parts above, and extract that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensors of the vessels, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all of the part of the parts of the hook.
Therefore, if the hook has already been attached to those flesh, then you should remove the hook and insert that.
And if there is any adherence due to the white cipher, or between what is between the veins, then you should remove all of that adherence and insert that at the beginning round.
If the birth of flesh is at the location of adhesion, which is behind, then cover that area completely with what is there, and extract the pus as we have said.
So when your operation is completed, fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the cure of hernia that is in the thigh.
The thigh is an abscess enveloped by some envelope similar to a bursa, and it is difficult to perform exercise and ambulation on the patient.
And in the treatment of this illness, fear for that which precedes it is remembered.
However cover what they say operation in that second which they did first.
And say that cover what you do is to place the patient on an elevated stool; and then raise the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to the parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals, and tie it with the knots that are said to be at the base, which are exposed to the view; and hold those other ministers who you have, and extend them with great force.
And then approach the space between the ribs with a sharp cutting instrument to expose the veins that are inside.
And then remove all parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of arsenic, which are in the temples.
And then insert a needle that is sharp on both sides, and insert the first one in the first of the places where we have cut, and the other one at the end of them. And then approach those places with a straight cutting instrument along the length of the body, and extract what has been added from the putrefying and corrupted humors.
And then care for the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you want to be born healthy because they do not block the veins that come from one or two generations, as it is not bad for that.
But if you have cut through all the veins, cover them with testicles that are removed or that the testicles are crushed by those veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment from the beginning of the veins, and that they are covered, or that something is done so that it does not harm those.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen, away from the angles of the stomach wall, causing intestines to protrude through that rupture.
And this rupture is either from the abdomen or from its excess, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, strain, sudden movement, or lifting a heavy object, or similar actions.
The cause of this is that when it occurs due to abdominal extension, it happens gradually over time and does not occur suddenly, and it is an abscess that enters the body when the abdomen presses on the intestine.
The cause of this is when it occurs due to abdominal section, where at the beginning pain becomes very intense suddenly; and it is an abscess that appears differently after the initial apparent symptoms, and it is caused by the intestine, and the condition of the hernia is related to the parts of the abdomen.
And sometimes the intestine is wrapped around the hernia, and this is called an enterocele.
And sometimes the intestine is wrapped around the hernia due to pressure, and sometimes it enters the intestinal fissure, which is then held in place, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when pressure is applied.
And in the treatment of this disease, iron is often used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided.
The method of the operation of this is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity and follow your instructions as they return, and then place it on their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
And then place the string that is the string of the testicles above, and insert the string of the testicles completely through; and then fasten two pins in the section second when it is necessary to open the section with those.
And if the section second, according to the quantity that you can possibly have from that, is already open.
And then excoriate that skin which is located behind the coda of the testicles, until it is completely exposed from every part.
Then you insert your finger into that place where the testicle is located, in that place between the white skin, which is behind the coda, and between the second skin, and remove that adhesion that is in the part behind the testicle.
And then you moisten the coda of the testicles with the parts deformed, and extend the white skin on its left side, and raise the testicle to the part of the section; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind the solution completed.
And then check if there is any cause for the intestine wrapped in the white skin. If you find any cause, then you remove it from the abdomen.
And then cut into the part behind the scrotum, which runs from the back to the front, as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white cloth is cauterized, which we have called the beginning of the wound, because it sometimes happens that those cloths are affected by flux of blood, which is why we recommend leaving them in place until they fall off on their own).
If the wound is late in healing, then apply a solution of water and vinegar, and place it on the wound until it falls off on its own.
And then care for the wound with the other method of healing until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of strangulated hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that can be used for its cure with iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is alive; which is that you tie the vessels at the section above the wound; and then dry in the middle location around the abscess, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the pain according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
About the dislocation that occurs in the elbows.
Sometimes a fracture occurs in the elbows, as we have said, and I will show you the location.
And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, a fissure is made in the groin before the hernia appears; and this occurs because of the extension of the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to stretch, soften, and become inflamed.
And the treatment of it is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and you press the area of the inflammation with a cutting motion according to the size of three fingers.
And then pull out the white ligament that is inside the knee, which should be exposed.
And then take the rod and place it over the prominent part of the ligament, and press that on the front of the belly.
And then cover the two prominent parts of the rod's end with the ligament, and adjust one suture of those on the other.
And then remove the end of the rod, and do not insert the ligament completely, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause that you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you insert the fields, clean that and restore the wound within where it is consolidated; because the ligament contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the ligament of the testicles.
When the neck of the testicles is swollen in some men, it is softened by applying heat because the flesh that is inside is softened, and the condition is treated accordingly.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure of the patient to have him lie on his side, and place the entire swelling over the natural neck; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
And if you want, cut off the excess of the softened neck with three or four stitches and make a firm suture.
Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treatment of the other wounds until they are healed and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by reason it is allowed to me to remember it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows how to treat it when it occurs; and the other reason is that we have sometimes had the necessity of castration of other animals for our purposes, such as cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And so it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
In the case where it is done by attrition, the method of operation is to make the animal lie in water with its tail up, until its testicles are softened and hanging. Then take those by your hand inside until they are resolved and do not appear outside the touch.
In the case where castration is performed by incision and section, hold the animal and take the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory, and incise over each testicle with one cut through two testicles proceeding.
And then incise those that are left after each excoriation. Do not leave any of those on the cipherac with any cause, but the subtle cipherac which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by attrition, because attrition does not leave any cause of the testicles so that the animal desires gout.
And take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is where it appears in that space between the scrotum and the testicles, where there is a fold of skin.
And some of them contain urine, which is in the scrotum of the testicles.
In women, there is a special type: and it is that the fold of skin over the pubic bone is similar to two testicles of a man, a little bit above the vaginal opening, where there is the penis of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one from men and one from women. And it is that you should insert those parts adjusted inside until the opening of that, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
And in the second type of men, where there is urine in the scrotum of the testicles, there is no treatment or operation in that.
Chapter 21
Of lentils and meat that cause diseases in women.
Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until they become soft and are cooked properly; some women are magnified in certain ways within which it is spread as in men and through intercourse.
Therefore, you should have the excess of lentils on your hand or in an ounce and incised.
And do not incise too much, mainly at the beginning of the wound, so that it does not cause blood to flow out.
And then care should be taken for the cure of the wound until it is healed.
Meat that is not cooked in the cauldron of the mother until it fills that one, and often it is placed at the parts deformed according to its similarity to the meat (and for this reason, firstly they called this "bad stomach"); therefore, you should incise it as you would with lentils, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not perforated, or is very small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by previous disease, and that is made from meat not well adjusted or from thin or thick fibers.
And it is made in the forehead of the woman, or in her ribs, or in the most sensitive part of her, or in the lowest part of her, and it prevents crying out and engaging in sexual intercourse and menstruation, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the moon, if the obstruction is obvious, then proceed; but if it is not obvious, then you should look at it with your eyes or with a mirror.
But if the obstruction is from thin fibers, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand on both of his lips, and then press them together with the fingers indicated for holding the nose.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both lips with force until the thin wire is broken and the obstruction is removed.
And then take wool and pour oil into it and place it on the area to prevent the wound from being consolidated.
If the wire is thick and hard, then cut it with a sharp knife or a saw.
If the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
And apply the remedies that stop bleeding from wounds without infection, such as honey, sulfur, and salt, adjusted to the size of the wound.
And then administer a wide-mouthed glass tube to prevent the pus from being consolidated again.
Hold that position for several days and administer some of that liquid.
And then, apply the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes certain events occur in the main native land of other creatures, and then it is necessary to follow this method. However, if it is for a cranial abscess, then do not make any incision into the cranial abscess in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
Of the treatment of hemorrhages, tail, and red blotches that occur in the womb of women.
Hemorrhages are appreciated from the openings of veins until blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhages are stopped, they are thus.
I have already mentioned in the division the types of these and their symptoms, and I will now say which receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, say that hemorrhages and their stops when they are in the womb and do not appear to the senses, then in those cases there should not be made incision with a needle.
Those that are in the major orifices of the body, upon which one feels pain, are those that are cured.
And if you place the finger in the most painful area and then extend it with a sharp instrument or cloth, and scrape those areas with the razor.
And then powder those areas with one of the scraping powders, such as mustard and similar to those.
And then soak their feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that area in cold water.
If the discharge from the wound persists, then make that area into a poultice with bread and scraps of millet, grains, and similar ingredients.
And then take ordinary flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a poultre with that mixture on the back of their hand.
And if the wound is suppurating, it is good; and if not, make it adhere with two bandages, and scarify the breasts with that.
And then take wool and apply it to the affected area with coliandre or arnagloza or guarravier or vinegar, making it stick to the area; and then care for the area until it is healed.
And care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Of the perforation of a hernia accident in the great.
Special types of accidental abscesses in the great, such as carbuncle and lapident abscess and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and fistulas emorroyas and raguarrias and thyl and other abscesses. I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And if you want to know in this treatise about abscess surgery which is done in the great when it comes to abscesses that collegeysso sania, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with a knife.
Then consider whether the pain from the abscess in its beginning is sharp and caused by percussion, flexion, and fever, and if it swells and becomes hard over that sensation, then do not pierce it, but cure it with a remedy that helps with its maturation until the intensity of the accidents ceases.
Then consider whether you should apply a cushion on a bed that has two cushions; and lie on your back over it and adjust your feet to the part of the bed that is farthest from the belly, and expand your thighs, and place your hands under your head, and apply a suitable bandage to this wound.
Then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the form of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you should place your hand on the opening of the major opening of the woman, and that what enters into the major opening should not be wider than the opening of the major opening and should not harm the patient. If the tool is larger than the point of the main instrument, then you should place powder on the surface of the main instrument's point to prevent the tool from entering the main instrument's point.
And you should place the thread that is coming out of the tool above and let the assistant hold the tool and rotate the thread into the main instrument's opening.
When the cauterization is ready, and it touches the hand and the lion and is wet, then you should remove that from the main instrument's head with a sponge.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you should place a sponge soaked in rose oil or clear oil in which there is some stupidity; and place the cloth in the section of the main instrument's point.
And then clean the main instrument and place a cloth soaked in water in which there are some flowers on the penetential.
And then it should be cured after two days with the appropriate ointment that is suitable for that until it is healed.
Some wounds are washed with the largest and flattest cloth, which is crushed with water and honey, and then return to the wound, which is filled with lily or astrology longue water, and then return to the wound.
And if the wound is deeply embedded in the largest cloth, then you should not be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the fetuses are best treated when they are not in a natural position.
It is necessary that the midwife knows the natural position of the fetus by smell of it, and when you see the woman giving birth to the parts below and desiring to smell the air, and over that is removed by what is on her, and the head of the fetus is fastened on its own head, and the second part is hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, make sure that the patient's belly is gently compressed so that the fetus does not move too much, as it may cause harm when raised above its head, and the second sign is called superfluity, which is beneficial for good delivery.
If this is another part of the body that is not natural and not usable, because when the fetus is on its feet and the head of the patient is in front of the head of the fetus, and the hand of the patient is on the foot of the fetus, or the head of the fetus is on the hand of the patient, or the hand of the patient is on the belly of the fetus, and it is strongly turned over its own neck, and similar to the figures of the patient not usable.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And by showing all the figures of those, and what kind of engine is in them so that it can be understood for that and stand on that.
When the fitting is done on the patient's head due to natural heat, and it is very painful for the woman, and the difficulty of that part is great, and sometimes the virtue of it has already been weakened, then do that procedure, or what the women had before, and evaporate the condensation from the patient with fenugreek oil and warm humidifying.
And then insert the menstrual pad between the patient's legs and tear that second skin, or dry it with a cloth until that water is removed from it. And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
But if it does not come out, then cover the woman with a mixture of honey and fenugreek oil.
And then command the woman, and the midwife, that she be calm and do that sucking with a condition; and give her mouth and nose for an hour, because the child is often born quickly.
And if the two mothers of the child are not born at the beginning, then gradually cover them with that facility small by small. If the patient does not obey the instrument, then pause the foot on a chopping block and lift the feet off the ground, and then carefully place the chopping block on the ground; and the foot should be held so that it does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not intact and the flesh is dead, then insert those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or apply a bandage to the wound on the patient's chest and remove that equal part, which will be for the wound.
When the patient is lying on its feet, then cover those with you and gradually turn the patient into a smaller one, and then equalize that, and then take a foot of it and extend those little by little.
If they are not inserted into the spaces, then command that patient to express itself, and make that external part conditioned, which will be for the wound if God wills.
And if that is not possible, then gradually return the patient little by little until you reach the second natural figure, which will be possible at that time.
And if it is prohibited to use all that we have recommended, then take some mallow and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and then apply this mixture to the lower part of the woman's belly. And then make that ointment in clear water until it reaches the desired consistency.
And when the parts placed on the patient are softened, then apply mithridate and rest it on that. And when the subfumigation lasts for an hour, then apply it on a cloth, and then make that powder and extract the mouth of the patient, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of the belly against the stomach with strong compression, which will relieve the pain.
The patient lies completely on one of their sides. If possible, reduce the abdomen of the patient, but if you cannot do that, then lift the woman and make her go to the bathroom.
And if she cannot go to the bathroom, then make her lie on her left side, and shake the parts of her vigorously, and gradually administer laxatives that you have and recommend them for enemas.
When the child is born, then make that sign on the brazen tablet, and study the reduction of the womb, and equalize the figure of the woman, and make her vomit and command her to understand whether she has been delivered.
The child is lying on its back, with its hands expanded and its foot at the side of its mother. The midwife should hold the child's womb and gradually turn it, and that should facilitate.
And when it is equalized and how much it is, then pause over the child's chest with that which we have recommended for oil and mucilage.
And then command the child to gradually open its mouth, and when you have done that, then make that sign on a brazen tablet and command it to be inclined over the right side, and then command it to understand; and make it vomit. The exit of the prepared child is on the side.
When the midwife inserts her hand into the mother's womb in this manner, consider, and then you insert the second finger into that which should be emptied of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then insert your hand into the abdomen to prevent it from being retained and dying.
And then gently push the fetus towards the parts that are not covered by the second sheet, and send the woman to get some rags, and let the midwife do her job, if God wills.
The outcome of many twins or multiple fetuses. Know that the rags used for twins or multiple fetuses are not natural, and sometimes three or four are needed, but that is strange and causes distress; but it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by the cord in the navel of each of those, and some rags are used as if it is a fetus born naturally, and its use is with some rags for unnatural purposes, as we have recommended.
If it is difficult to remove them from their position and they reach the condition we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have reported.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what facilitates and subtlety, and is timely, and has engineering according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and it is already verified that one woman aborts six times, and another gives birth to all of them, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious saints.
And all of this should be in the knowledge of the midwife that it is very useful for that part which resembles that, and therefore pause on that which she knows.
Chapter 76.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and you find that the woman is of healthy virtue and not affected by any of the accidents for which she is feared to be lost.
Then the woman should be lying on her left side, with her head leaning to one side and her legs raised.
And the assistant should hold two of her hands or be lying on her left side to prevent the woman's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
And the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then insert her hand in the womb to help with the extraction of the fetus, and then press on the area where the umbilical cord is attached to the fetus.
In these cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to be born and then you feel for the umbilical cord in the neck of the fetus, or in the collarbone, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or behind the beard, or in the shoulder blades, or in the locations appropriate for the ribs.
If the swelling is on his feet, then in the plantar fascia, or in the middle of the back.
And hold the needle with the bent part of the hand, and place the curve of the hand over that place between the thumb and index finger, and insert the hand with ease and put the needle in any of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
Then place and hold another needle in the same position, or the third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched too much.
And let the needle be inserted at all parts, so that the pain of the tooth is relieved as it is done in the extraction of the tooth.
And hold in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold some oil and insert those experiments and turn those that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the flesh is forgotten, then move the needles to another place that is more appropriate; and do this until all the flesh is forgotten.
If the limb is bent towards the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that area with a cloth; then extract it from within so that everything is removed, and incise it at the joint or in the groin.
And do the same in the other limb and on both feet.
If the head of the bone is large, or if there is an accident in the traction, or if it is not properly adjusted to the cap, then insert spines between the said parts and saw through the head and extract the bone, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will be shown in the figures of other instruments in the capital.
And similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then cut it with an osteotome or use an instrument as we have mentioned; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is bent and tractioned by the collarbone, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest is drained.
If it is not complicated, nor obese, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the wound in the belly is pus-filled or is in the hydropic state, then you should pierce that part where the moisture is located.
If the wound is on the soles of the feet, then the direction of the wound should be towards the mouth of the great toe.
If it is tightly bound, then you should remove the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand, and then incise the belly and chest where that moisture is located.
If the other members are still present and the head returns, then insert your right hand into the mouth; but if the mouth of the great toe is open, then insert your hand into the opening, encircle the head, and pull that hand towards the mouth of the great toe, and then insert one or two fingers.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of warm, thick humid causes. And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pierced: and that which we have said about the live wound should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised with a knife, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of death in the second stomach.
And when you have completed all your work, then administer that which we have said about the cure of abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
And if there is a flux of sanction, then dismiss them into strengthening waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was born dead, and another woman approached the fire, and another made the dead one. It happened to him that for a long time he had an abscess in his belly; and when it opened, fire came out, and he began to shake his arms.
And I was called to treat him, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed some strong-attracting plaster on him and waited several days, and then removed another bone; and I was very amazed, as there were no bones in the belly.
And then I thought that they were from the bones of the dead baby.
So I continued to remove the wound, and extracted from him several small bones, the woman existing in her many positions, and had been like that for a long time, correcting her little arm.
And I did not affirm that it was strange, but rather that in that case there is knowledge and help for that which the skilled doctor gives for healing administration.
Of the forms of tools that are necessary to extract the fetus.
The form of a spoon is used for this purpose:
This is the form of a forceps in which the free parts are grasped, to which grip two spoons are attached at both ends of two handles. However, this spoon should be more slender than a constrictor, and it should be made of soft or bamboo wood.
And the thickness of each handle should be two fingers wide and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measured staff, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the spoon so that they can be grasped when you turn the two prescribed spoons.
Another form similar to that of a more subtle and less painful one:
Should be made from wood or bone according to the appearance of forceps. But at the end of each of these additions there should be sometimes with handles, and the length of those handles is one span, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you place your hand on the left side of the feet hanging down, and put that which is between the patient's thighs. And then raise your hand with the instrument that is similar to forceps, according to the amount you want of the appreciation of the mouth of the larger one until the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of virtue which the ancients said:
Form of impelling which is pushed against the fetus:
Form of an amidate which is held in the large head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are sometimes handles, and some of them are made long like forceps according to this form, sometimes with handles which are sharpened and held. Form of administration for the remedy:
Form of application with a needle:
Form of application with two needles:
Form of spatula with two ends, where the tip is removed:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and as more species of them are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it becomes easier for their operation and also easier for the people due to their quantity.
And you should not be without those instruments, whether they are in your possession or not, as the need for them is not excused.
Of extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is held, you should command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then perform that sternutation condition, and place your hand on their mouth and on their nose, and if by chance it is deformed or broken, so be it.
And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover with a needle and place it in those herbs that are burning at the mouth of the mare, such as calamint, rough mint, and camomile, and Arabic and cassia wood, and santolina. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the egg, and place it on the fire.
And then place a canula of canary bird in the mouth of the mare, and hold it inside until the vapor comes to the concavity of the mare.
And then do that which we have said, and the second time remove it quickly.
If this cure is not effective and does not work, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and place it inside the womb and massage it, and when the second time she has found it, take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the prepuce of the mare, then place her second hand as we have recommended, and when she has found the second one, extract it little by little correctly so that the mare does not choke from the force. Before placing the patient on their side to facilitate the procedure.
And if the mouth of the main doctor is covered, we have already recommended the cure by sneezing and the medicine of the eye with herbs.
But if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard this so that you do not perform it in an iteration of abstraction, but rather bring what is necessary from the patient to the mouth of the main doctor and apply it to the woman's cushion with chalk and tetra-pharmacon; because that will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten after a few days.
But when it dissolves, raise the patient's head and stomach, and that will help the patient; and then bring what is administered as sub-fumigations and appropriate for that.
But the ancients have already discovered the use of sub-fumigation with nitrous and dried figs.
Form of an instrument by which the woman is submerged in steam for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
It should be made of iron or brass.
And it should be placed with the narrow end in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the steam should be poured over the arms of the fire.
And hold that one until that steam is consumed and repeat another.
For the cure of the child's non-perforated anus.
When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have been thin and oiled. Then ask the midwife to pierce that thin oil; and if not, pierce that space sharply, and make sure it does not touch the tail.
And then place over that wet and oiled cloth; and then cure that space until it is healed.
But if you fear that it will become oily, then place a tube in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And if there is an accumulation of pus or abscess in the anus for consolidation; then cut that consolidation and cure it with what we have said about the cure and the plaster.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the body, which are caused by the pressure of the intestines or in the space between the thighs.
And if it is a fistula or a fistula.
And if that condition is ancient and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate some of these fistulas.
And those worms are known by the fact that they come out through the anus and by their softness; and some use the patient's excrement for this, and often they come from these worms.
And some of these fistulas are worms in the space that penetrate into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these worms penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the back of the thigh.
When it is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula in the anus, you insert your finger into the anus, and then gently insert a thin iron probe into the fistula when there is no tenderness.
If there is tenderness in that area, then gently insert a thin bristle or horsehair probe into the area until you feel the probe or the hair in your finger.
If you do not feel any of these symptoms or if there is no cause for constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then it is non-penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
When the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra, then the meaning of this is that it is urine from that area and prohibited for that location to be treated with medicine so that it can be healed.
If it penetrates into the joint or bone and causes pain in the circulation, then it is likely that the probe will perforate the bone if there is no tenderness in the bone, and cause pain in the circulation of the affected part; and that it may not be healed quickly; and that it is not suitable for this medicine, nor is it consolidated with a poultice.
And in all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for everything, and the cure of those is laborious and depends on the knowledge of doctors upon which it is based.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is simple according to what I have advised you, and that which has already been done and tested.
And it is that the patient should lie between your hands above his stomach and raise his legs into his abdomen, the cushions should be inclined towards his belly, and then insert a probe, or a piece of cloth if there is turgidity in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
And if the patient feels pain around the anus, then you should introduce your finger into the anus.
And if you feel the probe already penetrating, another thing is to feel between your finger and that part of the flesh, then you will certainly know that it is penetrating; and therefore do not treat in that place, because it is not healing, as we have said.
May it be said that this is a sign of health in some men.
And of the medicine for which it is hoped that it will be greatly helpful in this, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously described, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and then repeat that dose or three times until you know that all those tissues adjusted by the fistulae that resemble a quill of a goose are adhered.
And then care for those wounds wrapped in bandages until all those tissues that are adhered are completely healed; and then care for the flesh-generating and consolidating medicine, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it is not healthy at any time by another treatment.
And if the thread goes in and does not penetrate into the wound that is in the anus, and between that and the thread that is covered with flesh or fat, and if the fistula is in that place where it touches the surface of the bone, then dry the bone from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the thread is dry, and it should be in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the end of the thread is, and through the thread it is released and catheterized.
And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a quill pen and do not have any cause.
However, if there is blood flow between you and your operation when inserting those fistulas, then milk the milk that is there and use the least sharp instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because a cauterizing instrument with fire adjusts well: it adjusts those fistulas and extracts the blood from the excesses of humidity.
And then care for those calluses that are wrapped in cloth or in a three-fold way before that place gets warm, and then care for the wound by applying a hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And use those medicines that have stoptic and dessication properties; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
However, if the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the body, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that one.
And if the tent is placed between you and the patient and it is made of silk or flesh, and it is prepared for penetration, at that moment it is not an operation on him but a second way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer it in him one of three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach the cavity of him so that you can enter the things and the proposed cure, and do not process any cutting so that you do not pierce the skin containing the gut, and what happens on the patient is immediately after the procedure; and then cure that with that which we have said that is very useful for healing; or to lengthen that tent and wound that which secures that entrance into the gut, as we have said, or with that tent or another sharp instrument, and then muffle those fistulas that are in the section of the gut where you can perform cauterization; and then force yourself to make the restoration of all the part affected by the section, and if the opening does not consolidate, and remains open in the part of the buttocks, and is more serious for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the rectum and on the edge of the rectum, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
And insert it into that surrounding layer of vessels or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the rectum nearby, then you extract that thread from where you inserted your own into the rectum; and extract the end of that thread and adjust both ends, and leave them for a day or two, and when more of that thread is inserted into the flesh, remove those parts that are between the two ends of the thread and that cause pain.
And then cure the wound where it has become consolidated and healed.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate, in whatever way you prepare, but not too much so as not to injure the skin; and then apply medicine to that area until it is healed.
The shape of the spatula that is used to pierce the fistula: its curvature is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not injure that which is not necessary, sometimes.
Of stitching of hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Hernias are of two kinds, one of which is between the buttocks and resembles a bag, or those which are like a hernia of the groin. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its cause, and its location in the buttocks, and at the edges of it.
However, those which are located in the buttocks according to the few amount of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small amount of swelling, and its color is like that.
And the cure for that which is in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and expel it while the fetus is still developing and the placenta appears to you. Then you kneel and hang your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and then incise those parts of hers that are her ribs.
However, if your fingers are not suitable for those parts due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a rough piece of wool, and extract them with the tongs, and then incise those and powder some charcoal dust over them at the beginning, so that they become a cauterizing agent; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the wound does not open, then christen the patient with a small bitter herb, and wash him with that water which is in the womb and which facilitates the opening of the wound more when the patient expels it.
If the swollen parts deform the anus, then the cause is probably feces, and you should remove them with your nail or with a spoon, scrape them off, and then care for them with what we have mentioned until they are healed.
And that person who previously inserted should administer a second suture according to this method: take a thread and wrap it around the needle, and then extract the swollen parts from the upper parts, and let that penetrate with the needle in the center of the other part, and wrap the two extra parts of the thread on the part behind the needle, and lengthwise; and strengthen the swollen part with the structure strongly, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
And do that to all of them, and leave one of them undisturbed so that the excess blood from that one can flow out of it.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose-scented oil or salve on the anus, and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that person in that bed; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or some other treatment until they are healed.
And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then you should apply those with a needle or your nail into which they have been made wet and hold them over the scabs of that pus above, which prevents them from consolidation; and then cure those that have consolidated.
And then apply those with very strong pus that the first one has been healed and have been excoriated; and then cure those that have been healed.
It is known that hernias, it is not known, and not if not noted redon like the color of the body similar to the crown of a helmet, and it is made in the whole body and especially in the parts behind the feet and those, and it causes pain for those who have them.
And then, cut that which is in the circle of the claw, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its capital.
Warts are small, sharp, round fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
The cure for it is to extend and cut that one, or to remove it with forceps or a needle. And if you wish, cauterize that one as well, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
Ants are small, feathered or large fistulas on the surface of the body, and when they bite that one is centipede-like in appearance, and it is made around the body.
The care for that is to take a needle made of iron or copper, and it should be strong, and place it on the edge of the wound where it contains the circle of the needle parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle of the wound, and place it at the front of the flesh, and remove the worm from its place.
And if you want, do that with a needle made of silver or iron in this form:
The part above the needle should be thin and sharp, not piercing (not perforated), wrapped by someone who knows how to make the wound and the rotation of that.
And if you want to cauterize the worm according to what is called in the cauterization of athyls in the chapter of cauteries.
In the form of the instruments that are administered to give chastity.
Some virgins are made chastity of silver or copper or iron melted or hammered; and some virgins are made of those instruments small and large according to those with which they are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose asses are fat or doloyrozes, the chastities of those should be small.
The large and small intestines:
The tip of the catheter is placed above it, and the bag should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is placed, it should be like this.
The end of the catheter is left, which is inserted into the anus, and should be thin (if it is not open) like a lion, behind a subtlety; and on one side of the catheter's two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
And the bag in which the medicines for the bladder of an animal or wool of a sheep are placed, and the reason for it is one palm.
And it should be pierced with a thin needle according to this method; and if the space between the holes is the largest, then
And insert the thin needle firmly into those holes, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the intestine between two distinct strong constrictions, and then inject each hole: May the quality of injecting each hole is that you fill the medicine bag, which should be scalded according to the tolerance of the patient; and beware that it is not too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be turned on their back, and their legs raised, with something under them like a pillow or a blanket; and then apply some ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or fenugreek mucilage or similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the nurse should hold the basin and express what is inside until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the cristero and the patient can lower their legs against the wall.
And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient sleeps throughout the night, it is better to do so in a bed.
But if you administer the cristero to the patient in the solution of the bowel and the expression of it, then repeat the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are moles or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp cristero, of the kind that children's cristeros are made of.
Of the treatment of wounds.
It has already been said in the division of the treatment of wounds that this is suitable for free people, and thus it is said about the treatment of those who are not free and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what kind of wounds they are and where the wounds are located.
And the causes for which some wounds are made are similar to those of a stone, or incision with a spear or a dagger, or percussion by a lance, or a mace, or a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
May the wounds that are in the parts of the body be similar to those of a head wound, or neck, or chest, or stomach, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And it is recommended that some wounds be treated according to that reasoning and rule for other wounds.
And I will begin with the simple plagues of the head, as the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore it is said that when a simple head plague occurs and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and has only been treated with saliva and is very painful and you fear the patient may develop an abscess, then you should first apply leeches to the cephalic region, and do not delay; and then extract the stone according to the amount of its virtue if no other cause prevents leeching, especially if the stone that was in the plague is small.
And if leeching is not possible on the opposite side of the affected part, then keep the patient on a soft diet and avoid heavy foods.
But if there is any cause that prevents mincing, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And if an abscess develops in the plague, apply a poultice of rose oil or of something else that is stiptic.
If you are sure of the abscess and pause on the wound, if it is recent and its pus has not changed, then apply a little powder that I will recommend soon.
If the air has already changed, then pause on the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and its lips are not adjusted by pegs, then adjust them according to what I will recommend about their stitching.
If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and meat, and is not retained but only a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to be fed on foods in which there is grease: caps and forms similar to theirs, until it is complete.
And if the flesh in the wound putrefies and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which unhealthy blood can flow, and it is not removed by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find it not incised, then you should incise it with a needle or ligate it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the unhealthy blood is being removed.
If these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is easily found; however, if you powder them with this powder, which becomes solidified in the presence of air, it moves those wounds.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished herbs; mix all this together thoroughly, and fill the wound, and hold it in place with a good constriction inside the body, and coagulate it with the blood.
Then tightly bandage the wound above with the powder and leave it there until it does not become infected, because it cannot be cured from there by medicine until it is healed.
And some women used to do that alone, when they were not in your presence and had no dragon.
And this meticulous operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place them over those and to straighten them, and their recent wounds are left open, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially in the summer, then do not apply this powder, but first cure those with what we have said, either by placing it on those wounds with a decoction of bread and water that has been boiled; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if the wound is a fracture of the bone, and it is small, then you should extract that with this method.
And I will describe the cure of fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the pain occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the pain of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in that engine but rather avoid treatment with that which causes very strong hemostasis, as ziniar and zegi say that it is veratrum and similar to their quar nozo to the nerves and contracts them. And do not place your hand over any cause of the pain, because the substance of the nerves is fragile and its continuity is attached to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured by false medicines, as if it is caused by washed with hot water, some vinegar in olive oil roasted or not roasted, and then when washed with hot water and the other stones are minced according to this manner, and found humanity.
If the pain is great, then administer stitches, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders until it is healed.
If the pain is deep or there are accidents at the lowest part of the foot, then prick it in the most depressed area.
If the pain is already cutting an artery and blood flow is achieved, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the spines of the horse's tail have already been cut off or completely, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the lips of the suture on the canal of the tail and do not touch that; equal it to that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with a structure decent, and leave it for several days; and care for it with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitacio until it is healed.
If the pain has already made fractures in the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all those that you can from it; and what is not visible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and it is separated and the wound is healed.
And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the same powder that was recommended to you. But if the wound has formed an abscess, then treat it with the same remedy that will soon be remembered in its capital.
If the lancet or needle is inserted, and you can see its depth, then consider whether the wound has bleeding when the patient inhales; then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the wound is recent to its source, then you place powder on it during the first hour, and do not strain it so that it does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the body and that no one harms the patient, but rather place a moist cloth on it.
If the wound is not present, then place your hand on the opening of the wound, to let out that which comes from the moisture; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid can drain.
If the wound has been open for three days or more and no spasms, tremors, heart pain, or stricture have occurred, and other symptoms are good, then know that the wound is healing; and therefore treat it with compresses and other treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore treat it according to its capital.
And if the wound is due to a cut of a blade or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the skin or back, then treat it with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If the wound has already formed in the bones, and it is not healing, then twist the wound and try to extract those fragments, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then remove the intestines that may cause the pain, as their extraction is beneficial.
And of the other pains that occur in other members, the cure is the same as what we have mentioned.
Of the pains of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or middling.
And disruption of the small ones is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so do not delay in inserting them to their proper place as soon as possible, because if they are opened and become swollen, the instrument for them becomes difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is middling, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestines, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
You know that there are four ways to close a belly wound, but two common ones are suitable for closing wounds in other parts of the body.
Two other suturas are common for other parts of the body, but they are more suitable for closing the belly wound.
I recommend you to each one according to its exposure and declaration.
Therefore, say that when the wound is small and there is no cause of the intestine for it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two methods is used: either by disruption as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to cold from the air.
And then when that is done, cover it with a cloth that you have dipped in warm water and wrung out, or take a cloth soaked in hot water, cyperus, spice, and embrocation at that intestine inside until the swelling is resolved.
Some times it is done in that which has stopticity, and it is better than the water alone in resolving the swelling.
And when you see that the inflammation is resolved, then moisten the intestine with water that is cool and mild, which is helpful for the intestine to recover quickly.
And if the intestine is excised, then cut the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is sharp and incises easily.
The first cure is best when it is properly done and does not cause drying or unnecessary occupation of the necessary and sufficient space.
Of the instrument, its shape is as follows:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, the other part is not sharp, its tip is thin and not as thin as a needle, but slightly blunt at the end.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then reduce it back to its original form in its proper place, if possible, which is better.
But when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, then have the patient lie on their back, and place their knees as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and raise their chest as high as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, quickly place your understanding and consideration on the side that is causing pain, so that the part causing pain is pushed away from the other.
And in this case, you administer it in severe and mild pains.
And in small pains, place the preparation you have made, and make sure that the minister holds the disruption completely in his hand and adjusts its lips, and uncover from one to another if there is any cause for another stitch.
And this is the common method of suture: you take the needle, or count the number of the width of the pain; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that is left over from the part that is left out, enter that you make that penetrate from that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cipher, and it has been made four orders.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some stitches on the two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then lay the largest of the latter and insert another needle into that, and then tie it as it was with the first needle; and do not cease to do this until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and fineness, because the fine needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and the thick ones are difficult to thread, and therefore it is advisable that they be of medium thickness in terms of fineness and thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in the two ends of the thread prepared for that, so that the flesh is not easily penetrated and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
And do not let the stitches be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place powdered substances on the suture, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
These types of sutures with needles should be used in small wounds, as they have one or two or several needles in their suture.
The second type of suture is similar: and it is that you administer the suture to the four extremities, of the codeine and two extremities of the scapula, in a straight line, with a needle that is thin and thick.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that part of the thread where it started, so that the thread does not rise again from the wound, so that the suture is the second type of thread made of cloth.
And pause between each suture the amount of thick hair from that same beard.
And this stitch will be for women.
And this stitch would have been used to close the wound that occurred in a man's belly, which was stitched with a needle, and was a tear of the major abdominal wall, and was situated around two palms of the intestine at the lower part of the body and was the tear in the middle of the member; and then I would have reduced it so that the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and it was closed and healed; and then I would have applied that and it would have been converted into its positions.
And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle fire, why I did not close that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but I kept it over the wound for two days and bathed it assiduously with melted honey until the fire healed.
May you direct two specific types of sutures according to the narrative of the Word.
And if you begin with the suture of the cord, insert the needle from the edge to the center.
And so, as the needle pierces the cord and those fingers are moved correctly and throughout the entire body, leave the extremity of the needle in which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle pierce from the edge to the center on the other side of the mat.
And so, after you have made that pierce, make another pierce in the other end of the needle on the same side of the mat from the edge to the center; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and make the other end of the needle pierce from the edge to the center on the other side of the mat.
And make the other end of the needle pierce in the direction that makes that pierce in the needle at its extremity, which is in the edge of the mat where all that pierces.
And then, approaching from that direction and bending over the other side of the chest, extract the needle from the incision it has made, and return it to its sheath on that side; and then, approaching from this side, extract the needle from the incision it has made, and return it to its sheath on this side.
Do this several times, and do it again in another way, approaching from another direction, until you have completed all of that which is deformed according to that example.
The sum of this method of suture is that you sew the wound with a thread of silk, so that you do not sew the chest once from the side of the incision, and let the other side complete the stitching.
The second special method of suture, which is called the "Gualia" by doctors, and this is what should be done for each part and throughout the body, is that you sew that second semilunar part, which other doctors sew together with another piece of cloth, so that all the parts are joined to their corresponding parts; and then apply the end of one side to the other end of the wound, and the end of the mirror to the other end of the wound, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you place the needle at the end of the mirror near your own part, make it penetrate into the part of the body from that side, and let two other ends of the cipher; then revolving the needle, make it penetrate from one side to the other two ends of the cipher.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate into the body from one side to the other two ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common suture of leather, and it is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Guaila
And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so you should insert one in each, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those that equally cover the hearts.
When the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is a judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same person who has it, and reduce the intestine and cleanse it and prepare it indecently, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it alcohol with which you have present that makes hard and heals wounds, and is consolidated and shiny; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it immediately, before it starts to rot, with vinegar and change the bandages daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medication in dispositions when the plagues are simple.
If you fear that the plague might spread to the main members, then apply a wool cloth soaked in high-quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the areas where the toes are located and remove them.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which is a sign that something is wrong, then apply a black stypic wound powder, and especially if the putrefaction has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And you should know that the pus from the large intestine is less dangerous for healing than the pus in the small intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from any disease that occurs in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its length, and the subtlety of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If that which precedes the plague is the cloth, and you have recently had that, reduce it according to your correctness, which reduces the intestines equally.
If it has passed to the space and is already turned or not, then you should place a bandage on the area that is discolored from it, so that blood flow comes out of the veins and arteries in the cloth.
And then insert that which is another of those ligaments, and place two ends of the bandage hanging from the part of the plague before the plague, so that above you is relieved the attraction of it from the cavity of the cloth and emission of the brace of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues that happen in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they saw that one who was previously plagued in their belly with percussion of lance and was the plague of the right part of the stomach, and the plague was ancient and made a fistula, and they managed to restore its mobility and vitality.
Then I continued the cure of him who was not yet healed, but I stopped subtly that which healed and the wound became solidified.
And then I placed on the patient that which I had prepared over him for the wound in his own belly; and he did not have any other harm from that wound and remained in his bed, eating and drinking, and afterwards it was buried and exercised in its place.
And then it was said by experienced people that when there is an abscess in the intestine, and it is small, one should follow this method: and it is that you take thick needles; and then adjust the two lips of the abscess and place a needle from those which have the mouth open over the two lips of the abscess; when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of it, so that it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing that until you have done it for all the abscess.
And then reduce that area and place it on the wound; and remove those things attached to the intestine inside the intestine so as not to harm the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine can be sutured with a thin, sharp needle made from animal intestine, rather than using a regular needle; and you should take hold of the end of these thin threads of intestine, which should be clean, and then wrap the end of the intestine around it, and then insert that thread into the wound, and suture it with those threads.
And this method of suturing is only the second method of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but rather treated with cauterization, and not healed from it completely.
Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
You should know that any wound and abscess that becomes indurated and scarred, and is made into an ulcer, and does not consolidate and bleed continuously and is not removed, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it that disease.
And in truth, a fistula is a hard, white, painless ulcer that is located where the penis is attached to the scrotum; and because of this, it is called a penile ulcer.
And in wet men, the ulcer that causes this is often accompanied by a discharge of pus within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is thin, thick, and fine.
Now it has shown all those causes, and their symptoms and the cure of them in the division of medical treatments.
And now I will tell you how to perform the cure of a fistula that is made by surgical operation.
And you should know that fistulas occur in all parts of the body; among those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the spinal vertebrae, or some of the joints composed by a composition as mentioned above.
And among those that are of this kind, which is difficult to heal, and does not receive cure or treatment, and occupation in this case is hard work and ignorance.
And if any of the fistulas has a depth that does not reach those places mentioned, and you expect and believe in its cure, and you want to reach knowledge of it, then take trial with an iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, and you find it there.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate with a thin probe, as the weight of their body helps to straighten and relieve the twisting.
And if the fistula is too wide, it may not be possible to insert the thin probe into it.
Then insert the catheter through its orifices, as the moisture that you use to clean it will also clean the other orifices and remove them.
And then carefully inquire, according to the method that you are able to determine whether there are bones or nerves here, and whether the longitudinal or propdana fistula is its cavity, or if it is a fistula with many openings that is located above all of your strength, your uncertainty, your patient's pain, and the invention of the pain due to your compression on the affected area, and similar to the meanings and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And when you have considered all these causes with stability, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is whether you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in salt, longitudinal of joint, of nerve, of artery, of vein, or of one of the places that I have told you.
And after you have dried the fistula according to the name of its nature, and removed that which is in that filter and decayed flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible in front, and remove all the decayed flesh; and administer cautery cottons wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that which is in the cavity of the fistula of the decay.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry it with the second method we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
If the bone is under your control and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that which is inside the corruption entirely; and cure that which is inside with that which will heal it.
And if it does not heal and the bone is as it was before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and then you should remove it again carefully and make the reason for it and the cleansing of it with the strongest fortification, and then restore that.
And then if it is healed, good; and if not, know that that corruption is in the deep length of the body, which has not been achieved, and then you should not force it but leave it alone.
If the bone is broken and small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
If you have the strength to extract all of those, and none are held by any cause of your weakness.
But if you encounter any opposition from some cause of humidity, and in its beginning there is no fear or mistake, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of bones from the bone bank, then place that which can harden the bone in that place, and let it remain there until that which is around those bones of flesh and ligaments is consolidated, and keep the plate so that it is not consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Having said that, if you fear, place it on the side submerged in three parts of oil, or the side submerged in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when they harden those ligaments, and the bones are separated from them, the healing is delayed.
If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure that before it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has had an injury in their thigh to place that and assistance on your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who had pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were swollen on the matter of the body inside where the matter reaches the thigh, and that matter is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
And then the doctor extended the fire too close to that part where the abscess was about to burst, and matter flowed from it, and his cure was paused near where the bed became fistulated, and in those matters there were open wounds which all oozed pus and moisture from the body.
And then all the doctors treated him for about two years, and the fire was not in that place but in the arm, until he was called.
And he saw the bed covered with those matters flowing from those wounds; and that man's body was completely wasted away and the color of it was yellow.
And then he inserted the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
And then he quickly examined those wounds and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
And then he showed and inserted into one of those wounds, through which he described a part of the bone, and at the same time rotted that, and it was already rotten and corrupted and decayed; and a part of the body had already penetrated into the intestines.
And then you should apply that which was previously discovered and prepared from the exposed bone.
And then you should apply that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which was removed and prepared, and which had already been applied.
And then you should place your hand over the wound with a consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
And then you should repeat and expose again over the bone secondarily over the first exposure, and continue to apply the remaining corruption to the bone.
And then you should apply that which appears from that corruption, and then you should pierce it to make the cure of it and restore it, and it is not restored.
And then you should expose it again and continue to scratch the bone little by little particularly and pierce the restoration of it, and it is not restored until you have scratched around one palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then apply it with a medicine, and it is consolidated and healed.
And repetition is not necessary in the operation of amputation or section of the limb unless for the disposition of the patient's wound and for the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, which can lead to complications in all hours due to excessive evacuation of sincopi.
And therefore, the treatment is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to arrange it in its own body and return its vitality; and it is managed in its arrangements and not done against it in ambulation or harm in any cause.
If the bone is in place of the body that has been fractured, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that protruding bone, and command anyone to extend it; pause that bandage of thicker wool than the first bandage; and place it on the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
And place the table beside the bones carefully, because when you do that, it is not prohibited for the saw to not dry out the rotten flesh.
And cover the sawing over the rotten area gradually, because if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for sawing.
And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, then from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a part of it, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; and place the saw beside, and place the saw of the first piece where the corruption is continued until the sawing of the other piece is completed.
And if the sawing is according to the location of the corruption, then it should be done gradually, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, then insert into that rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but in the joint itself.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and monitor it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and when no contrary vein or nerve comes out, it should be corrected to you.
And you should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, depending on the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and poverty of those, and their hardness and rarity; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instruments suitable for that operation.
And you should know that that operation means to you on the specialty of the instrument that is necessary; when you have great study and length and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you will already have them for your use, what is suitable for each instrument for every disease.
And you should know the number of simple instruments that you will use in this chapter, which you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. A saw blade:
A different saw blade:
A large different saw blade:
A ruler: The head of this ruler is in the shape of a star-shaped crown, and its points are in the shape of the points on an astrolabe.
And you should only use it to rub the heads of joints when they are damaged, or if the mouth is very wide open.
A smaller razor:
A wide razor:
A different saw blade made of iron, with a curved shape and sharpness, and the handle of it is made of wood: The shape of it:
Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Another shape of a razor:
Shape of another curved razor:
Shape of a small razor resembling a needle:
Another smaller shape of an incisor:
Shape of another incisor, resembling a ray, and its end is like a saw, and it is used in certain places in the ratio of bones:
Shape of a ray that is suitable for the ratio of the one that pierces through bones:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with a layer that all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the cutting edges of bones and their sawing.
The ends may be sharp or due to an intrinsic cause or an extrinsic cause, or because you have treated that corruption by those medicines and the cure does not succeed, or sometimes the corruption causes the member to die, which is not cut by any cause, then cover that member within that wound, so that the patient can escape from that death or harm, which is greater than the damage to the member.
When the member of the one who was affected, is that the limb is made black before it is cooked by fire, or if it is poorly made, approach the blackness before the pore does enter that limb and if it enters that limb, it takes all the body; and so you should begin to cure it.
Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion marsh or from a viper or from a rattle snake and similar.
And if the corruption or the pressure is at the end of that limb, then you should insert it and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter the body.
Similarly, if it enters the body, then you should insert that of the reed of the fire, and not give space to the corruption until it takes in the reed of the arm.
And if you have done that, then insert the arm into the hollow at the joint.
And if another corruption and the poison passes around the hollow, then in that case the patient dies; and administering another cause in cure is of no use in treatment.
And similarly, when decay has destroyed the nail of the foot, then you insert that into one of the bones.
And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. But if it can enter into the ankle, then you insert the thigh bone into the joint of the ankle.
And if decay has already reached the ankle, then there is no remedy, and you let the patient die.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part that you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament on the area; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments at least one span wide so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And cover it with a cloth of all parts so that it does not touch the area and that the patient's injury and abscess are adjusted and cauterized.
If the patient has bleeding when working, then you should cauterize the area constantly, or place some restricting powders on the wound; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
And then place the injured member in a suitable bandage, and cure that before it is healed.
And you should also recommend to that man who has such an accident in his foot, the same method that you and I have recommended, which is an accident that occurs to the black person in his foot due to overheating that is similar to burning by fire.
And that corruption first occurs within his own foot before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for such an accident so that the cure would not arrive at the member due to the intensity of the pain and the burning of it, and he did not inscribe that foot into the joint, and it was healed.
For a long time, such an accident occurs in the same way on the same foot of the same person.
And then he came to me, and I felt the need to expel that excess liquid that was on the surface of the medicine, approaching the purification of his body; and if it is not expelled, it starts to go into the other part where it started on the hand.
And he asked me to incise the surface of his hand, but I did not want to do that out of fear of the repercussions of that excess liquid, and more because I feared the beginning of the incision on his hand might cause death, as the patient was already in a critical condition.
And then he left me, returned to his land, and it was reported to me that that man had prepared and incised the entire surface of his hand, and he was cured.
And I have not added this narrative except as an aid to understand that which is caused by this illness, and what it signifies, and how it should be treated.
Of the treatment of hernias and the quality of clisterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshy member and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and pierced, and the pus is drained from it, and the place where it was becomes like a vessel, and the code which is above it has subtiliat drap, and no corruption reaches the rear, and it does not press on the bone or the nerves or the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
If the space is prolonged before the corruption reaches any member, it is then called a fistula and not a zuchem.
The cure for it is to insert the entire codex with its folds, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and to ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the codex sticks and that the corruption has not been achieved due to previous consequences, and if there is a gap in the codex, then you treat it with a salve.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that comes from the fat has a pleasant odor, then use the Egyptian salve which is made of oil and vinegar and equal parts of wine, and adjust them in a vessel, and cover them over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
And then you take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and salve the affected area, and strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine on for a period of twelve hours.
And then remove that dirty cloth; and do this for several days until the wound is cleansed and the pus is removed.
Some people boil the ash of willow in water, when this medicine is not present; and you take the ash of willow and put it on the water; and then colander that and boil that cloth until you confirm that the wound has closed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ash, then boil that cloth in water and honey and mix it with a third part of vinegar, and boil that cloth in honey mixed with vinegar, because honey cleans and heals, and it makes the wound stick together, and especially when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness.
And when you do this for several days and you confirm that the wound has healed, then boil that cloth in water that makes the flesh tender.
And you take some diaphoretic and dissolve that oily, stinging substance; or you clysterize that area with some medicines and other substances that have the properties to do so, which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the orifices of the sinuses are narrow and cannot receive the clyster needle, then you gradually widen that area with a small file until it is wide enough, pausing in the caliber covered with Egyptian ointment or basilicon.
Similarly, if the orifices are wide, then you add the lips of that area with sutures and leave it in the amount in which the clyster is added.
And if the orifices of that area from which the intestine is raised to the parts above are elevated, then dry that area in the lowest part where it is in order for the intestine to pass through it again, because when the intestine is constricted in the sinus, the flesh will be in that place.
If it is not possible to dry the sinus inside the lower environment of the second bone that you want, then prepare the limb for the procedure by removing the bandage in a natural way and ensuring that there is no cause of retention in the bandage.
The one that is over the opening of the sinus should remain in place throughout the hour so that what is adjusted on the bandage does not come out. And so that you know if what comes out of it from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or not digested.
And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that flows over the orifices of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then remove it on the first or third day, and when you remove the plague, change the cloth and renew the poultice.
But if the sinus approaches the space and subtle viruses are found, do not despair of its adherence, because the healing of it will take place, because in some people in which the generation of meat in those plagues takes a long time, and from those in which it is done the opposite of that.
And if the sinus approaches the arm in an undigested way for several days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this is the cause of a prolonged treatment, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as soon as they are adjusted to remove excess humidity.
And the most common cure for that part is to take a certain type of fat and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area as if it were its own substance, and then comfort that part with that oil.
And it is similar in that action, when there is no bone, certain fat, when it is thickened inside, and use of that; or take lard and aloe and grind them together, and sprinkle all of that over the melted fat when it is on top of the fire, and then place a cloth over that and strengthen that over the wound; and sprinkle the same fat that you have thickened inside over a cloth and strengthen that.
And some of them are administered with the long and expensive lily (and it is the celestial lily) and rice flour and centaury, and use those simple herbs or adjust them, grind and powder over the fat that I have recommended; and use that.
And if the wound is prolonged and does not heal with this cure, then you know that the corruption is in its base, and it makes an investigation in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with the fistular cure as mentioned above.
Of the treatment of broken nails and toes, and the addition of cutting a finger, and the section.
Apostema is an abscess that occurs under the nail of the toe or foot, and if it becomes prolonged and its treatment is highly valued, it is a cautious abscess, or it is corrupted, and if it is not treated in time, it will spread to the bone, and if it spreads to the bone, it will cause a foul odor, and the end of that toe will be black.
And therefore when you have that same thing that we mentioned in the division and do not complete your treatment, then cut away all the excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery, because the pointed cautery is helpful in this case.
But if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already begun to grow together with the flesh at the parts where they were separated, and they begin to pungent and the wound has healed that way, then cut a thin piece of skin from under the angle of the nail that punges the flesh, and push it into the wound, and cut that flesh with ease, and place something over it that was used in medicines to burn corrosively until it is all removed; and then cure that wound.
If the bone is already corrupted, you must insert the bone and remove it, for there is no time to heal when the bone is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and decay have reached that point, you must insert it into one of the empty spaces according to its memory, and cure it while it is healing.
If the nail is broken or lost, and the pain is severe, you must begin by cleaning the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp transverse cut above where the nail was, and be careful that the cut does not reach the flesh that is under the nail, for you will cause severe pain to the patient, and may cause excessive bleeding in the area; and cure that location with this.
This is not adjusted, which is common in the bones of many men, but it is fleshy all over, and it is often found in the bones, or it is in the nail.
If the patient's joints are not in their natural position, or if they are born with abnormal joints of the aforementioned type. Those born with abnormal joints do not suffer, but those born with very weak joints are unfortunate.
And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should incise that part of their joints with a narrow space.
It is difficult to cure those born with abnormal joints; therefore, be careful of their incision.
It is better to incise the flesh of those born with abnormal joints at the beginning, around the bone, and then use one of those suitable files, and cure that before it is healed.
It is better to remove the consolidation that occurs in those born with abnormal joints between their bones or by birth of the man who was not born, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, therefore be careful to remove that consolidation before they return to their natural form.
And then place their clothes between them, which are soaked in warm oil to prevent them from becoming stiff, and separate them with this, or place a thin layer of plaster between them according to what is appropriate.
Similarly, if the stiffness occurs in the palm of the hand, then dry that stiffness according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the member.
At the beginning of the fingers, they are swollen.
The fingers are swollen, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities, which come from the members of the body, and the most common occurrence of them is in the chest, and especially in the chest of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer bowel cleansing of the body of black cholera some strong purges, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
The cure of them is done by two methods: the first is that it be incised and that that black blood be let out, and the other method is that the vein be raised and all the blood be extracted.
The second part of this procedure is as follows: first, apply a cloth soaked in warm water to the abdomen to soften any hard or thick parts of the intestine, then gently lift the patient's bed to the highest possible position, and secure it with a belt around the waist, just below the ribs. Then, dry the vein in one, two, or three wide sections, and elevate the black intestine above the patient's chest, and then lower it back down, until the desired amount of intestine has been removed, which the patient can tolerate without discomfort.
Then, leave that and command the patient to abstain from foods that cause black bile to be generated.
Repeat the treatment by tapping on the abdomen when the veins are full and the patient feels pain.
The second way of raising the bed is as follows: if there are moisture spots on the patient's abdomen, wipe them off and apply a warm cloth to the abdomen until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if you do not have a cloth at hand, until the limb becomes scalded.
And then cut the cord on the right side of the vein for sectioning in the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg, you must use the denolette, or at the lowest part of the leg, you must use the talc.
And then lift the cord with scissors and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the touch, and you must apply the appropriate remedy for that which sometimes presents as black.
And then when you remove the cord, you will sometimes find a white thread-like cord.
And then place your finger under that which is elevated and rotated from the cord, and suspend it with scissors open.
And then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the cord from the part above the vein until it appears.
And then lift that and insert it into the back section with the talc, and then extract it and lift it inside where it is next to the second section, and then extract it from the section above it.
And do that before removing the outer layer that is the most recent or the most distant from all the sections, until everything is removed; and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a double-edged sharp needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind it the ray and rotate your hand at every part until it is cut through. And be careful that it is not inserted; because if it is broken, it is difficult to elevate that part and it comes over the patient for that harm.
And when that part is completely removed, then place it over the wound covered with wool soaked in wine and oil and not oiled, and heal it until it is healed.
And if the wound is twisted having winding that should be wrapped around the parts, and not straight as we have said, then cover that you cut over it at every part of winding of it and the places of wrapping of it, and suspend it from a hook inside until you elevate it completely.
And be careful not to puncture the vein and not to press too hard on that area, as it is difficult to lift that part; use your discretion in that matter.
The shape of the incision made when the vein is cut open:
It should not be sharp like the nails or pins, but rather blunt to avoid puncturing the vein; it should be made of a flexible lion's claw, as if it were too thin, it would puncture the vein due to its thinness; having too much thickness there is what we have mentioned.
On the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the hollows on dry lands like those of the Ategi in Arabian lands and in the dry and barren lands of India where there is little vegetation and in which there is no grass or herbs.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body, not just the hollows.
And the process of its putrefaction is that it leaves behind a tail-like structure like the venom of snakes, worms, and other creatures that breed between the intestine and flesh.
And in the event of the occurrence of this venous inflammation, which is very intense on the chest; and then the place is incised; and then the vein is carefully removed from that incision, which seems reasonable to do.
And then, when it appears that you have reached the end of it, then cover the area with a poultice made from the powder of a dragon's tooth, about one dragon's tooth, and tie it there and leave the poultice suspended from the chest.
And as many times as you find any cause for it in the parts affected, cover that with the poultice and tie it there. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover it with the remaining poultice; and do not incise that which seems reasonable until it is completely out, because if you incise that, it contracts and goes into the flesh and causes an abscess and pus in the place and ulcer in the wound.
So that it is treated carefully and removed bit by bit, until it is completely out of the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
And in some men, this vein extends along the length of their arm, from the palm to the elbow, and I have found that it reaches up to about 20 palms.
And if it is incised during their treatment, then insert the ray into the wound of the patient and pierce through the long tunnel to the body, until everything that is in the matter is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the location with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein has caused some pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out with some orifices, and it extends from which orifice.
And then cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is above mentioned.
Of section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This disease is not called in any land the bovine sickness because it is caused by many worms that are between the skin and flesh, and it is very rare, and it appears in all the body, and it descends and ascends, and it is shown at the feeling of the same member from member until it disrupts the skin and comes out.
And the generation of it is due to the putrefaction of some humors, such as worms and snakes and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
And it is feared for its maliciousness, because when it enters the body and ascends to the head, it reaches the brain, and then a strong fever comes into it and enters and destroys the brain, and this causes convulsions.
And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, it is not done unless you first examine its appearance and location on the sensation, and then be careful of what is above it and what is below it in its likeness and construction, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is found in the flesh and not on the skin, then you place a pointed cautery with fire over the location where it is, and the greatest fear is corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the head before the brain, then strengthen above the temple with a strong structure, and then dry it and extract that; and be careful that the patient uses medicines that evacuate bad humors which cause putridity in their body, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
When performing a surgical incision due to pain,
This disease is not named in our land, but it is pain that occurs in various body members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
I have already seen the second one that I will tell you about. He was called to a sick woman in a village, and she discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, which had been there for an hour, but it seemed to be moving like worms at this time, more likely than not that it was so, as if it were live silver when moving from place to place.
And then the pain of that place and it settled in the muscle, and it stayed there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other body until it reached the other arm.
And then it recommended itself to me that it was turning around in the whole body, and it was too wonderful about its change and the speed of member to member. I have already seen that happening in the second month of pregnancy, but I have also seen other symptoms that cause pain to be exchanged from one part of the body to another. I have not seen that happening in women's thighs as well.
And I did not think it was that, but rather because the woman was old, with dry skin and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that exchange was felt.
And it is necessary that this does not appear in those who are delicate and have a body with constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not appear at that place with the hand as we have said, but strengthen it over that and gently press on it until it is inside where that sensation is covered and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see that in the thighs, then cure that excusion of the body and that which expels that sensation, and give those who are foul-smelling and those who are made of serapee and similar things.
Of extracting teeth.
Sagetas are diverse according to their species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, due to their diversity; some have large points, small ones, concave ones, and deaf ones, which are solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some are astelas.
When the spleen of the servant is catheterized, it passes through the bone, and emerges from the cyphac which is above the brain, causing severe symptoms such as scotoma, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms, and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and the word is abscinded and the voice is destroyed, and it emerges from the place of the humid white plague resembling pollen, and eyes like the consistency of flesh.
And if this spleen appears to you in this way, then you must stop the treatment and extraction of the catheter, unless it is necessary.
When the spleen of the heart is catheterized, it is close to the right breast, and it feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and the movement of the spleen is similar to the movement of the polls, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing of the extremities, and sudden sweating, and syncope; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
When the lungs are completely filled with frothy blood from the wound, and the veins that come from the neck become swollen, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and quickly, and demand air frequently.
And if the sword is in the cloth that is on the chest, and the pain is near the ribs, and it causes a great sharp pain and a loud cry, and does not affect all the member of the muscles.
And if the sword is in the stomach, then there is a strong yellowish discharge of blood from the wound, and some undigested food.
And if the sword is in the abdomen, and it gets stuck in it, some blood or cloth or intestine that is torn, and there is no hope of healing without extracting the sword.
And if the sword is in the bladder, and it pierces the urine, and causes some abnormality in the parts, and there is a great deal of pain on the patient, then you know that it is fatal.
When the other members are like the face, neck, shoulder, back, ribs, and breastbone, and the sternum, and the spine, and the bed, and similar to the limbs, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the surgeon does not find vein or artery and is not venomous.
I would recommend this to you who have seen the work of these surgeons, so that you know how to treat such cases.
The cause of which is that in a man who has this surgeon in the lacrimal duct of his eye in the nose, and I extracted it from the other part, after the gray matter of his brain, and he was healed, and did not cause harm to his brain.
And I extracted another surgeon from a Jew who had this in his brain gray matter, after the eyelid pushed down, and the surgeon was already hidden and could not be removed from that but a small extension attached to his head, and it was a great cause of the sharp surgeries of the Turks, like a lion in which there were no brain.
And if it is not the case of the Justinian plague, and there is no such accident in his own home.
And they extracted another secretion from a man named Crestian, who was shot in the galley, and it was an Arabic secretion, and they placed it on that between two guides, and it was already submerged in the galley of him; and then they subtly applied that, and then they extracted that, and healed the Crestian.
And they extracted another secretion from a man who was shot in his own belly, and they thought that he died because of that; and then, after it had passed thirty days and there was no change on him due to his conditions, they placed it on the secretion and covered it over, and he was healed, and there was no accident to him from that illness.
And they saw another man in whom a secretion was shot into the back of him, and it had consolidated the plague on him, and after seven years, the secretion had dried up in the middle of the wound.
And a woman was seen who had a tumor in her belly, and the plague was consolidated within it, and was not moved in her positions, and the woman did not suffer from some of her natural operations.
And another man was seen who had a tumor on his face, and the plague was consolidated there, and the tumor moved, but did not cause much pain, similar to these.
And the tumor was extracted from the man's nose, which was located in the middle of his face and had already declined to the left side, and the entire tumor was hidden.
And I was called to treat it within three days after the extraction of the tumor.
And then I again felt the pain of the tumor sharply; and then I inquired of that woman who was subtle, and she did not feel it; but he felt a point on the right side, and then I suspected that that point was at the end of the tumor.
And apply a poultice in the place that has attractive and digestive virtues, so that I can see the place of the wound, to dry it out.
And do not accidentally harm the significant part of the wound; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without causing any accident; and while consolidating the wound, also observe the patient's general condition over several days until the day when the wound is healed inside and you report that to me.
And then apply acute and corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it is opened, and use the tent to cover that, and again apply the fine tip of the needle to the edge of the wound, which adheres to the skin.
And then adjust the opening of the wound for that acute medicine until I can see the edge of the wound, and pass it to me periodically for the next four months.
And then when the wound is enlarged enough, and it is possible for me to introduce forceps into it, and continue with that, and do not neglect to examine it, you should not cease to carefully observe and engineer over it using various instruments, until one day you can hold the wound open with forceps descended from the top of the capitulum, as soon as its shape appears in the form of those in the end of the chapter, until it is extracted; and then restore that wound.
And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and if it is restored, the wound is consolidated, and the patient is healed entirely, and there is no harm in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some herbs for which you can apply that rule and meaning to that which I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration or do not understand those freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare with few words; and they know what is present where it is absent; and they must learn new operations and new tools when external causes of the art occur.
And therefore I say that herbs are not removed from the members in which they are stuck but by two methods: either by attraction of the place where they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is removed by the place where it is inserted, or herbs proceeding in fleshly places, and it is attracted and removed.
If you do not obey the instructions of the hour in which the cat is present, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and relieve the attraction of the cat and its exit.
Similarly, if it is stuck in the bone and you do not obey your instructions, then wait for several days and apply an attraction and moisture to it every day, and it will eventually be removed.
And if you do not obey your instructions in the proper time, then wait for several days and drill a small drill through the entire part of that bone until the location is widened by the saw, and then extract it.
However, if the spear is already buried in the body and is hidden from feeling, then you should inquire about that part, and if you feel it, then you should shoot that part with appropriate arrows for the extraction of the patient.
However, if you cannot reach the patient due to the obstruction of the wound and its length, and there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then you should perform an incision on the wound until it is enlarged and possible to extract the spear.
And if you have the golden keys that should be held, then remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts and cut away everything that can be done; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the golden keys and in torsion of those entrapped inside.
And when you administer the extraction of the safest in each place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that obstruction; and subtly work on the detail that the safest is not broken and that it is made according to your difficult approach to it and from that extraction.
And if you cannot on your own, then leave for several days in which the parts that are inside it can be scanned, and repeat that which is usually done. But if you have a contrary flow of blood, then administer what we have said about the cure in its capital.
And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve, or of the cord, and administer engine in all possible ways of the evasion of the safest; and do that with facility and tranquility and delay and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and to your recommendation.
And therefore you should make the sawing motion to bring the patient back to their original figure, according to the shape in which you must cut the saw in order to do so, as it is more beneficial. However, if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
However, if the saws are not in good condition, or have been used on other parts, or make the exterior of the saw rough due to the part above the proposed handle and sometimes that part; then you should smooth it over; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then draw it away, as it is made lighter by doing so.
However, if it is held in the bone, then twist the blade according to the opposite direction before the saw enters the bone, and widen it as you insert it, and then remove it.
And if not, leave it for a while, and then insert it when it is possible.
And if the wisdom tooth is in that position, then you should remove it from there.
But if the tooth has fallen out and you wish to administer an injection, then insert it into that place, if it is deaf, use a syringe to inject the medication into the concavity of the tooth and its root.
But if the tooth is hollow, then strongly insert the injection into that place, as the tooth is held by that.
And if the tooth is poisoned, then carefully remove all the flesh in which it is located, if possible, and then treat that with whatever is appropriate.
And if the tooth is stuck in the chest, or abdomen, or bladder, or side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and if it is possible to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and after removing it, apply the appropriate remedy as soon as possible, and treat that before it becomes healed.
Form of forceps used for grasping the fetus:
With their pointed ends shaped like a beak, which are made like a vice when placed on the fetus to prevent it from being released:
And of those, special types of forceps are made, large, small, and flexible, according to the amount of the fetus's size, and its flexibility, and the width of the wound, and its construction:
shaped like a ray to facilitate the introduction of the instrument into the wound and to push it away:
Of vein puncture.
The veins of phlebotomy, of which there are sixteen in the head, two temporal arteries that are called temples; two herbs that are on the two temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is in the tip of the nose; and two arteries that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. May the veins that are punctured in the arms be visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild thistle; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that vein to the people "vein of the whole body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "vein of the belly"; and the brachial vein, and it is paused over the hearth, and it is the vein in which it is punctured, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest called, and it is in the two grooves.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curve of the wild thistle of the thigh; the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the thigh domestic; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild thistle of the thigh; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
The swelling of the veins that are close to the ears is due to ancient and recent catarrhs, seizures, and old wounds on the head.
And the quality of these is as follows: it is to shave the patient's head, and to rub the patient's head on the occipital bone in the location where the veins are wide with good friction; then strengthen the patient by placing a band around the neck where the two veins appear and their locations are close to the ears; and if you feel pain in those places, here is a remedy for that.
Then take the cutting lancet, and that which is sharp, and insert it behind the vein in the hollow of the elbow where the elbow joint comes to the bone. And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow above and insert the lancet into the vein at the beginning of the incision. And the length of the incision should be approximately twice the width or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
And then apply strength to the powders and leave them inside where it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, I have indicated the beginning of those and their cauterization.
May the two arteries and veins that are at the temples be the ancient and bad and constant and source of excessive and sharp fluids poured into the wounds.
And the quality of fleubotomar those is second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient with the mallet where the two veins appear at the sensation by manifest appreciation and demonstrate their legs behind your own; and then you will see if it works.
And then you will raise the cord above the vein at the parts indicated by you, and introduce the fleubotomi behind, and raise the vein up; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and make it bleed according to the amount of your need.
And then remove the bandage of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that cot and powders and strengthen that above with strong constraint, and leave them inside where it is healed.
And they have already made their memoranda, and of those who were present, and at the beginning of the free text.
And the advantage of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is to approach the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigrant and ulcerous fetid sores.
And the quality of that phlebotomy is as I have recommended to you; so it is that the patient should strengthen their neck with a band where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is of this form:
Place the puncta eminent on the top of the fossor above that vein and strike it with the other hand in the manner of the instrument, and let the blood run according to the amount you want; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that area where it was healed.
And some veins are opened with lateral phlebotomy, however do not let the phlebotomy be of acute extremity as with other phlebotomies, but rather on the front side, and perform the phlebotomy according to the transverse line, where the bone is prop and very strong to cut into it when it is subtle.
May the swelling of the two veins that are near the lacrimal glands of both eyes due to scalding and irritation in the eyes, and in facial diseases.
And the quality of the tracheotomy is that the patient strongly bends their neck forward, and then perform a tracheotomy on them, and you should be standing over their head.
And if the tracheotomy is made along the transverse direction a little bit to the side where there is no flesh; and if the incision of the tracheotomy is thin, then the end of it is cut off.
And then run cold water over them as much as is necessary, and place your hand on those wounds, and stretch them with a new cloth, and then remove those.
May the tracheotomy of the nasal vein be compared to acute fever and violent soda, and in facial diseases and migraines and irritation that occur on the face, and especially when it is ancient.
And the quality of the lumbar puncture of him is that the patient bends his neck and approaches his own nose with your left hand, and takes the fine needle long and puts it in the lower middle part of the back of the second straight direction, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the spine begins to flow soon.
And you gradually move your hand with the lumbar puncture needle according to your need; and place it on a new site, because that is restored more effectively.
The onset of lumbar puncture in the case of meningitis and leprosy and other diseases and inflammations and malignant ulcers with herpes is as follows:
And the quality of the lumbar puncture in those cases is that the patient bends his neck and approaches his own chin with his hand; and the surgeon is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a mattress.
Approach the vein with a small forceps, gradually opening it from the long side; then extract the blood in small amounts as needed or as much as necessary; and do the same with the other vein.
And then remove the bandage and tightly tie both veins with a strip of cloth to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
The use of bloodletting from veins can help to treat small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and fissures in the nose and around it.
The quality of bloodletting is that you should perform it on the patient, and tightly tie the collar of the vein with a band, and then rotate the lips of the vein and look for both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that which is more black is in the circumference of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
If you are unsure about something, and do not know which of those is correct, then examine the most prominent or obvious of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
If those two veins below the tongue are bleeding heavily, then use the lancet of the cephalic vein at the forehead, to the patient's mouth, throat, uvula, and other parts of the mouth.
And the quality of performing that procedure is to have your hand between the patient's legs, and raise their tongue, and look at the other side of the vein from each side, and the color of each is becoming darker.
And then puncture each one; and be careful not to pierce your hand with that lancet, because those are arteries.
And your veins that are punctured in the groin are those in which blood flows in all men, and the puncture of their veins is done in two ways, either they put a butterfly needle or an olive oil needle at an angle; or they cut the puncture with a scalpel, and call it a suture, and this is the form of it:
If the latitude of it is such as to be with times, and suitable for opening convex veins full proceeding from apparent thick ones, and those that contain thick blood clots.
And this is the form of butterfly needle puncture with a smaller latitude and more subtle tip, and suitable for puncturing thin veins that contain thin blood clots.
May the lubrication of the basilic vein, one of three veins: where it extracts the san from the patient's body and neck, and from there it enters the chest and stomach.
And remind the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be careful and have no fear in that place, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will incise that artery and cause a flow of blood, so that he does not perform that phlebotomy without being careful and having no fear.
And if the basilic vein does not appear due to its manifestation, then advise that you leave it and move to another, or surround some other part; or perform phlebotomy in the place of the end of the arm, where it is manifest, and cut it as we have said.
May you also want the phlebotomy of the elbow, then advise the structure of the arm that you touch the place before you know the place of the forearms, and then cover your hand over it; and then bend the arm and cut the vein in a concave section as we have said; and be careful not to press too much on any part of the location of the artery.
When you see, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation in the place where you have placed your finger, that inflammation is an inflammation of the artery, and therefore it should be treated like that.
And if you see the sinew flowing in the popliteal fossa as thin as a child's artery, and the sinew is very subtle, then you know that it is from the sinew of the artery; and then cover and press the wound with your hand for a long time; and remove the bandage, and if the sinew is cut, then you should strengthen your arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the moccasin of their foot, and do not cause them too much fear until they are healed.
But if the sinew is not cut, and you must not present medicine to it, then you should incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the sinew is cut; or take a needle and make that, and take one thread and strengthen it over the place of the vein with stricture descent at the ligament and in the pulvils through the other day.
And if the bone is abscised, it is good; and if not, then cure that part with the same method as previously mentioned for the removal of bone splinters.
The abscission of the bone from that part is difficult due to the small space of the wound and the possibility of the tendon of the arm.
When the dark vein is used for the trephination, it is very useful to remove the bone from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; this is composed of basilar and cephalic branches, as we have said.
And advise the trephinator who is overly fearful of that trephination, which is near a nerve; and then he should adjust the puncture of the trephination and avoid the nerve, it will cause great pain, and it is difficult to cure that, and often it is not cured at all, And this nerve appears in sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then advise him to place the trephination near the bone section of the skull, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the suffering of the headaches.
And to do this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done with an olive or a nut; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, it is very common for pus to form in some men, when it is not venipunctured at the first percussion, and if they do not know that pus is in that area.
The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the sake of preserving health and for hope of it and for caution against the onset of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done in one of the veins that are in the body, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilic; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevera, after breakfast in primevera and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be done on the third day or the first after three hours have passed since sunrise.
More phlebotomy that is administered, more when convenience and necessity require it, either at night or during the day, at all hours and in all times.
And the type of person who should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who should not be phlebotomized except in the fourth month before the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And if someone wants to be phlebotomized for some reason, let them take a lion's claw, and in those places where there is a small wound, hold it so that the veins do not release the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
And do not phlebotomize those who are suffering from sea sickness, drunkenness, or have escaped from illness or intoxication before that has passed from them, nor those who are suffering from hydropsy, and more that phlebotomy is feared for colic passion and vomit, and for stomach, and for multiplication of costiveness, work, and exercise of breakfasts or vigils, and for all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it be corporeal or animal.
And also consider in the subtilization of humors that if the blood is thick, take food and drink, and take medicine if it is possible to it.
And if possible, enter into the wound and, unless something prevents it, exercise it in order that the sinew may be thinned.
And place the bandage on the chest of the day, around the time of the third hour, as we have said.
And prick that chest of his so that it may be kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all bodily accidents, such as labor and superfluous pain, and crying and similar things to them.
And in his seat, make sure that the causes are present in the vessel of which customarily men have aromaticity and odor and balms and similar things according to their quantity.
And follow the bandager on a cushion that is put or that of the one who should be bandedaged.
And if possible, extract his arm, and wipe that with the hand of the bandager or three times; and then tighten the bandage around it and wrap those three times.
When the stricture is cold and not equal, or when it is superfluous, then do not allow the flow of the san; or if it is a softening, then do not allow the heart of the san to be entirely.
And then the stricture, cover that one who should be phlebotomized with his hands between their thighs where the veins are inflamed, and they are declared to the sense.
And then the phlebotomizer places his finger on a small amount of ancient oil properly; and then he places his hand over the vein on the side where the phlebotomy is to be done, so that the vein flows a small amount, and the percussion is set where the veins are located with the cord fugent from the phlebotomy, and those that are full of ventosity and when he pauses the phlebotomist over that one, he contradicts the phlebotomist, and the phlebotomist does not open the vein, and if he opens it, that one is strict.
And therefore, for that reason, the flagellant should be stopped and solicited in all these causes.
And then, if the vein is pierced in a varicose vein, you should do so; but if not, repeat that procedure from another location nearby, or over the affected area, if the location is not too inflamed.
And if the location is inflamed, or the patient becomes frightened, then you should leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the bandage, because that would cause more inflammation or not enter into the wound.
And then, if necessary, repeat the flagellation.
And if the puncture is small and corrected gently, and you fear that it will not be enough to get the desired amount, then repeat the flagellation in that area again, adjusting the bandage a little, and do that until the location is inflamed, because in some people, the location becomes inflamed after puncturing.
If he has already developed a boil, do not touch him, for there may be some cause that does not allow you to; and place some part of the oil cloth over that part. It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer oil cloth in all phlebotomy, which veins pierce the prohibition of blood from the body, and do this by tying and bandaging when placed on that one of those over the area, for the wound is subtle and revolves when it is large.
And if in the location of phlebotomy a large boil is generated, because of badly formed veins, and especially that one who has not been bled but only that vein, or in the insertion of the needle into the vein, and then you take it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, for it dissolves.
And make sure that this is done near the end of the vein from that vein or another vein.
If you find any black or green color in the area, do not note it; and if you wish, place something over it to prevent it from being a cause of poison or mirrors dissolved, or any cause of suc de mentastre or of calament or a similar thing.
And move the swollen parts and abscesses that occur in the great sinus by lancing it.
And then place your hand over that area, and if you find mollicia, place your compression over that area; then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something over that area to prevent it from being a cause of the blood flowing from the artery.
And apply an emplastrum to that area to prevent bleeding, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And cover that area with a bandage according to the amount of its power and according to the color of the blood that comes out, so that it is covered with the blood that appears.
If the bone is black, then leave it inside until it is rotten; and similarly, if you see it swollen, then leave it inside until it is thinned out; and similarly, if it is sharp, then leave it inside until its sharpness is blunted.
And if it is necessary to extract a bone in an emergency, then the phlebotomy of the vein should be amplified and the phlebotomist should be left-handed.
And in those that are cold, do the opposite of what was done before, and if it is necessary to extract it in an emergency, then the path should be straight.
And the best thing that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy saves from bone flow and nerve injury, and it is more praised and safer than second-latitude and longitude phlebotomy.
And in the case where a syncope occurs after phlebotomy, and if you cure it with a small dose of pinewood infusion or simple oximel, then extract it from the bone in three or four emergencies.
If there is complication of the complexity, then take a syringe and infuse into an eye-dropper of milk or an eye-dropper of honey-flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or an aromatic eye-dropper with a pleasant odor.
If the syringe breaks and you need to use it again, and the cause of its damage is the presence of a small amount of salt, then take some water of meat and a honey-flavored eye-dropper with a subtle odor; use an aromatic oil, and smear it on the patient's chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syringes for evacuation.
And who wants to move their arm and dissolve their second salt, take the syringe from which the eye-dropper is used for forced evacuation, and its virtue is free, which evacuates the small amount of salt gradually, according to the quantity of its virtue in the continuous days.
If one wants to perform surgery on their arm, and their second finger is bent, and their chest is strong, then do that procedure around seven or nine hours after the first phlebotomy.
If one wants to draw out their chest bone towards the opposite side of the part where it inclines, then do that on the second or third day.
If that chest in which the bone is already sore and sharp, and causes a high fever, then draw out that bone in a gradual way, and draw out a large amount of it, and amplify the opening until the fainting stops, so that you have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the side of the chest, to prevent death from fainting, which gradual extractions cause when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do that when you want to dislodge the arm and evacuate the second bone extraction, as the orifice of the vein has already been closed and it is difficult to remove it from the bone, which would be harmful if you press too hard and bend it incorrectly, because that is very bad.
When performing a procedure called bleeding through the vein; or remain with that sharpness of the bleeder which is coagulated from the blood into the opening of the vein; or pause over that of tyrannical algaroth, or sagzenea, and compress that with light pressure until the blood stops flowing.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if it is necessary to evacuate the blood again, and there is no excuse, then sign that spot on the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is bled from the back or the base, when they are not hardened or hidden, which are composed of those.
And the quality of that bleeding is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
And then apply strength to that which is the ligament of the migratory stricture; and bleed again following the transverse line, not horizontally or lengthwise.
And make your incision wide and use your flensing knife to remove the joint slightly.
And if the blood flow is prohibited, then you should immerse the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing the hand in warm water, and instead place a cloth on the back of the patient's neck in cold water during winter.
And the incision of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been previously pricked or punctured by a needle.
And the incision of the patient's ankle is like that of a child.
And the quality of this incision is that you should stretch the hand or place it on a cloth, rather than immersing it in water, until the vein is inflamed and clearly visible; then make an incision across it; and if you do not see anything, repeat the process.
And do not let your hand touch the fleur-de-lis, which would expose the nerves of those disrobed parts to harm.
And then repeat the hand in the lower part and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not repeat it in the lower part, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you should place salt and oil on the vein, so that it does not solidify too much; and similarly, make sure you do everything in a straight manner.
The stain of the fleur-de-lis from your hand is like the diseases of the melon.
And do the same with the fleur-de-lis as you did in the other.
And the stain of the vein from the fleur-de-lis is like the diseases that are in the part behind the belly, such as those of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and the diseases of the rats and ulcers of thighs and old joints, and their similarities to the diseases.
And the quality of the fleam used on him is that the patient inserts his own foot into hot water and makes incisions over that friction where the veins appear; and he ties the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein he takes as a guide, and from there its branches spread out on the surface of the foot.
And then he uses the widest branch or behind the cushion, following the guide of the vein, which is best and most safe.
And if he makes incisions on the surface of the foot, then you guard against the nerves that are located above the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam at the place where you would like to make the incision, as if you wanted to insert it.
And let the fleam be silent.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you rub the foot of the patient in hot water and let the pus run out through that incision where it can be drained.
And if the fleam user errs in the first incision, then you rub the fleam on a small area, where the location is safe; and do not fear from him, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same thing on the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, it should be behind the heel and in front of the outer ankle joint.
And the juice from the phlebotomy of that place is painful when it is poured out.
And the quality of the phlebotomy at that place is that the patient lies down, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion under his leg from the side of the thigh to above the ankle, forming a long, subtle bend, which does not appear otherwise.
And when it appears, you should phlebotomize that place with a needle at each possible angle and transversely, which is better; or insert the needle from the beginning or remove it from the end, because the location of that place is salty.
And it is in men more common; and if you cannot phlebotomize that place, and it does not appear all at once, then phlebotomize some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot, near the auricular and annular.
And be careful of the nerves, and pour out the amount of blood that you wish.
Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the area of the wound, pressing strongly on the location where it is usually healed.
Of the symptoms and qualities of using those.
Symptoms are of corn, or earwax, or vermin.
Symptoms are made in two ways: one is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is by making incisions.
And this symptom that is made by incision is done in two ways, either by fire or by fire.
And the symptoms that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, of which the first one where they are placed is the neck, and the last part is the back; and the middle part is two parts of the collarbone; and symptoms below the jaw, after the mouth; and symptoms of two spatulas; and symptoms of an aesthesiometer, and it is on the top of the spine; and symptoms of two forceps, and they are from two bones; and symptoms of two chisels; and symptoms of two cushions.
When the pus is not extracted from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor is there any harm that pus should be made with fire or hot iron in some bad condition made for replacement before the whole body is completely evacuated.
However, if the pus is caused by illness or continuously, administer it in the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at some time.
And therefore when in any of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then command a warm foot bath to be made after two or three hours have passed.
And it is important that the foot bath be given with the head elevated and at a level that allows for complete evacuation of the body.
And this bath is in the location of the cephalic phlebotomy.
And it is not good to use that one which is of complex preparation, or in which there is catarrh, as it gives great harm.
And therefore do not use those ones that are old, and in the tops of which there are illnesses festered.
And therefore it is important that the one who performs the bath places their hand at the parts behind, as to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
And the bath with alcohol is in the location of the phlebotomy of the dark vein and the basilica: and therefore it gives relief from asthma, and from the contraction of the lungs, and the opening of the lung, and cough, and the repletion.
And if the wind eggplant is not covered with a small cloth, if it is placed there, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
And the wind eggplant gives rise to headaches, obtundation, photophobia, and pain in the teeth; it is a place for tracheotomy of the pharynx.
And if you command the wind eggplant operator not to prick his hand with a scalpel so that he does not puncture the artery and cause blood loss.
And the wind eggplant in the mouth gives rise to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is a place for tracheotomy of the pharynx.
May the wind eggplant that is made on the two spoons gives rise to caphtan, which is caused by the accumulation of heat.
And the wind eggplant of the two parts of the needles gives rise greatly to tracheotomy of three veins, which is from the pharynx, fusca and cephalica, because it draws out all the blood that is in the flesh, and those small veins of the other veins that are thicker than they reach the attraction to the three veins.
And command the bleeder that he not proceed too much in the act of scarification, for the area is exposed to flesh, and leave there his nerves and arteries.
And there is a bleeder who is bled over the buttocks and relieves the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers behind.
And you command the bleeder that he be a great bleeder, and that he be of iron, for the area requires strong section; and he should have thin and delicate veins, and be bled during the act of scarification.
May veins of the thighs be thinned by obvious minuicio, for they draw all the blood from the body, and relieve old pains of the joints and of the loins, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve constipation and diarrhea; and stand in place of fleubotomia of two sophens, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
However, if it weakens the whole body and causes syncope in men.
When the patient's breathing becomes shallow, it is recommended to place two cushions under their arms.
The quality of the position of the arms is that they are placed in a way that allows them to be slightly elevated and cooled by a moderate breeze, and do not prolong this position, but rather change it often, and keep them comfortable, so that the humors can flow into the body. Do not stop repeating this until you see that the affected area has become red and swollen, and the signs of infection appear.
And then you should gradually scarify and repeat this process little by little, and also consider the position of the body.
For that person who has thin skin, it is recommended to scarify only once and not repeatedly, so that the affected area does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to blow on the scarified area and gently fan it, making the process easier.
And if the infection has become severe, then it is recommended to scarify twice, because in the first scarification, the pathway for drainage and the moisture of the affected area are opened. In the second, during the examination acquired from the extraction of the large stone.
And if the stone is foul, then make a superficial incision in the clean part to allow it to pass.
And finally, when we want to extract a small one by one or a small one, we need a superficial incision.
And if we want to extract a large stone, make a large incision; and if we know that the stone is very large, then make a preliminary incision.
The term for incision is the depth of the wound.
And if the wound is large, thick, dark, and its pores are straight, then make the incisions of the blisters more gentle, more open, and more resolved; if it is in summer time, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violat, or oil of amellas dossas, or oil of cement of coja; and if it is in winter time, then use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camamilla, or of sand, and similar.
And if the excess is large, then rub it with oil of marjoram, or oil of balm, or oil of aloe, or oil of aneth, and similar oils.
And if the wound is large because of thick flesh, then it is prohibited to use oil, and instead, for these locations of wounds, the wound should be washed with warm water or fresh water of salt, or warm water of cow's milk, or warm water of donkey's milk, and similar.
And for the one whose wound is of thick moisture, wash the wounds with warm water of vinegar, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar.
And for the one whose excesses are large, wash the wounds with warm water of vinegar, or water of pennyroyal, which is marjoram, or water of aneth, or camomile, and similar.
And it is recommended to keep the wound away from dirt; having them administered nearby the bath for an hour or two, and it is recommended to keep the wound near the bath.
What is the reason for retaining blood from a person before a phlebotomy?
If the person who is to be bled or the one who performs the phlebotomy is irritable and has a sharp and inflamed tongue, with symptoms such as mildew acidity, and sweet and sour taste, and dry mouth, and julep, and similar symptoms, then consider that they should take cooling causes, such as mildew acetose, and endive anise, and agrimony, and julep, and their similarities.
And pause their meals such as pork, and meat of young geese, and cooked foods with sour taste, and their similarities.
And from the one whose complexion is cold, consider that they should take essence of almond, or essence of secanabin of semense, and sumac, and any fragrant herb between old and new; and that they should be advised to use little wine and food, and pause their meals of pork and cannabis, and pissers and small birds and pigeons.
And it is recommended that on days of wind and flagellation, the food should be more than the meal.
And it is recommended that food be given to some men in the morning, with certain herbs, musk, or medicaments of musk, so that the main members are comforted and that the sickness is alleviated; and do not recommend that they take that scalfatz.
The incisions that are made should be incisions that are placed on the legs, and over the fetus and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the locations of the joints, and the great toe, because these members do not suffer incision on themselves.
And it is not desired for those but to draw out the sickness of the member, such as a moist bandage on the breast in illness of flux of sickness from the sickness of the nose; and use that which is to dissolve the moisture of the flesh inviscade of the member, such as a bandage over the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and scalps it and ramifies the pain that resolves the moisture.
When pain occurs in the joints due to inflammation or swelling, a strong attraction force can help reduce the inflammation and remove the swelling from its location.
Similarly, when it is placed on the leg and foot, it helps to relieve the swelling in those areas.
These relieving measures are administered only with succession; and some are administered with heat.
And some are administered full of warm water in the afflicted areas of the foot.
This is to ensure that the relieving measure is full and large, using warm water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
A relieving measure administered with heat: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the remedy should be the thickness of a palm; and it should be on the side of the affected area, in the location that is within the circle, the most of it, the track should be small according to the amount that enters into it, an needle.
Make a pad or cushion of wool or citrus, with thick edges, lion, equal and smooth, so that it does not press the member in its position on it.
And place it at the side of the patient's body, where a candle is placed near the fire.
And this large cloth is much better than that one we recommended; and the smaller one, according to the patient's illness and condition.
And the cloths for children and weak people are different from those for young people and large bodies.
And the quality of placing this cloth on the member is that it extends the melted wax from a candle, and place it on the side of the transverse line in the middle of the cloth, so that the fire is lit around the part to be treated without burning the patient's body.
And place it on the patient's member, and the doctor says so on the throat that we mentioned, until when they have the cloths and do not need to open the mouth and let the steam over that throat, then the cloth will be dissolved soon.
And then apply the second instrument according to its method, and repeat that one if necessary.
In a syringe that is administered in the patient's bed of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse or horizontal line, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the member only.
And this is the form of it: And this syringe, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in any member but in the members in which it is impossible to position syringes, such as teeth and similar ones; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar ones.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodletting instruments that are in the waters of polluted streams.
And then lay them down in water until they are famished, and that there is no cause in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body with the flannel and syringes; and then wash the member of the patient before it becomes red; and then place them on it.
And when they are filled and cased.
And if it is possible to see the area with a wind instrument, it is better to do so from behind.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and a mottled cloth; and wipe and extract it.
And if the body is prolonged from the wound to the cavity of the bleeding vessels, and that water is drained, then place a cloth soaked in cold water under the area where the drainage is located.
And if the wound is multiplied, then powder over it with vitriol trisulfate, or with similar substances according to the causes of styptics, until the wound is stopped; or place the most dried beans on the area and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound is stopped.
And if necessary, repeated bleeding of the vessels, when it is possible to change them.
And if the vessels are prohibited from suspension, then wipe the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the places where blood can be found; and place them there, so that those vessels that have some blood soon stop bleeding.
And when you want them to pass, powder some triangular aloes, or salt, or ash on those areas, and they will soon pass.
Here begins the section of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental dislocation in the bones.
Oh child, know that many foolish doctors and the common people and those who at some time will not regard the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences in our earth is hidden; and I do not have it and am obliged to it in some time from all; and I have not admitted anything that comes after, but by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of them.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns the greatest science and on which the best experiment was passed; so that it is opened to you others and relieved from the occupation of length; and it is opened in the end of opening; and it is shown in the end of declaration; and it is formed in it many forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, as it has been done in two previous chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections on the breakage of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and different limbs of each one. Therefore, let us say in the introduction of this chapter the summaries of the speech; and the titles to which in the beginning are suitable for craftsmen and students, who know or learn this noble art besides you.
Therefore, let us say that when something happens to someone with a fracture or dislocation or twist or crush, then you should begin by examining the pulse or removing it, or whatever means, if no cause prevents, as in the case of debility of virtue, or is the one who has happened, or old age, or is time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with seeing the signs of fresh herbs and of bird carcasses and of crabs; and prohibit thick meats and filling up with foods and of all food that fills the veins of sang, until you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first usual state.
Therefore, as the bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious food that is thick, heavy, and difficult to digest, such as bread made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow's milk, cheese, and fresh pork, and similar foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more commonly and milk.
You know that bones can heal in men who are in the prime of life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the desiccation of their members.
May however nature adjust and anoint over the broken bone of any part, in which it is often said that it grows and strengthens the one inside that is enveloped and connected together, through which the end is fortified and firm, like fire at the beginning, through which any cause does not prevent it from its work.
For this reason, it is necessary to place the bandages on the patient's limbs, bandages in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of the limbs, for example the fracture of the bone of the chest is different from the fracture of the bone of the head; and similarly, the fracture of the bone of the arm is different from the fracture of the bone of the shoulder; and likewise, all other members are different among themselves.
And I have remembered the remembrance of all types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Great diversity of fracture in this case. There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are caused by arcs, others by accidents in the stars; and some are longitudinal fractures: and some fractures of the skull and ribs and additions and non-additions, as is done when preparing to write, and a fracture with a great pain and disruption in the head, and a small fissure.
And for each type, there is a specific pain in the restoration of it according to the memory that comes from its different locations.
Great severity of bone fracture. For that reason, bone fracture is known by its deformity, and by the swelling and tenderness of it to the touch, and by its location when it is felt at your hand.
And therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not made by touching the bone in its movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that the tortuosity or small fissure does not allow you to place your hand on it and compress it entirely; place it over the medicine of which you remember the appropriate moment, which is suitable for the location; and keep it straight by a delicate constriction.
You should know that when the location is curved and does not split into two or another, such as it remains throughout the entire part of the body, then you should begin with your hand to rectify the situation where the abscess occurs.
And if the abscess occurs, then leave it for several days until it ceases; and then apply an equal amount of each method of levitation and engagement that you can.
You should know that the restoration of the location and its hardening is more important than the bone in which the abscess occurs.
And then apply the second method when the memory of it comes back.
If the bone is affected, then it is necessary to extend this member torn in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if the member is small, then place your hand on it; or if there are two cords or one cord and the hand.
And position your hand on the part of the body where you place the limb, while the parts of the body are extended from the limb, then pierce those attachments to return them to their proper places and according to each method that you can in their locations.
And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or its damages; and pierce according to your power that you apply one bone against the other as a companion according to the best forms.
And be aware that at that time you touch your hand at that place, and if you see any different cause here, rectify that and equalize it according to the quantity of your skill.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as do foolish doctors who make movements that cause abscesses to occur through their operation, or cause contractions in the limb as we have seen through their foolish movements.
And the quality of the structure of the broken member is as I have recommended; because you know that broken members vary in their location, size, and shape.
And for those that are small like the arm and the elbow and similar to those, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
But those that are larger like the cushion or the chest, cover them with a thick and durable cloth, because the lightness of the cloth strengthens the member greatly and holds it together equally, in such a way that there is no opening.
And then, after you have started the evacuation of equilibrium, place a convenient bandage over that fracture with three or four layers as soon as the member is ready; and strengthen your hand slightly on the bandage.
And then go to the most sunken part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your structure does not break the location of the fracture. And then, with your tongue in the wrapping of the location of the fracture, slowly loosen the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of the location.
And then, take another bandage and wrap the other wound over the location with the wrapping, and slowly remove the wrappings from the part of the location behind the fracture; and your operation in the structure of the wrapping and the softening of the second one that we have said in the first wrapping.
And then, place your hand between the wrappings of the lion or cloth that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place your hand on it for any reason.
And then, place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press these sharp wrappings at first, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the location; and later, place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which stops the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then, strengthen on that.
And if the splints of the cane are made of this type, and well formed; or of wood; or of ramps of palm; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and narrower than the others, and the length of the splint according to what is placed on the member in magnitude and equality; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first structure; and place a piece of cloth decently above it as we have said about the structure, and that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
And the threads should be thick and thin in subtlety, and they should be made of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of sewing up wounds with thick cords of silk, which is a great error when the structure is equal.
It is not advisable to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to sew together those things that you want, and it will not be possible for there to be any space between each one.
And if the patient is lying on the edges of the stirrups near the area where the sewing will be done, then place a layer of lion or lambskin over that area to prevent injury.
Some fractures are difficult to treat, and disruptions in the spine can occur, and you will need to remember that in this case there is a special singularity in the second chapter of the capital.
And you should know that not all broken bones can be treated with stirrups on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not allow for resting on the stirrups for several days or even more, depending on your certainty of the risk of an abscess.
This is the method of plasters used by the ancients to treat fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Handcrafted device like a bandage for the restoration of fractures, suitable for certain complexities and especially for women and children, where it is placed on the part that does not have heat or moisture: and you take powder from milled grain, and this is the medulla of the flour that should be mixed with the movement of the mill in the parts of the mill.
And if it is like that, but you crimple that album of honey, and place the condition of the non-sharp or subtle; and then use it from there.
Another device for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lavender, of acacia, of enula, and myrrh, which is made from one part of each ingredient, mixed with one drachm of aloe. x; one drachm of mirra and aloe. v; alochil drachm xx; all their crushed and crimpled and mixed with either alichil water or honey if the condition of the patient is scalded; and then use this device, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more gently, and confers to most men.
Another remedy for fractures and sprains: Take equal parts of white marjoram, mint, aloe, and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contraction, and their sieves, and their powders with water or egg white and administer it.
Remedy for separating joints and bones in those places, and for painful accidents in those areas and fractures: Take a piece of silk cloth and soak it in a mixture of vinegar and oil and place it on the affected area.
This remedy does not have the virtue of healing, but it can prevent and expel pain properly.
Another remedy that heals broken bones: Take fig leaves and wild poppy flowers, grind them all and make a poultice from them.
Remedy for applying when healing a broken bone: Take equal parts of white marjoram, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of ers, and all the ingredients ground together, and apply it to the affected area if the limb is not scalded.
If it is burned, then apply a wet cloth or a wet cloth made of it.
Another stronger plaster for quicker resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take petals of althea and seeds of lime, balm, melissa, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, all parts equal; all should be boiled in water or wine or honey, all according to the quality of the member and its color.
May not use Hippocratic wine freely placed on the member to be restored, but rather make a wax seal with wax and oil, and not another cause; and recommend that it be done between roughness and fineness.
May not use Gall wine placed on the member to be restored and its causes in which drying is small of heat as it has with mirra, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Grease for wound and pain relief: recipe equal parts of miguel, of ceze, of hair from an unshaved man or a feather from an owl, and aloe, and salt; crush them with a mortar and pestle, and make into a paste.
The amount should be adjusted according to the size of the wound and its location; consider whether it does not cause pain or inflammation, and if the bones are not broken, do not leave it for more than a few days. If pain, inflammation, or swelling occurs at the location, then remove it in that hour, and leave the paste on the wound.
Take a cloth and sea sponge of lion's mane moistened with water, and soak it in cold water; then wash the wound until the swelling subsides and the pain is eased; and leave the member to rest for an hour; and then place a woolen bandage moistened with warm vinegar and olive oil on the wound, and keep it there for a night until you are sure of preventing an abscess, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and that the pain of the wound is relieved.
And then gradually apply that delicate structure and use a small, not too strong plaster for your first construction, and gently insert it where it is healing.
And if you see that the abscess and pus and pain and inflammation and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need plaster and structure, then gradually apply it as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm has occurred to the member from those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it for three or four or five or seven days; and some days all of this is left for twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the structure more than in your first structure, and adjust it according to the increase of the food of the patient, after the remembrance of him.
But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extended than it should be, then know that the food is prohibited from reaching that; and therefore apply it with warm tepid water throughout the day that you removed it; and this is all three days; and the structure is added a little, and for this operation the food reaches the member, and it is healed more quickly.
When those who are called bone setters restore the fracture of a limb in another way when it is not restored to its original position, according to their opinion, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient ones in their freedom and they would harm that work.
I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The species of fractures are varied, and their figures are different, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by percussion of the space, and the percussion goes through the entire bone, which is located behind the bone, just as it does in the bone, and for that reason this species is called "ascial"; or the space enters a part of the bone and penetrates the flesh but does not pass the incision to the back of the bone; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absolute".
And the pain from these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contrary or atricious; and the cause of it is percussion by a sharp object or a fall on stone, and similar circumstances.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is on the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is great or little.
And of fracture that is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called capillary.
And this fracture that is made by a fall or by percussion of stone, and similar circumstances, which causes some fragment of the bone to be driven into the parts inside, and it happens in the concave place as it happened to the ribs when they were struck and their fragments entered into the parts inside.
This happens more in the bodies of humans, such as their skulls.
And all these special fractures are caused by falls from a height, like those that occur when stairs are separated. And you should remove everything from that location.
And you should detect all these special fractures by examining them and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And a special kind of fracture is known by the way it is discovered on the bone, it is cleaned, and it is covered with a bandage, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that it means by manifest signs such as vomiting from colera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the throat, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the glands and pain in those parts, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, they are not cured.
And if you see that the symptoms do not correspond to a cure, then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause of this is that if it has come to you in the place where it was originally and it is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the day of the fourteenth, all in disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the seventh day, having that which is left of the bone is corrupted by the panniculitis, and that accidents have occurred.
And if the fracture has already reached the panniculitis covering the brain, and it is small and thin, then you should study in the position of the cut and thin part, according to what I will recommend to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient lying down, and disclose over the bone according to custom and your ability, as much as possible according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at the patient's am aquo that covers, and that you fill the place of cloths infused in vinegar and olive oil, and make a bandage over the wound until it is sedated the abscess, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in the removal of it.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the form of it:
And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
And you should have various incisors of different widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and sharp at the ends of their extremities, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease for percussion on the incisor so that it does not hurt the head and let that one go.
And if the bone is hard, tough, then pierce it in its circumference where you administer the incisors with those called non-penetrating tartars.
And those are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point where you approach it, so that the tartar has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left behind the head similar to a margin or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
And it is convenient for you to take many of these needles that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is in your present in all tests of the brain, the length and width of which should be according to the quantity of spirit in this test.
And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality to pierce in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it along its length until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around that is.
And then insert the thinnest possible needle between each crack of the bone, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause that has appeared at that point, such as delicate scissors and forceps.
And be sure to guard against any cause that the scissors might touch the brain.
And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it continues to be attached to the bone, and if you extract that, cover it with a material that is rough and uneven like the surface of the bone, but rather more smooth and subtle than other scalpels.
And if there is any small part of the bones that are attached and stuck, then take that which you can from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find the ones we have mentioned.
And the other method of operation is longer and more difficult, which Galen and Avicenna praise greatly; and this is the speech about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most obvious, before you have discovered that part and placed it behind the end of this slow and gentle scalpel, of which this is the form:
And that the lens-shaped part is lion and does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp part is of the same length as before; that the lens-shaped part should be adjusted to the bone at the surface of which the sharp part incides.
And then, approach the incisor with a small sharp knife within which you insert the bone entirely as it is revolved, and you should be sure of the pericardium that it does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
If any cause is attached to the pericardium in some places of the bone, then cut that one with the extremity of the incisor that lenticular, and release that one with facility, which is released from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pericardium, and that which is abscised or stopped on the bone is the face of it, and it is in the roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with razor-sharp knives which you have prepared for that purpose, of various quantities so that you can possibly administer them in all places the most convenient for them and the most direct of them second to that in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and its figure.
And you should apply in your reason the medicine that you have used to thin those bones at the beginning, and then use it close to the most thin part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest of all those drugs.
In all other small bone fractures and thin fractures, apply the cure according to that which you used to correct it.
And it is not caused by all those that have studied in that art. And you should refer to what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the bandage is removed when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the same amount as the wound, and soak it in rose oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and soak it in wine and rose oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible without causing pain; and then apply a broad bandage over it, but do not strain it except for the amount that the wound has, only enough to hold it together.
Let this person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure that the abscess has healed; and then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of aloes and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property that is to remove and not bite.
And guard against the second that the wound in your cure is not contaminated; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or other; nor do you allow to add virulence to it; because when it is applied to the membrane of the brain, corrupts that and pores out that, and affects the patient with that evil malignity.
And it affects the cerebrum, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed in the cure of it, and it blackens on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it affects the patient with the accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for him.
And if no black magic is involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is the power of that medicine that causes the black magic, then cover that part with melted honey and four parts of olive oil, and place a cloth on it, and rest that over the affected area; and then care for that with the appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Chapter III.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken in two pieces, but rather in two parts, which are more solidly joined together, because there are two bones inside it, and the part that is left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken, and it does not affect it except for its shape and curvature and flexibility.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then cover that part with the smaller bone of the nose, and equalize that fracture with the other bone, and place it in its proper position, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this to help you, and be careful not to hurt the patient during your operation on the patient.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit it to be seen, then cover it with a small swelling on the side where it is located.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the patient on the first day after the fracture, if possible; and if not, then approach the seventh or tenth day to replace the bandage of the abscess cautiously.
And then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and be careful not to block the nostril completely.
And say to the ancient restorers that the splints should be wrapped in bread, and moved around every day, but not seen by me; having covered the cloth with a piece of compacted powdered molasses; and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
Some splints should be inserted into the nose, in place of a plug, without any more cloth than a lion's mane; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent, do not prohibit the patient from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; and if you want to do it, do so, and if you want to, make plugs.
And if another splint accidentally causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or a poultice made of warm water and rose oil, or with diachylon.
However, if no abscess occurs, apply a plaster made of flour of starch and powder of calamine with egg white to the deformed part; and place it on top of the lion's mane, and do not leave the nose without any cause.
However, if the bones of the nose are fractured or broken, then cut over those, and remove those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this opening, and heal it with what is suitable to consolidate, and with plasters that are suitable.
If there is pain in the nose, then apply a warm compress and administer medication through a nozzle into the nostril to treat it completely.
Chapter 4
Of the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not painful, if the fracture is only slightly deformed and is not completely separated into two pieces and is curved to the parts inside, then it is likely to heal.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then insert your finger from the left side of the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then insert your finger from the right side of the patient's mouth; and press that against the soft part of the fracture inside, with your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize them.
And if the fracture of the jaw has already been separated into two pieces, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line as much as possible to equalize them.
And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of dislodgement, then use those that you hope will remain in place, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled-up cloth, and place a large steady sheet of cloth, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold them above second by what you have prepared for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place the food of lion's blood on their wounds.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then take and remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of mold, album of egg, or flour of cinnamon, so that you have already removed the plaster from it, and place a lion's wool on the application.
And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the position of the bone is not altered, leave that, until it is healed and strong the fracture; because this fracture is strict in three stages.
And if another event occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same medicine that we have mentioned for other events during their recovery, and let that abscess remain.
And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the separated bone or fragments are displaced or not. If they are, then use the same instruments that are used for removing those from the instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them with a scalpel according to your need.
And when you have replaced those fragments, and if any do not remain, then enlarge the openings of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place one of the dressings that are suitable for this and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the shoulder when it is dislocated.
The shoulder bone is often fractured at the part where it meets the arm, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts, other than those that do not require surgery; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are complications in the surgery, and it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is severe.
In that case, the operation when the fracture is severe, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the assistant and follows the broken rib, and the other stretches the neck towards that part.
Then level the fracture with the ribs until it is in the second form of the bone, and not in the eminence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover the patient's chest with cloth or wool, and make it according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the rib and tie the bandage to your hand until the fracture is leveled as before.
If you cannot pull the tip of the scapula to the fractured parts, so that it reaches the front, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion under their neck.
And the assistant lifts the muscle of the patient to the fractured parts before the bone of the scapula is raised to its position in front, and then you straighten the fracture and equalize it with those called splints.
But if you feel pain in the scapula and its muscles, then have them removed to relieve that pain.
And if it is stuck in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this purpose, after removing the scapula and the instrument that serves to break the bone; and this instrument is a hammer or an iron rod of which this is the shape of it:
And it is similar to a chisel of which this is the concavity; and its thickness should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
The length of the incision should be second to what is possible during the operation; there should be two endpoints, and one endpoint should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the bone fragment is wide, and it is sure of infection, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear infection, then you fill the wound with gauze and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
And if infection occurs, then pour oil and rosewater on the gauze and place it over that.
And even if the bone above the broken one is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the ligaments are softened or you see that the bone has healed, then you should straighten it and strengthen the joint.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and place a small cushion under their neck to support their head; so that the assistant can raise the bone of their clavicle to the level of the muscle; or hold their arm against their chest.
And do not dislocate it unless an abscess occurs in the place prematurely or after twelve days.
And then renew the bandage if you have seen the wound at that place, and adjust it in the stricture and restore it; leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in the middle of that time for some people.
Chapter VI.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder joint.
A wooden spatula is broken in the area of the shoulder, not by the shoulder itself but by its edges.
And when the area of the shoulder is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the shoulder — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the shoulder and reduce it to its natural position in any way possible.
And then place powdered chalk and stopper on the fracture; and then place double-layered cloth; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the entire spatula or more.
If the layer is concave in any part of the shoulder, then level that concavity with stopper and then place the layer evenly.
And then apply strength above with long tape for the compression of the layer until it is not moved from its place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the swelling if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their left side.
The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25 days.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is not from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut it off, and remove it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if something happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the thigh.
The thigh is broken in the middle of its length, and that part is still attached; but the ends of it are not united or comminuted.
And when the bone is broken in that place, it declines towards the parts inside and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and severe vomiting and nausea; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion between their shoulder blades; and then press on the muscles of the broken bone, and adjust the ribs of the patient to two vertical positions, and gently perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible methods and what is suitable for it, until the figure of the bone returns as it was before.
And then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone and place it on a soft, flat surface of cloth or paper and similar materials to prevent it from becoming maggot-infested; and gently apply that over the broken bone so that it does not become putrid; and then apply some lotions to the wound according to the return of the flesh to its normal position, and strengthen that with a suitable dressing; and consider the wound throughout the healing process, and when it becomes soft, strengthen that.
If necessary, to prevent dislodgment of the bandage or swelling, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, you should remove and replace it and remove the plaster and correct what has occurred due to the method of treatment; and then return the plaster, if it is necessary to apply it again; and adjust the restriction until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the restoration of ribs when they are bruised.
You should know that rib fractures do not occur except in the largest parts that are on both sides; and from the extremities of those parts, no contractions occur except for those that are cartilaginous. And you should not be confused by the sensation of pain with the examination of it and its signs.
And the restoration should be such that it is equal to the fracture according to the method possible, until it is covered by flesh, and then apply plaster and strength to the broken bone in that place, if necessary from that one.
If the rib fracture is directed towards the inner parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by someone who has coughed, and for that reason, the bones are covered with a cloth; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, which is difficult to cure.
And the ancients used this method with great success.
They say that covering the patient's belly with a cloth causes inflammation and heat, so that the abdomen is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the outer parts.
However, we do not use this method because it is not a reliable cause of generating abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, we now help with that.
And they said that it should be placed above the wound and sucked strongly; but this is similar to reasoning, however, it is feared that the wound will draw too many fluids to the area due to its weakness.
And they said to him: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between his ribs until it is full, which should be the same as when you wrap a second-degree burn; and then cure the patient with the care of wounds from food and medicine.
And if the patient is very strongly constrained and has not suffered from it, and the bone punctures the bandage, then place something over the wound on top of the patient, expose the broken rib, and then place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, which is preceded by the remembrance of the same, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitches, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in the wound, then you should cover it and insert powder into hot oil and place it over the wound, and treat the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him lie on his side over which he usually sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter Nine
On the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck and ribs, and they are similar to those in the sacrum and back. And if this happens to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened and stunned and dead and cannot move those nor extend nor strengthen them and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel any pain in those places, then know that they are not healed, and in these conditions it is mortal.
And if they feel pain in those places and pressures, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similar things in the sacrum of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
If you notice that it has already softened, then apply those things that happen in the abdomen, and when it is on its back, it becomes bloated and wants to defecate or urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of it is to puncture the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with some mugwort leaves; place some cloths on it until the abscess is sedative.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and be calm and not sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the fracture of the bone is separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and set that bone; and adjust the wound edges, with stitches if it is large; and care for that wound with some animal fat until it is healed.
If the lower back of the spine is broken, and it is at the end of the coccyx, then you should insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones as much as possible with the other hand; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken ribs in that area, then perform surgery on it, and remove that, and cure the wound with the treatment that is preceded by its healing.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are often broken, and if they are broken, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts of the wound; and the patient experiences pain at the location and puncture, and the bed is stupefied when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that which is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary to be similar to its natural shape.
But if the fracture is long or has declined to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their stomach until you are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or iron, and strain for stricture on the one you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity of that which places it inside where the fracture takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their stomach or side.
But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which precedes it; and return to the restoration of it, and strain that which is with cover.
If the bones of the skull are fractured or crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11.
On the treatment of the fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the treatment of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grasp it at the place where the meat is thickest, according to this form:
And if it is connected in two ends of two bands, then lift it up from the location.
And follow the patient on a chair; and when you reach the broken arm inside where it meets the shoulder, place the curvature of the bone in the middle of that.
And lift up some heavy weight, or the nurse extends it to the parts behind; and place the doctor where the fracture is closest together, until the fracture returns according to its form.
And the other nurse is that the patient should be placed on their back and their arm supported by the collarbone; then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the pressure behind the patient; and each of them extends to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you strengthen over the fracture and on the other side of the collarbone, and each of the two ministers extends to their part.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the collarbone over the shoulder and the other behind the fracture, on the side.
And similarly, if the fracture is on the side, then cover that collarbone over that place and on that side.
And equal to that which is easy and their work, and when it is covered and applied according to the covering and application, then strengthen it if there is no suppuration after cauterization.
If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place your hand over it in a certain way to prevent it from spreading until it heals, and then remove it.
The way to remove it is to apply a poultice over the wound, and then wrap it with clean cloth over the poultice; then adjust your arm on that support, and place your hand on their muscle.
Then place the cloth and remove it over the arm support to prevent the arm from being in the wrong position, if there is any cause of the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And then place that splint that is closer and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of the fracture, and the length of the splints should be according to the broken bone plus three inches of all parts.
And then remove it over the splints with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And your restriction on the location of the fracture should be stricter. When the fracture is more elongated, the restriction is less strict.
And if you see the position of the splints and the restriction as we have said at the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
And if you fear infection, then leave the restriction and splints until the seventh day as we have said.
And then consider the limb in all parts for three days to prevent it from happening in the improper or inflamed location; or eating is prohibited until the member is disposed of due to excessive restriction; and therefore correct all of this as we have said.
But if you are unsure that none of these causes will occur, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be on their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant completely covered with wool, and consider in all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the limb is softened, therefore correct all of this according to your virtue.
And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given before, unless the food is subtle in the beginning until it begins to digest; and then wait until the food is fully digested.
It is customary for the assistant and the person supporting the patient to be strong for ten days; and then wait until they are relieved, administered a bath, and treated with drugs that correct that.
And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not remove that bandage and those splints within one day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
An arm is composed of two bones, which are called two forearms; one is small, and that is the one that is attached to the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is attached below the small one, from the part where it is attached.
And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if both are broken together.
When the small intestine is pierced above, its restoration is less likely, and its healing is even less likely.
And when the large intestine is pierced below the fracture of which, its healing is bad, and its healing is difficult.
It is even worse when two bones are pierced.
Therefore, if the bone that is pierced by the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its healing, and place a slight extension to prevent it from being equal.
But if the large intestine is that which is pierced, then place a more forceful extension to prevent it from being equal.
And if both intestines are pierced, then place a stronger extension to prevent them from being equal.
And place the hand of the patient over the extension and the intestine, and place the other hand on the side of the patient's face, higher than all others, and the ear should be lower than all others, and the patient should lie on a flat bed.
And place a cushion under the patient's head or neck, to prevent them from moving.
And the assistant extends the arm of the patient further away from their side or over their body, and another assistant does the same.
And the doctor straightens the bones until they are reduced to the best possible figure that can be achieved.
And if there are any fractures in the bone, then carefully remove all the fragments to their original place with your skill.
And if there is a fracture that appears to be separated and cannot be expected to be restored, then do as we have mentioned above.
But if the fracture is open, you have already done this special procedure, and therefore take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a piece of cloth dipped in warm oil and white wax, and it should be moist but not too thick, and strong cloth over that to cover the subtle structure until the abscess is reduced; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered myrrh and honey, and let it dry.
And you should know that the number of ribs in the arm is variable, either a fracture in one or two bones at once.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as tightly and forcefully as possible, and when more strips of the bandage are above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little more loosely than it was before in the beginning of the chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to be moved gently between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and its position closely. And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that happens to the limb, and then cover it with water until that problem stops.
And do not keep the limb pressed until it relaxes, and then return the bandage.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and similar to those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, then gradually loosen that one a little and allow the nourishment to reach it within those days until it can again, and strengthen that one.
However, if nothing happens to the patient that is similar to those we have mentioned, then do not allow it to be removed within the next 20 days or around those times.
And suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving and make that one sleep on their side.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or the strong one is restored in 28 days, and all of that depends on the condition of the complexions and the conditions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of fracture of the little finger and those mentioned.
When the pinch of the thigh and the knees of said tart have a fracture, do not apply any force to them, but use gentle pressure.
And when the patient has a fracture or sprain, make sure they remain lying flat and keep their legs in the same plane, and place your hand on the extended leg.
And the assistant should extend the broken bones and the doctor should align them in a good alignment.
And make sure to apply a plaster and bandage, but be careful not to apply it too tightly; and place your hand above the wound according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in a cloth of linen.
But if the bandage is in the parts of the intestines, then make it similar to a sling, and command the patient to hold it against their abdomen; make sure it is tightened long.
And make sure the part of the bandage that is elevated is in the cloth, so that the wound can be applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is at the parts deformed, then place your hand above and below the part of the bone, so that the muscle is exposed and straight; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up in a bandage between the mentioned limbs.
If the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the mentioned limbs, then if it is a large bone, place it as strong as possible on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and not to be deformed.
If the fracture is in the other mentioned bones, such as in the middle of the bone, or in the end, or in the ear, or in the ring, then it should be equal and flat on the said surface; or all should be even and continuous, which is better; or place a small splint above, as we have said in the large bone.
And consider, in your restoration, and place it above, the disposition of abscess cautery and opposition — against the said operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is reported about it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are fractured and are declared to be broken as soon as they turn to the second pain and to the most severe.
The restoration of it is done in such a way that the bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
And then the assistant extends the bandage completely over the part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is placed at the top of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed on the denolh to the part of the patella, so that the extension can be in it, and the other bandage under the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is placed at the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed on the denol to the part behind, and the extension to the parts in front.
And then the doctor should gently move the bones of the arm, placing them back into their natural position and allowing the bone to heal properly; however, if there is an abscess on the member, then apply a bandage and compression, but do not allow the member to become infected. However, if there is an infection in the abscess, then leave it open for several days until the infection has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage for the fracture should be made as follows: wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it twice or three times, and then remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the affected leg and foot.
Introduce the long felt between the thigh and the pillow, near the damaged area, and then cover the ends of the felt with a cloth that is more absorbent than the two parts; and then roll it up over the pillow and leg to cover any excess.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of the fracture, and place a cloth over the bones of the leg.
And then fill the empty spaces between the bed and the cushion with many folded cloths, so that the pressure is coagulated.
And then begin the strong bandage from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your bandage should be thinner and looser and wetter.
And then extend two extremities of the bandage to the parts behind until it reaches the hollow of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the straps on the other side so that the bandage does not remain in its own place.
And then lay the bandage over that, so that it does not cause damage to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things; and if any of those causes occurs, then count on dismantling it, and correct what happened as soon as possible, according to the methods we have mentioned.
But if in the bone there is a bone fracture that puts it, then try to align it as much as possible; and if not, put it on and return it, and cure the one that precedes the remembrance until it is healed.
When some splints are strengthened to this fracture of the thigh or others that are adjusted to its bones, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of this fracture, it does not happen to the patient that he becomes paralyzed; and if it is restored alone, another cushion should be applied to the other knee, as it is necessary that he becomes paralyzed from that one.
And you should know that the thigh is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and of the other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder bone.
You should know that the fracture of the shoulder bone occurs suddenly, but it does not happen to the other broken bones.
But if it happens to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is a simple or double, and over that all is dependent on the sensation.
The restoration of the bone should be equal to what was broken from the parts of the limb that are called joints, and it should be added and joined as much as possible according to equality and convenience and construction.
Then place a bandage and place it on that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen it with a stricture at that convenience.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended in other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those that are opposite to all accidents that are convenient for that one until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large, and it is called the rib; and the other is thin, and it is called the costal.
And according to the species of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of the bone is made equal to the restoration of the arm, and the operation of the bone is one.
And if two bones are broken at once, the cushion is placed in all directions.
And if a more delicate bone is fractured, the cushion is placed in the Denant position.
And if a larger bone is fractured, it is usually due to causes that are not within your control.
Then administer extension and alignment and the splints according to that equality.
However, if the fracture of the bone is in the same place as the previous one, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the arm there is a reason for surgery, and that is when you align the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron rods that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the palms; they are similar to those with a small groove, and not like the hands, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the arm and the elbow to the farthest.
And then cover each one with a blanket in two layers according to its length, and place one over the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and the other underneath the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three blankets in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, so that this structure prohibits the bed from tilting to the right or left side, and it is a good position.
And then a small board according to the length of the bed is administered; and it is placed on the bed so that it maintains its movement.
And especially cover that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And then consider the bed every day and study how to maintain it, and you should guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and when something happens of those, then pause at the same time that it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those mentioned.
Not all of the talus is fractured; rather, some fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fewer fractures occur in the mentioned bones, and they do not occur to them but only in the joints of their position.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then the patient should place his foot on the prepared ground as if walking.
And then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two flat sides.
And then strengthen that part of the foot with a bandage and other causes of which it is in need.
And after three or four days pass, then you remove the bandage, where you find the bones equalized, or they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those is like this with such conditions.
If the patient's toes are broken, then repair those and equalize them with each other and with the healthy ones, and you should recommend their restoration in the treatment of the mentioned condition. Then place your hand along the length of the broken toe and place a bandage on it; then move the foot to this table that is recommended for you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
If that bone is broken into two or three or more pieces, then you should place your hand on each part of the covered area in lion cloth, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table on the belly of the foot to hold it in place.
And it is necessary for you to not forget that you should consider all the causes that have been told to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have mentioned, and pause at any sign of that accident.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the knee of the woman and the bone of the patella and the vertebra of the man.
When the womb of the woman is crushed, then perform this cesarean section in the lower abdomen, and then gently place it on the back of the spine, and hold it there.
And then the midwife should gently remove the womb from its position, and do so with the same caution as before; and then the woman should be gently shaken, and her arms raised little by little, until everything is removed from the area where the womb was, and the crushed bone returns.
And then place powder on her back, and when she needs to urinate, gently help her to do so and remove the urine, and then reduce and return it according to the method by which it was placed initially, and then return it to its original position.
Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a catheter of silver and insert it into the urethra of the woman; and then inflate the entire bladder into the womb, and then gently blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated inside the womb, so that the fracture returns.
And if it is necessary to fill it with cotton and linen for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
When the bones of a man or woman's patellar tendon are fractured, then administer in the recovery and needle insertion of that which we have recommended in the bone of the thigh.
And that which is drawn out should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, especially to the one to whom some study and use and understanding of this free motion is given; because that fracture means to you in the major dispositions via dreyturiera in the recovery and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
In the wound of a man when it is split, take guarguamela of lead, and put the wound in that; and place your hand over it wrapped in cloth, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the recovery of bone fractures when it is impacted.
It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture to have, especially if the bone is large like the bones of the jaw or the helper, or similar to those, that you should have and use a splint as soon as the conditions for splinting are present.
And if the fracture does not heal, then make sure you hold it in place by applying three fingers of powder on it, unless there is another cause.
Then begin to restore the fracture in that place, but do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
However, if an abscess occurs, leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before it subsides, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
However, if the broken bone is prominent above the coccyx, then make sure you reduce it and equalize it with your fingers at your convenience and with minimal extension.
If the extension does not match your prepared equilibrium and the patient's legs, then you reduce it to your hands and this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight spans, and its width is according to the extent of the injury; and for that reason, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these instruments in every special case of fracture.
And it should be smooth, and in the part that is greasy, so that it does not slip off the instrument during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end that is marged in its extremities; and the underside of it should be broad and thick, and the top of it should go into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called "labrave" in Greek, which is the name of the instrument.
So that the end of it can be placed on the elevated part of the prominent bone.
And apply pressure on that spot until the bone returns, and it should be equal to some equality.
And then apply force to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that which is necessary for it from among the tools that we have mentioned; or use a saw on that in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those which are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient feels great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do that which you have advised the patient greatly.
When your restoration is completed, which you have done to the bone, then apply a bandage with tightly bound sterile black cloth, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it over the wound or any other cause in which oil is present, so that it does not cause further injury and corrosion.
And then administer splints at the time of the bone's complementary restoration, and leave the wound exposed to prevent it from being covered with bandages according to the amount of the wound.
And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it is customarily done by folly doctors, who make incisions on their thighs, which are mortified or rotten and putrid, which is harmful. And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, different from the fracture of the others.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear that those evil accidents which we have mentioned might occur, and cause great pain in the area, then do not place splints over them, but instead make an envelope of cloth in the place of splints and strengthen it with those.
And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, which is when it starts to heal, then remove the cloth that you placed over it and administer poultices, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
And it is agreed that you should remove the bandage and consider the pain in each joint at dawn and evening, before it is consolidated and closed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the inflammation flows from it to the nearby parts for ease.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or discharged from it, then know that here are some remedies to help you search for the pain and treat it. And of those remedies, those that are separated and removed should be chosen, those that are not separated and placed on the member and cause more pain, you should choose those that are possible for you.
And if the pain is caused by zuchem or eluchen, which are diseases or another special type of corruption and putrefaction, then make sure that you place on it one of those remedies that are appropriate for the cure of which a previous account has been given in its own chapter.
And of that in which you should place the best advice and you make present your hand: when the large bones are cut, raise it over the member as if they were the bones of the joint and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction or removal of it, which may occur after a long time; leaving that inside for a while, because it will cause great pain for 20 days or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20
Of the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of a certain fracture.
Swelling occurs at the site of healing of a fracture, and more so near the joints, and is caused by the figure of the member; and it greatly prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administered in those medicines that have been stiptic with aloe, and ense, and mira, and sercacollo, and acrassia, and similar to those; in which you take some or all of them, and comfort those with a stiptic o album of honey, or a stiptic of vinegar, and place that on the swelling in a cloth, and bind it over the swelling for good compression.
And loosen the bandage that does not leave the swelling for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen on the swelling with a plaster of lead, which has the property of reducing everything that is inflamed in the members.
If the joint is already hardened and strained, and it does not necessarily cause gout, then cut that part of the bone that is most protruding, and scrape off the excess and eminent, or remove that part with a sharp instrument before it becomes re-inflamed; and cure that part while it is still healing.
Chapter 21.
When the fracture is restored and the limb is set, it should not be placed in its natural position.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb is set, it should not be done for many reasons: one of which is that the solution of the flesh and ligament of the bone is not made according to its nature; or because there is an excess of stricture of the bones before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because there is too much embrocation; or because there is excessive movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of its debility.
The treatment for that is to make the patient lie on their back and keep them like that until the swelling increases in it; and administer baths, and apply compresses and leeches on it.
And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continues to draw out the impure humor from it, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22.
Of the treatment of broken bones that are restored improperly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to this.
When an injury occurs to a limb that has already been restored, it is necessary to correct the deformity of the broken bone and the nodosity, and to shape it in the form of the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of those who claim that the limb is newly broken.
But many foolish doctors and restorers have done this in our time; and this operation is very reprehensible, causing great fear of the fatal consequence that results from it.
If the patient has recently experienced swelling and pain, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of warm water mixed with softening herbs such as elderflowers, rue, melliot, and similar ones; or use a softening plaster like diallylquinolone; or use a poultice made of ground rue leaves and spread it on the affected area; or use a poultice made of crushed figs mixed with honey and applied to the area; or use a poultice made of crushed garlic and spread it on the affected area.
Some herbs are dissolved in an abundant amount of light oil and applied to the most humid parts of the body, and administered to promote movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
If the bending has already become chronic and is strong and converted into bone and causes the need for cure of the bone using iron, it is recommended to apply a poultice made of a lot of leek juice and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off any excess from the swelling of that part with a small surgical saw, and administer a remedy for relief in that case.
Chapter 23
Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, distorts the figure of the member, and brings pain and great injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and in such cases, the reduction of dislocation is difficult.
And to avoid this, it is not advisable to move or stretch the limb during the inflammation stage, because movements and stretches can bring on spasms and slow pain.
When such an event occurs, it is advisable to approach the patient's bedside, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then, the limb should be rubbed with warm water and oil, and reduced with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
And you have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder bone, it enters into the part that was just left.
Chapter twenty-four.
Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
If the lower jaws are not dislocated; and the dislocation of others is done in one of two ways: either they are reunited with their places by a little removal, and they are slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are softened at the part of the joint through which the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold that nor can close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his cheek.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the greatest positions if it can be done without cause.
If the dislocation is complete and completed, then apply reduction of it more carefully, and do not delay for too long.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and insert the surgeon's fingers on one side of the jawbone near the mouth of the patient, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers simultaneously on both sides, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the cheeks of the patient, and equalize them; and command the patient to stop clenching their jaw and remove the fingers from each part; and the surgeon should equalize the jawbone and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jawbones are dislocated, then apply heat and oil to the neck and back, until the reduction of both is made, and do not delay the reduction of both for too long, as we have said.
And when they are returned and equalized, and the patient's mouth is closed but not molded, then place a poultice of cloth on those parts made of wax and rose oil; and apply it to facilitate movement in the jaw.
And the patient's head should be positioned between two cushions, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the patient's own view, then remove the bandage when the pain is relieved and the jaw is unobstructed, then move that which you want.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for feeding, drinking, and other activities, until the jaw is unobstructed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws in a certain hour and they are not converted to their usual places, then use cold compresses and frequent baths, and strongly apply heat to the patient's abdomen, and strongly apply vomiting to purify the body.
And when you see this, know that it is fatal; and those who experience this will die within several days.
Chapter 25.
The reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated from the chest due to its continuity with the breast; and some ribs are dislocated at the front, and that is called pain in the chest.
The restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so it will return.
Then place a poultice and powders on it and strengthen it with that.
The extremity of that which is bent and connected to it, is not dislocated in any day; however, if it is reduced and straightened according to what we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on it, and command the patient to remain quiet and rest until it is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the base of the tongue to the base behind.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this is done quickly; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated downward through the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and deformed and remains at the base behind the tongue, and especially in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are fat muscles, it is difficult to be dislodged.
And it often occurs to men by blunt trauma or contusion, and the muscle of which is abscessed with an abscess, and it is treated for that because it has already been dislocated.
Then you should know that you should not enter that until you are over-serious about it, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind are deviant; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the unaffected muscle, because you find differences between them; and you feel in the head of the concave muscle behind the tilt of the muscle cap as if a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and you should feel the distinct touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of this is that the practitioner raises the hand of the patient above the parts; and you place your fingers behind the tilt of the affected part, and strengthen the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner raises the hand of the patient, and extends it in that direction; and you pause it where it returns easily.
But if it does not return, and since we have said that the dislocation occurred from the beginning, then after several days, the patient should be bathed in warm water and administered a bath that softens and melts, as if it were made of herbs such as rosemary, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and positioned under the patient's head a wool cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and the doctor places their hand on the patient's thigh, raises the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the patient's arm so that it does not fall to the side, and another minister holds the patient's head, so that it does not fall to the side, because at this time they return to their place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle under the pillow of the patient and raise the pillow of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the patient's arm from the sides of their belly. But if the patient is heavier, then cover that with which another cause is suspended, because that will cause dislocation to return quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: and it is that a long stick should be placed on the ground, like a mortar, which should not be too thick or too thin, and placed behind the patient; then the patient's head should be placed on the top of the stick covered with leather lions, and the patient should stand along the length of the stick, and the hand of the other part should be extended to the parts behind the other part; and the other part should be strengthened by the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: and it is that you take a stick of the length of two fists, and its width should be four digits, and its thickness should be thinned at the tip in the form of a titillus.
And then place a round leather lion on its head so that the stick does not descend the patient.
And then place the patient's head on the titillus, and extend the hand or arm over the stick between the parts behind, and tie the stick, the arm, and the end of the hand.
Then place one arm on a sloped scale according to the latitude, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other object should be suspended from the other side, as the joint enters quickly.
Then apply the instrument to the patient according to any possible method, and afterwards place a piece of wool of equal quantity over the tender part; and then apply a prepared paste of powdered mustard and albumen on the entire muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place a stricture decently behind the tender part; and the bandage should be rolled up on the paste, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and it should be left, and not be disturbed for seven days.
And make sure that the food of the patient is given in small amounts, until the member is comfortable, because it is more beneficial for their healing.
And the food should be given in larger amounts after seven or eight days and some exercise should be done; and if it is stopped and not made flexible, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to moisture that has accumulated in it or for some other reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cautery.
And if all of this has been done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint have been reduced due to some swelling, and it is not healed, nor catheterized, and cannot be raised above the parts above, then know that the nerves of which are at the head of the muscle, whether they are cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in place.
To reduce the dislocation of that which is made from the elbow and forearm or behind, reduction is done by impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
And the other bandage is applied there, and it is cured within the time that it is healed.
And if the healing is delayed in the limb and the movement of which is slow, then use moist bandages within the time that the gravity is relieved and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and when it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the arm meets the body, and the dislocation of it is not caused by a fall or by some touch according to any figure as it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder which is dislocated, it does not return to its place, that is your clear indication, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And you should feel that the shoulder is out of place, and reduce the dislocation as soon as it comes to its proper position, because if you see that it has come to its proper position, the reduction is difficult, and not always cured; and especially when it is at the back parts, because it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that place, which can lead to death.
When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce it, the doctor's hand should be extended towards the two sides, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the surgeon's fingers should be on the back and under the patient, and the elbow should be pushed towards the joint or the palm of the hand where it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the doctor's arm and his hand, until it hits the back and the palm of the hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force.
And if two assistants are extending the arm, then two assistants should hold it in place to prevent it from being pulled away during extension.
And then rotate the arm completely, so that it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage over the doctor's hand.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to prevent it from happening again and facilitate the movement of the joint until it returns.
And then bring the reduction of the uterus that is placed on that padding in which there is stiffness and execution of an album of hen's egg, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a few days.
And then remove the sling; and if the joint is formed in its place, then remove the bandage of it and leave it there.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then repeat the bandage and the sling, and leave it there for a few days until it is extracted; and then remove the sling.
But if the weight of the joint causes the reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and gentle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or place a greasy cloth on the joint, and leave it there on the bone and the night. And then remove that bandage, and put it in the bath; and when you are done, then rub the joint with cold friction, and repeat over the greasy cloth, which is a roll of movement, one day, and the second, and the third. with a warm instrument, when it is lukewarm.
And if you wish, place it over that cow's wound, which is moist and scalded, and apply some drying agents, as it is moist and reduce it to its proper state.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
The shoulder of the chest sometimes becomes dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, but rather it is important to have speed in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become abscessed or something else happens in the abscess.
And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the shoulder joint of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it into place as it returns to its proper location.
When the palm is not yet placed on the patient's belly, then place the patient's back on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then position the patient's back intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is near the joint.
And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then apply pressure to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, it will not heal or you cannot reduce it more than passing days.
However, the joint is twisted; and the patient does not know any cause, but the hand is soft and cannot strengthen any cause; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and you should not insert in it, but rather strengthen with a pointed cautery to the wound of it and strongly apply that.
And when the abscess returns, then place it on the pressure that we have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for several days; and then remove it and leave it and the hand of it should be exercised.
If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity involved, then apply a wet cloth and some friction to the affected area, until they are relieved.
Chapter 29:
Concerning the cure of dislocations of those joints.
Sometimes these dislocations occur in all parts.
And when one of those joints is dislocated at the base of the thumb or in the abdomen, then bend the affected part and push the dislocation back into place, until it returns.
And then support the head of the joint, and suspend the weight of that limb to the part where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
And then suspend it again and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
And when it is not yet straight, apply the second treatment as described, and do not stop rubbing that part on that day and exercising its movement, and apply the second treatment at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same as you did with the foot, if the patient's abdomen is dislocated, and attach it to that part and perform the first surgical operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same as you did with the abdomen when other parts are dislocated.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and the remaining vertebrae from those locations are not healed, then death approaches the patient.
And in such cases, the patient's evacuation is not under their control, and they cannot retain it; and softening occurs in some of their members or their bedding or their pillows or one of those; or if a vertebra remains in its place, then softening occurs in them and in those, and removal is made at four points.
Then it has already been removed to the back parts and is called gout.
When the cure of the patient is that the coldness has occurred due to pregnancy, then it is not curable nor healable in that case.
However, in those cases where it occurs due to impact or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients mentioned the methods of cure for such prolonged speech, which is the most beneficial; however, I have already and improved upon that from which a few people excuse themselves from too much of it, because of its proximity to understanding and explanation, which he has exposed and formed from various instruments of that kind, which I will show you and explain.
And of those, none are cured except that which occurs naturally in the back, which I will recommend to you.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face with an equal distance from the wall, and should be extended behind that instrument wet for so that the chest of the patient does not stick to it.
And then place a stick upright, with its base on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick in front of their feet at the other end of the bed.
And the servant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in a ditch; and another servant should hold the other one according to that form.
And then cover the patient's head with a cloth and leave the leather whip firm; extend the end of the whip to the stick that should be held against their head, and attach it there; and strengthen the other leather strap over their ankles, holding their bedding; and adjust all the straps and attach them to the other stick that should be held against their feet.
And then the servant should extend the strap to the part of the stick where it is attached, and not remain in that position with both sticks and straps in the places where they were placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
And the doctor places their hands on the spine at the strength point until they return, or places them on a table, and adjusts their feet on the table until they return.
If it does not return in this way, then take a table whose length or width is about three spans, and carve a hole in the wall where we have said that the patient should be placed between the ends of the table. And then place your hand on the edge of the table over the spine, and the doctor places their feet on the other end, and wait until the spine is tightened and returns to its original position.
And if you wish, open the turn of the chair that is revolved around the arm; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head at the back of the chair between two sticks, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head at the back of the other chair just above two sticks; and the distance between each stick should be a palm, and it has been made in each stick through which the turn goes, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not become crooked.
And there should also be another stick in which the turn is, and it should be revolved in the two grooves of the two sticks.
At the end of it is a tube in which the tube is formed, the length of which is a palm and a hand, and in the other two tubes is similar to that one.
Then strengthen the ropes that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the tube that is on his head, and the ropes that you have tied in the cushions of the patient in the other tube that is on his feet.
Then each tube should be turned and a servant should turn the tube with his hand, and the doctor should massage the spine as we have said.
And after the spine is turned and the area is massaged, then apply a thick layer of egg white on the area, and stop; and place a tablecloth over the egg white, the width of which is three spans or around those, and the length of it is the amount that the area took up, and on the side of the spine.
And then apply a bandage made of linen that we have mentioned, and use the patient as nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the place at the end of the healing, then apply medicines that are moilific and liniscan for the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that place, the plaster of lead.
And some days after the incident in the back of the ribs of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, so that it does not cause any further harm to you at this medicine, because it will do great damage to you.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only end with dislocation, and not with those that occur at other joints with a small removal and concavity.
And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, either at the front parts, or at the back parts, or at the right side parts, or at the left side parts.
And it is mainly dislocated at the front parts, and rarely at the right side parts or at the left side parts.
And when adjusting the patient's pillow to make them comfortable, if the affected foot is longer and more swollen than the other, the patient cannot bend their knee, and this is where the swelling may become an abscess, so the head of the pillow has already reached here.
And the rare case of that which happens is at the back parts, because the accidents of it are opposite to this accident.
And the rare case of that which happens is at the right side parts, because if the other pillow is expanded according to convenience, but does not bend towards the painful knee, and if it is perforated to go and cannot be placed on the right side parts; and the urine of it is retained, and the soiling of it becomes an abscess, and you must place the ambulance of it on the thigh.
When the person who has experienced dislocation at the back parts cannot extend their arm, nor can they bend the one that is bent, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bent part is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that location.
The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been treated before, then you administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not in that cure of all; and therefore do not expect that in that there be made provision.
In that one of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do this to it that you turn the joint and extend it to the back parts and the front parts, and on the right and left, for it will return strongly and does not require other cure.
However, if it does not return in this way, then you should expect that you prepare strong medicine and extend the cushion of it from the part most behind, or at its hands, or at the cloth which is laid over the cushion above the arm; and another minister extends the hand of it above the tingling parts of it; and strongly hold the lion's skin on the edge of the cushion, and another minister cleanses the end of the cloth.
And if it is necessary to extend the patient's limb or the part of the body from the elbow to the shoulder, or from the back to the back of the shoulder.
And if it is necessary to extend all of those in a row while the patient is lying on their side and they are hanging down.
This type of extension is especially common for all four limbs.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for each special case that is directed at the specific cure.
In the reduction of the dislocated limb, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, have the patient lie on their side; and place the ligaments over the ridge of the cushion in that location where the head of the cushion and the location that is placed next to it; and extend the ligament from the elbow to the next part of the furcula.
And another minister strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large part of the patient's body and extends to the parts forward by strong extension until it returns to its place.
This particular treatment is the least harsh cure for which this member is reduced compared to other treatments.
However, if it is not possible for you to follow this treatment of healing completely, then have the patient's two feet tied together with a strong, lighter rope than usual, above their ankles and below their knees.
And the length of each should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's leg should be extended more than the other by two fingers.
And the patient should be hung over the end of the bed, and in the highest position; and the length of the rope from the ground should be equal to two arms.
And then command a strong young man to pull on the cushion, and another young man should be suspended from the patient, and the other young man should strengthen the support with a lever, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the front part of the body, have the patient lie down on their back after we have recommended that they have been properly positioned; and strengthen the rope over the patient's leg and on their chest.
And then bring two cushions, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushions to the middle of the patient's chest, so that the patient is not suffocated by the cushion being between their legs, so you must extend the parts behind them.
And then each minister extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is said that the blanket should be extended widely, and according to this method narrative about the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and then covers the other hand with it, and at that covering pause the one extended to the parts behind at the part of the elbow.
If the dislocation is at the back, it is not advisable for the patient to be extended at the back, and should be raised on the ground; having a pillow under their back, as if the patient's jaw is dislocated forward, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two pillows; and it is over their face and the restraints are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And it should be applied with compression on the table over the area where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as follows - and the assistant of the reduction of the patient does not leave you, and it is that you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends the other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member according to what we have said returns - and then you adjust two things and press and extend at the bend where the pillow is not too hard in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and the other under the other side.
Then, if you see those joints in the correct position, then know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to its first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again in the ambulatory for several days until it is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
On the treatment of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the base, at the knuckles, and at the fingers, but not at the tip.
And the sign of thumb dislocation is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to place the patient upright, unless they can sit on something; hold their head between your hands, and place their foot between your feet; and then help them to grasp your palms, and tie those between your palms over the patient's shoulder, and another minister extends their leg inside so that the shoulder returns to its place.
And during the patient's recovery, their bed should be elevated so that it is not laborious.
And then place that plaster on the bed and hold the bed against the wall, and tie those bands for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the tendons of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
Sometimes the ankle is dislocated by a small movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in full rotation, and the dislocation of it is made at the front or back parts.
And the sign of the dislocation of it is that sometimes the ankle inflates and protrudes from the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of the dislocation of it is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hand and returned without delay.
In the cure of it when it is dislocated in full rotation, one should make the patient lie on their back, and hold that one a strong and skilled person from behind the shoulder of that one in the middle part of it.
And then you should take your left hand on the inner side of the foot farthest from the knee in the location of the calf.
And then approach the foot to your right hand, and approach the left for two reasons, and extend the left; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
And make those two reasons when you have counted them.
And then push the chest of the foot to the third side of the bed, and you are at the chin.
So return in one direction or two using this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it to that position, then place the patient on their left side on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and put something between the patient's thighs, and you have already covered them with a blanket so that they do not slide.
And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the ribbon that lies on the back of the foot; and then extend each assistant against the extension of their side, and the pillow should be extended between the patient's thighs, so that the thing of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
And the doctor straightens the dislocation with his hands, and another servant holds the clean cloth at the ready parts, as the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong plaster, and tie the foot to the leg.
And be careful not to press the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that does not hurt and it is strongly bound there.
And leave it like that for two days or three; and if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third day or fourth, and prevent the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary to go out in that space, do not make sure that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
And if the abscess opens, then carefully apply what we have said in the chapter of that, in another place of healing and embrocation, until it is reopened.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the treatment of the aforementioned joints of the feet.
Whoever has a dislocated joint should apply some extension to its workings; and this is not difficult, if one goes before it.
But if the dislocation is in the bones of the back of the foot, then apply this to the patient's foot on a level surface or on a table, and be present there as if you were going.
Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand on that which comes from the joints, and gently press on that side of the foot until it returns, and you see that it is equal to and does not appear in the elevated position.
Then place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, which has two lids, and strengthen that side of the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and make it rest for several days, until it is restored and its recovery is assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by pain or fracture or any other means.
When any of these causes occurs, and you perform the cure of that and its restoration, sometimes death results.
And for that reason, you should not presume to cure it, but rather use the knowledge gained from long experience, mercy and pity, late, not hasty or arrogant; and that you use in the beginning of medicines that lead to abscesses only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, for the relief of malady, and in which some hope appears. And therefore you should first try to reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving that it leads to abscess.
And then if the member returns as they wish, then administer the regimen that leads to abscess and heals the pain, and that which is appropriate for it from the decoctions of drying.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then pierce their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that in the places of those.
And guard and avoid that instrument according to your virtue in the ways of fear, following what my preaching preceded; for that is better for you to give to your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own being as those see in your time. Ayssi end the words of Albucasim perfectly from which God may not be blessed. Amen.
