Oh, my sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, in order to fulfill its purpose and due to its expositions and declarations, I believe that I have completed this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The surgery of the mother is prohibited in our region and time, until recently, when the science of it was revealed, and its evidence is now established; and no one practices it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which were most harmful and led to errors and doubts until the understanding of it was closed and its force was prolonged and its art.
And I believe that I have lived according to the order of this treatise in the second way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of the cautery and of the other instruments of the work, as well as for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
In ancient times, the cause for why an artist was not skilled in their own hand was because the art of medicine is long, and it is necessary to exercise that skill in the science of anatomy, which Gallus discovered before knowing the importance of the members and the forms of those, and the conjunction and separation of them; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their breadth; and of the pulsating veins and quiet vessels, and the locations of their origin.
And for this reason, Hippocrates said that one name is not enough, but in the work, it is smaller, and more so in the art of medicine.
Because we have already mentioned that one in the introduction of this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy, will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those, because they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor was called to see a woman who had developed an abscess of the neck, and had also injured some arteries in the neck causing great blood loss, resulting in the woman dying among her companions.
And another doctor saw a man who had been stabbed with a stone from a house that had been built, and the stone was large, and it came to him and removed that stone from his body through a small incision, so that the man died on the third day.
And he had already been called to extract that, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, it was known that she would die.
And another doctor took the salary of a duke from our land for surgery, and went to an experienced blacksmith who was skilled in setting bones; and because of his ignorance, the doctor removed the fracture, on the plate, with pins and nails with strong structure, and did not allow the bone to breathe.
And then gradually remove the bandage according to his wishes, and then remove the dressing, and then the leech for several days and nights, and command that we remove the bandage; and this is when the wound and the foot become infected, and reach a dangerous state.
And then apply it to him, and prepare to remove the bandage, and thus achieve peace and relieve his pain.
However, if corruption was already confirmed in the member, so that it could not be controlled, and did not cease to spread the corruption in the member until the patient died.
And then another doctor who punctured an abscess and made it ulcerated after several days, until the fire magnified the malice of it to the Lord of it.
The cause of which is that the cranium is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not reach the patient with all the iron, but rather that the member which suffers be held from all.
For this reason, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation should be divided into two parts: one in the operation that is associated with health, and the other in the work that is performed in the major dispositions.
I have already existed in this place where the operation is performed, where there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay down that one, so that the people do not approach to speak to you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your weapons with solicitude and protection of God, and your patients with success and stability.
And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay down those terrible diseases of difficult healing, and let your weapons be in that which makes you fear, so that your situation in your faith and in your name does not escape from you: because more remains to your glory, and more in the world and more behind your sanctity.
In some of its symptoms, it causes swelling in certain parts of the body. Do not heal the patient incorrectly, because misguided doctors may not recognize it.
And you have already dedicated this book according to three titles.
The beginning of the division of the book, and the first of the first section. The first chapter ordered by the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on dryness and puncture, and on ventosas, and on plagues, and on the extraction of sage and similar things to those, all chapter ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and on dislocation, and on the cure of tortion and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those handles of that cautery and of its sheaths, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
Therefore I say that the speech about the quality of the handle of cautery and its sheath is a long and elaborate and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there they have spoken much about secrets, and because of it they have disagreed, and to me it has been a short part of their speeches, I am afraid of length.
And therefore I say that cautery compares to the whole complete condition universally, which is matter or its matter, except for two conditions, which are conditions of the tail, which is matter.
In the condition of the tail and dry matter, they disagree; because one said that cautery is suitable for that, and the others said the opposite of that, that cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness tail and dry matter that is caut and dry be healed.
And tell that person who says the opposite of that, that cauterization is greatly beneficial in all kinds of illness and dryness that is seen in the bodies of men, because when you compare the bodies of men to the humidity of fire, the bodies of men are wet.
And I say by the word of that person, that I have experienced this myself several times.
But I do not know that there is someone who has experienced this already and has been trained in the capital of cauterization through previous exercise, and has known the diversity of the appearance of men and the disposition of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time for those.
But in other appearances, you should not be afraid, and especially in illnesses that are wet and humid, because all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree in the benefit of cauterization in those.
And you should know, children, that the secret of healing by fire and the goodness of it, is that cauterization is simple, because the action of it only reaches the member that is cauterized and not to the other member that is adjusted with it, unless it causes a small harm.
May the action of medicine burn through to that part of the body which is affected by it, and it often brings relief to the sick member and is often used for difficult healing and often causes pain.
May the fire, due to its greatness and goodness of substance, not do this, but rather, it is known by us through experiment and long experience in the study of the art on the truth of causes; and for this reason you are excused from the length of the sermon. And if not, then it would not be understood at all in this pause to you secretly hidden away with the fire, and the quality of the operation of which in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, is a philosophical demonstrative speech, which would be sharpened in your minds.
And know, my sons, that they should not forget the time in which it is convenient to make a cautery and they should wait for the best time of primeval morning.
And you say that cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by time is submerged in the jubilant joy of which is thrown with the cautery, and more so if the cautery is for pain or necessary painful ones, quickly and forcefully, the ones that do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come malicious, which is greater than small damage entering through time.
And do not catch in your feet, or, sons, that is only appreciated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that illness that is cured with cauterization is not always effective for a long time, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not that they seek for that, because cauterization is only a matter of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moisture which is the cause of the pain.
But it is often used for cauterization above medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that its illness returns in some time of the time, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of its illness, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of superfluities in it, and that which is obtained by it in the acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness of a few members of superfluities and moisture, like a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, possible is that in it does not return that pain, but that which is done in small amounts.
And more commonly, people believe that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, and they think that there is no cure that can be achieved with medicine or any other cause before using the pointed cautery.
And the cause is the opposite of that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine only when administering methods of treatment in some diseases, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer homeopathy, and it works for that. And from here, people believe that the pointed cautery is the last resort of medicine, but they understand it in a different way than what I understand as a common person and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterizing does not matter, because it is not absolutely true, for I have seen some people who are very good and others who are not, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron, but rather when you do cauterizing with fire and gold, it is not up to your declaration, because it depends on the quantity that you want to use, and because it prepares to receive the heat of the gold, and if you adjust over the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made lighter and more conveniently and more directly to the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that the muleteer asks him what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is caused by moisture and cold on the most common accident of which these causes are the cause of many traumatic fluxes, called crisis, from the head to the parts of the arms and legs fluent, and many sleep, and of tooth pain and the gums, and universally of all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, hardness and apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first commands the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for the head, for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and his age and his custom.
And then command the one who is shaving his own head to do so between your hands on a chair that you have placed, and place your hands over his chest to prevent him from falling.
And then place the back of your hand on the shaving razor near the nose between his fingers. However, since the place you mentioned on your body has been reached, sign that location and then apply the pointed cautery made of olive oil, which is in this form:
And then place that on the location well and apply it gently, so that it does not hurt too much at once, and you rotate it.
And then raise your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see that some amount of bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of grain, then raise your hand, and if it does not return, place your hand on that iron, or another one, if it is cooled, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small piece of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
And then place your hand on the wound that has been opened in the border and leave that over the entrance where the skin of the fire should be destroyed. And then apply the four-pharmacon ointment into the wound to make it heal.
And they say that as long as the plague is open, the more it gets better and more useful.
And they say that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until some part of the bone is burned.
And then remove that which has been stuck to the bone, and then heal it.
And they say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it reaches the strong part of the bone where the bone breaks, and this is the way to puncture the little heel: And they estimate that from that wound the vapors of the head escape.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cautery used in all men, except on those who are second in line due to fear; and if that one leaves, then it is better for the sake of his health when it is, because the head is revealed by the solution of continuity of which he has with the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of naturally fragile nature.
The first type of cautery is more saving and better for me; and from that one, and from the other work, it is for the sake of his health.
Second chapter.
Of the cautery of the head.
When the whole head is affected by chronic and long-lasting pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses of garlic and of charcoal and of capipurges and of ointments and of bandages and of sweats and of gallipots and of similars, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery which they have and do not know how to apply to it again from those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and not fragile and atrophied, then that cautery applies another one after that one. And then cauterize that on the surface of his head with a pointed cautery where the skin is broken. Cut the skin and expose the bone to the extent that we have found it, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery in the part behind the head where it is called the mastoid process, — and that is the place where the pillow is placed. And let your hand rest there, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain from that, different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I say that this cauterization is in that place, because it is the cautery that is used to cauterize the tips of the head and the back of the head, which is a more subtle cauterization than the one that is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter three.
Of the ancient non-anterior cauterization.
When the pain is severe in the part of the head, or it penetrates to the eye, let the doctor administer the remedies that make the head better, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatises on illnesses; and if none of these help, then the cauterization is done in two ways: either with a sharp cautery or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as you take a lancet and prick that area and apply a bandage to its extremities to stop the bleeding. And then incise the location of the pain in the temple with a blade that is inserted into the place where it is located, until it is hidden.
And then apply pressure over the stopped bleeding with a bandage that is tightly compressed, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the lancet, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then apply a poultice on the affected area until the place stops bleeding.
And then care for that one until it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some burning remedies that I have written in the other treatise on burning remedies.
May the cauterization be done in this way: light the cautery with the following method:
and it is called a "claw hammer" because its head has the form of a carnation in which there is some curvature, and at the middle part of it is a small projection.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and retrieve your hand - so that the wound is not stuck with the bandage that has been left - and turn the small iron at high speed.
And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the type of cloth is such that it covers most of the patient, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck with the bandage that has been left, so that there is no bleeding.
And then apply a salted water dressing on that location, and leave it for three days; and then apply a wet dressing, and then heal with an ointment as soon as it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this situation properly.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the ancient cautery of the emigration.
When you treat an emigration with the remedy we have mentioned in the previous cure, and the remedy we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the cure, and see that the disease does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then cover the cauterization of the knife before it becomes bright, so that it means over the location of the pain with a long line of the same length as the one you have used; and place your hand firmly between the incision and the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is often damaged during mastication, and that the jaw not be held too tightly and the nerves that may be affected, and that nothing happens.
And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from an artery that is abscised, which in the abscission of which there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what to do and are not studious; and leave the operation until the beginning.
And you should remember the rule of the flow of blood from an artery according to your method, in its own place in this book.
And if you see this evil that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter of stretching of an artery having two points, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of gout pains.
When pain in the big toe occurs due to cold humors and is treated with laxatives and the other treatment mentioned in the previous section, but the pain does not disappear, then use the cautery without making points, and this is the one that has no name, of which the following is the form:
And then use the pointed cautery, and bring it close to the flame, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotating, or in the circle of each joint if the pain is in each one. While applying the cautery to the edge of the big toe, gently press it into the place where it hurts.
And if the cautery touches all the big toe, and it is painful, then quickly treat the affected areas before they are healed.
Chapter 6.
On the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and treated with cauterization is only of the specific kinds that come from inflammation, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
Avoid the use of a dry or spasm-inducing cautery on the sensitive area.
When you treat that area of turmoil with jelly, purgatives, and worm medicine, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the end of the golden hair, the second a little below their temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
The method of cautery application is that you cauterize that area with the cautery at the end of the golden hair, a little above the corner of the cap, and on the temple, the longest one being second to the length of the previously mentioned point, and place your hand inside before the quantity of the main part of the coda is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is specific to the knife, the shape of which is given in the table. May it be, however, that there is also a more subtle cause in the abundance of excess grease.
Then care for the area with the procedure until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the ancient cautery for apoplexy.
When ancient apoplexy is treated with the procedure we have mentioned and the patient does not have a fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all parts of the head; and with a cauterizer at the middle of the head, as we have mentioned; and with a cauterizer in the neck. The method of the cauterizer is done as it is mentioned above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; and then care for the area with the procedure.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by flatulence.
Gave the patient large and tasteful pills at the beginning of the treatment.
Then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the described plaster in the treatise of plasters.
And place some cautery, which is a sign of cauterization. Do this second according to the method that has already been mentioned.
And if those methods are successful; and if not, then make three cauterizations on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most superior part of the head towards the most inferior part of the head. And place the largest part of the above between each cauterization, and then cure the cauterized area with the method that is used.
If you feel additional pain and the patient is tolerating it, then make the cauterization in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then cauterize that one on both feet.
Then cure it until it is healed; and the cauterization should be made according to the form given.
Chapter 9.
Of cautery of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
Having already processed in the softening of the head and neck, and with that which we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply the pointed cautery at the middle of the head, and apply the cautery over all the joints of the head, and apply the cautery on the back part of it, and three cautery on the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's condition of softening of the body, and if the patient tolerates three cautery, and if the condition is strong, then apply four cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards apply the cautery inside where the tail of the patient comes out, and raise the hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this cautery should be made with olive oil.
Chapter 10.
Of cautery of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexibility.
And therefore, it is necessary to modify the patient's brain at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have said in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not suffer the medicines, then give them gourds and mustard plasters to the servant who modifies, giving them this for several days, good benefit of the foods.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that with a cauterizer at the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizer in the occiput of them, and over each corner of the head cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates, then cauterize that with cauterizers which I have said, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And if it is a cauterizer as it has been said before.
But if the patient is a child, then place cauterizers gently according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of Cautery for Melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted moisture and flatulent gas, then cautery is applied to those parts which we have mentioned in the book.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a small incision decently on the top of his head over the circle, and place your hand on that spot.
And the patient should be laid down, and held from all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is worthy of being boiled with ancient wool fat. And scald that over the fire for warming, prepared by measure, which the patient says is sufficient when it is enough in him. And then apply that in the middle spot of his head over the circle, and let it enter him until it is dissolved.
And apply that to the patient every week for the entire week until they are healed; or if you wish, make small points with a cautery according to the most appropriate part of the body, but always hold the hand with a moistened cotton swab: this is a special type of cautery that hydrates the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen area in the form of a border or in grayish-white color.
Chapter XII.
About the application of descending water cautery on the belly.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of water application on the belly by means of syringes, as I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient that which will cleanse the head of the body, and keep that from all moisture.
And make that which is washed in hot water for several days.
And command the patient to shave their own head, and make points with a cautery in the middle of the head; and then make points with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of water application in two bellies, or on one side if it is the beginning of water application in one belly.
Incision with the cautery all the veins and arteries that are behind the neck; and those in that area on the side of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from there, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
And if you find knowledge of the kind that is in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those and caution about blood flow.
And some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones and two cautery recently produced.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient lacrimals.
When the lacrimals of the forehead are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in that place clearly and it is verified that this is superfluous, then cauterize that with the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water accumulation in the forehead, and the cautery in the middle of the head and two cautery in the neck behind two temples, and two cautery in the neck behind two bones. And if it is necessary to make an incision, then cauterize that area in the entire length of the neck on the tip of the upper eyelid with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV
On the cauterization of bad odor from the nose.
When you treat that person with the method we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give the patient three doses of bread; and remove their cap, and cauterize the area with a thinner or thicker cautery, depending on the situation. And then cauterize that area with a small needle between the two upper eyelids, under the eyebrows.
And be careful not to burn that area.
And this is the form of the needle cautery.
Chapter XV
On the cauterization for the softening of the eyelids.
When the eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a moon-shaped cautery; and this is its form.
And if you, using a small pointed cautery, make points on the two upper eyelids in all parts, and extend them from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the upper eyelid.
And do not press your hand too much on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the sticky part of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
Concerning the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs become converted into the parts inside and poke the eye.
When the hairs of the eyelid become converted into the parts inside and poke the eye, cautery is done in those places according to two methods, either by burning or by medical means.
If the cautery is done with fire, command the patient to hold those hairs that are similar to those that are shaved, until they are prolonged and equal; and if it pokes his eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that eye with a bandage so that it does not become infected until the hairs have grown.
Therefore, when they are born and grown, pause the patient's head on your shoulder, and then place your hand over their eyelids with a second tent, which should be in the shape of a fan of mercury, and the beginning of the tent near their ears.
And then place a cool cloth or moistened cotton on their eye.
And then remove the cautery that has this shape.
And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in waves, until the surface of the eyeball, which is like a fan of mercury, is completely burned.
And to ensure the healing of the eye work, you should see that the eyelid is already contracted and the ears of the eye are raised for the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it on that for three days, and then place the cloth over it until the scar is healed. And then take care to remove that which is unhealthy until it is healed.
However, if it returns through the eyes due to some cause and the eyelid becomes softened, then do so with another pointed cautery on that spot as you had done previously.
However, if the eyes are in the eyelid, then cauterize that which is inside and raised to its natural place and equalized so that the eyes do not push it out.
However, if the pointed cautery is not available, command the patient to look at the eyes while they are prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth in the form of a funnel.
And then take some known wool and live worms, and mix those causes with beeswax, and make that into a poultice so that it is not scattered; and then spread that over the paper which is made as mentioned above, and place that on one of the eyelids; and place the other eyelid on a flat surface in a bowl of water, and let the head of the patient be in an upright position.
Pause the medicine over the patient and press it gently into them so that the patient does not feel the bite of the medicine, which is like a burning fire.
And so, as the patient persists with the biting pain, press the medicine into them again and give it to them; once the pain ceases, remove the medicine and wash the affected area with clean water; then consider whether the eyelid has already been raised as if it were washed from the constraint of fire or incision, for that is well; and if not, return to the previous step of the medicine on the place where the medicine has not yet pressed in and does not become damaged before your operation is completed and is contrary to the affected area.
And then pause over the patient's side near the border until the code of the adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with the ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to guard your operation that you keep the medicine from falling out of the affected area, and if the eyelid approaches too quickly and some cause of the hairs pushing into the affected area, then repeat your medicine on that place where the eyelid is softened, and usually as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
And this is the form of the herb of myrtle.
And you know that the feet of men are varied according to their size and shape, so you make your adjustment accordingly.
Do not obstruct the straight path to that which is studied in this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the foot.
When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not follow the method we have described in the sections on diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to tilt their head towards you, and hold their head at an angle between your hands in such a way that it is not too high or too low.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in alcohol or a mucilage of poppy seeds on the foot of the patient.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
which is straight or shaped like a cane or penis of the vulva, at one end of which the pointed cautery is made.
And if you see, it should penetrate into the other end. And if you want to draw out, use a tent.
But the one that is straight is better for the intended purpose.
Then press the fistula if it is opened, and drain out the pus and dry it up. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from there.
Then place your hand over the cautery which is hot, and hold it away from the patient's face and the part of the nose, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the brain and corrupt it.
And if at the beginning of the treatment the cautery goes through the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that and around the area until it is healed.
If they have been suffering for several days and have not healed, then pause the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and scraped according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing the fistula which was first described as follows: enter the place of the fistula and make that, and then place your hand in that fissure which is the shape of the wound; and put on that amount of one ounce of lead; and with your hand hold it well for retention, and do not let the patient be burned by the lead so that it does not reach the bottom of that; and cover that you place over the patient's wound with albumen of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by wonderful cure.
And if the fistula is healed by what we have said about cauterization and cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nasal douche and reduce the fistula to the nose according to its own location when it comes.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the wound in the foot.
Women often get tears in their labia, and especially in those of children.
Therefore, when you treat those tears with the cautery that we have mentioned in divisions and do not apply your treatment, then use the small pointed cautery of this form:
And its hollow is according to the thinness of a spoon.
Then place that instrument carefully into those tears until the cautery reaches the edge of the tears.
And then treat it with the cautery until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or in the gums, an abscess forms and becomes hard, and then it is broken, and then it becomes old, and then it is hard again, and a fistula forms, and then you treat it and do not apply your treatment, then use the cautery according to the quantity that has been reabsorbed in the fistula, and then put that hot into the mouth of the fistula, and then place your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the edge of it, and then make a small incision or two; and then treat it with the cautery that we have mentioned for treatment until it is healed.
And if the sinus is removed and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the corrupted bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of the extraction of teeth and the melting of the jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are loose, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and place the hot cautery in the shape that will be used, holding the cup over the tooth and inserting it into the cavity of the cautery burning vigorously, until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, as the loose tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried out.
Chapter 21
Of cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is frost or worms in it, and the medicine does not provide relief, then cautery can be used in two ways: with a cautery made of cow's horn, or with a cauterizing iron.
The cautery made of cow's horn is to take a piece of cow's horn and melt it in the fire, then take a cotton cloth and wrap it around the end of the probe, and quickly insert that into the tooth that hurts, pausing it over the painful tooth until it is frostbitten.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the horn below, and place that over the painful tooth, and place that over the ignited iron until the iron reaches the end of the cavity of the tooth.
When using the pointed cautery to cauterize, you wait for the right moment when it is hot enough, and if there is any rust on it or if the heat does not reach the patient's mouth, then do not use it.
And then ignite the pointed cautery in the shape it will take, and place that on the tooth, and your hand over it until the cautery is extinguished; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or the next day.
And cover that the patient closes his own mouth with good border and holds it for an hour, and then scrape it off; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize where you can reach with your hand.
And this is the shape of the needle:
Chapter 22
Of cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are flexible and affected by humors and do not obey digestion by medicines and you want to make them more firm, then ignite the cautery in the shape that is this following, having two extremities so that the smoke from the cautery can pass through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a few times, and if it needs it, until the point of the cautery reaches the center of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then pause the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it over the affected area in boiling water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
And then apply the ointment and try to wrap it with cloth until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cauterization of a wart on the nose and its contraction.
When humidity comes over the lower part of the lung, and especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that place on the abdomen where the pain is.
And be careful not to touch the cautery on the abdomen or burn the intestine of the patient, but a little.
And cauterize that place with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the lower spine of the patient. And the pointed cautery should be used in the same way as before.
And then take care of that thing that was previously put in until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of the cauterization of the patient's lungs and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by humid humors, and the patient does not have fever or tisane, and it is an old disease, then cauterize that thing with two pointed cauteries on the furcula in the locations where the lungs are deflated; and another pointed cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and use the pointed cautery as before.
And if you want, your cauterization should be done with the pointed cautery called puncta, whose form was previously described in the punctation of gout.
And their points should enter those; and then take care of that thing that was previously put in until it is healed.
And now the pointed cautery should have three points for this cauterization: you can make three pointed cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 25.
Of the cauterization of the nipple, which is the help of the helper.
When the helper's nipple is dislocated due to excessive lubrication and not stopped at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that state, and with a small movement it can be adjusted as needed, as we have testified, first reduce the dislocation, and then turn the patient over on their back or on their side; and raise the codex which is in the part of the nipple towards the upper parts of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated in that direction.
And then light the cautery which has two heads; and this is the shape of it:
And then cauterize the codex until it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come from four heads of cautery.
Sometimes, according to this count, and because they are the cautery .viii.,
Then place your hand over the cautery poorly cut wounds with salt, and then make the patient comfortable so that the limb is not painful for a while until it is relieved.
And if the dislocation is above and below and has been made like that, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter .xxvi.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is bile and moisture inside the stomach that multiplies in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm it, then you should place the patient on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cautery: one cautery placed at the chest for the quantity of a pointed clavilh, and two cautery placed on the sides of the cautery, forming the figure of a triangular cauteri; and extend between those that are not adjusted to make a puncture.
And if the depth of the cautery is equal to the thickness of the two thirds of the codpiece of the gown.
And if the shape of the cautery is according to this form, it adds up. And if you want, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
And if the stomach is punctured at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to the amount you want to test, and cauterize that with a cautery at the points; and cure that with the remedy that is prescribed before it is healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot.
When pain arises in the foot due to coldness or moisture or heavy wind before it has reached its normal complexity by excessive exit, and the patient is cured with the remedy that we have said and not otherwise, then it is necessary that the patient be placed on his back, and place your hand over the area three times according to this form and this amount lies over the foot below the ribs, which is the position of a man.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest length of the said cautery, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straightened.
Do not trust the cautery too much.
And if the amount of water that is adhered to the amount of the main part of the cotton, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet; and if he is not standing, then extend his limbs and lift his arms.
And you may use these cauteries as a pointed cautery when you have skill and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overdo it in the cauterization, and let the main part of the cotton be adhered to the body so that the whole body and reach into the intestines, because the cotton here is subtle; and you know this.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
When the inflammation or abscess in the thigh has ended and one wants to know whether that abscess is in the flesh of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often wearies the doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, the patient should be turned on their side; and then cover the location of the abscess with a tent; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the shape of which was previously described on the other page. And cauterize it with that and ignite the cautery into the wound until the entire sinew is boiled, until it reaches the fascia, until it escapes from the bone.
And then care for that by treatment of the other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cauterization unless the one studied in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which most people have known to cause harm; but this pointed cautery has been tried for some time on this operation, however it is better to leave that to us, and it is more reliable.
Chapter 29.
Of the cauterization of the plantar surface.
The ancient cauterizations of the soles of the feet were made in this manner, and this is the one you should take from the writings of Hippocrates, a long dry needle that is found, and it is of the largest size of the same.
And then immerse that one in oil and place the other one on the fire, and then cauterize at that location where it is between the continuity of the scapula and the collar; and with two small needles, one slightly declining to the part that was left by the beard, and two more in that which is declining between the fifth rib and the cizena, declining a little to the parts behind; and another cauterization at the middle of the chest; and three cauterizations of the parts behind; and one cauterization at that location where it is between the two scapulas, and two more on the sides of the chest, after the cauterization that is between the two scapulas.
And do not let your hand touch the pointed cautery, but keep it in the manifest direction of the wound in the work.
And they also said that ancient people who were familiar with men who used cauteries similar to rays and ignited them, and put them in the location between the ribs, until they reached that pus and it was removed, as we have said about the abscess of the foot.
In this puncture, the cauteries do not cause much fear, because it has already happened many times in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
Of the cautery of the malleolus.
When you cure the patient's ankle, do not compare your cure with what we have said about the division, but rather apply the cautery in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the ankle according to the figure of the cauteries of the foot, the figure of which has been preceded.
And let there be a large enough amount of the cautery or a little more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as the one we have mentioned in the cautery of the foot equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their side.
And there is another way to cauterize, which is that you ignite the cautery having two points, which we have mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the cord which is at the end of the muscle on the left side of the patient.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the cord according to the length of the body, so that the points are made at the appropriate latitude of the body.
And then insert the two points, ignite one, in the moment when those penetrate the cord of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with a cautery having three points.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, because it is more harmful than the other previous causes in the treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of hydropsy.
Cauteries should not be used in hydropsy, but rather in the proper place.
When you treat the hydropsy, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the previous division and do not compare your treatment with others. Then, place four cauteries around the navel, one on the stomach, another on the chest, another on the belly, two between the spine, and one on the right side of the chest, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cauterization in place for as long as necessary to cause pain.
And do not remove the patient from treatment while the cauterization is in place, because it is beneficial for the two understandings, and it should be fastened to the patient's body as an aid to healing.
The shape of the pointed cautery used to cauterize the belly is like a claw, according to the form above, and the one used to cauterize the back is like an olive, according to its previous form.
Chapter thirty-two.
Of cauterization of the feet and the spaces.
When the feet are infected with hydrops and filled with water sitrina, cover them with a cloth and cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, between the ear and the annular, and elevate your hand over the cautery and do not twist it; then elevate your hand and do not return to that, because the water sitrina evaporates.
And the cautery should be made in this way: And on both spaces make two cauteries, and in each space make a cautery at the end of the cautery cutlery. And the cautery should be made according to the length of the space: and one end above the fold and the other below the middle of the space; and two cauteries on each space.
And leave the wound open for a long time to allow some fluid to drain from it.
And then care for those causes that we have mentioned.
Chapter 33.
Of the cautery of wounds in the belly.
When wounds in the belly are caused by friction and humidity entering the intestines, the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, are cured in this way and not by other methods, and sometimes patients suffer from a strong cautery of virtue exhibiting, then cauterize that with a large cautery over their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cautery of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cautery en the circumference of the subtle abdomen, with the subtle clavilh cautery; and with the cautery over the alcatin on alozis great, or with two cautery.
And if the humidity exuding and the patient can tolerate it, then cauterize that over the pentenilh and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery over the stomach and near the inguinals, which is a perfect cure for the quality that you should not err.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in their natural state or filled with thick humors that have infiltrated them or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division and not by the other curative method, then cauterize them with three cauteries on the surface of the lower back, and with two similar ones above the navel.
And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach of the patient and the food of the patient has not been digested, and the face of the patient is inflamed, then cauterize that one on the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned before; and with one cauteri on the chest, and with another cauteri on the side of the patient's body, holding the cauteri for some time, and cure the patient before it is healed.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of an abscess near its opening.
When you remove the lancet, then extinguish the cautery that resembles a ray. Approach that burning lancet into the lancet you removed, and finally place your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, if they are too painful, then cauterize each of them one by one after you have recovered, and finally care for those that you gave them from the saliva until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on something, it is more dangerous in jest.
Chapter 36.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, then heal with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula in nature that is formed, and it is old, clean out the rotten humidities from it, and then apply something that is more suitable than cobwebs to that area, and know the quantity of its depth with the previously mentioned needle.
Approach the cautery that resembles a ray. And approach that lit cautery to this fistula, and insert the probe according to the amount in which it enters.
And repeat over that with the cautery going in which those corrupt flesh is burned away quickly one time or two or three, according to the amount of your need.
And beware of burning nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the corpus of the bladder or the intestine, then beware of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And cure the place where it is healed.
And if the place is sealed, and those matters are removed from it, and they remain there for a long time, then know that it is completely healed.
And if those matters are not removed from it or remain there, then know that it is penetrating or in the beginning of it corroding, or that thing comes from those causes of which you will remember mention in its place.
Chapter thirty-seven.
Of the cauterization of the heels.
When pain occurs in the heels due to cold or rough friction, and the patient's mouth is closed, then cautiously cauterize that one on the heel with a pointed cautery on each heel, using a needle of which you should remember the removal.
And if it is very painful to cauterize them immediately, then wait a little while, so that three cautery lines will come, and they will be more effective later on.
Chapter thirty-eight.
Of the cauterization of the bladder.
When there is a debilitating and softening of the bladder due to friction and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold the urine, then cauterize that one on the part where the urethra is, with a needle like those of the pentenilh, and cauterize with one cautery in the middle, and another on the side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of toes; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cautery if necessary.
And the cautery needle should be according to what is processed.
Chapter 39.
About the cauterization of the shoulder.
When there is cold and humidity in the shoulder, and pressure is prohibited, and the ligaments of it are corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and they cause pain due to their presence, then it is necessary that this place be cauterized with three cautery around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery over the back, or with two cautery, and let the cautery needle be.
Chapter 40.
About the cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When cold moisture is infiltrated into the part of the elbow, and it causes its dislocation from its place, and it is stretched on the other when compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is in the area where the pain is.
Then you should cauterize the patient on the affected area of their body with a pointed cautery, as you would in the circumference of the area, to prevent the area from falling to the wrong side of the circle.
And the cautery used should be in the shape of the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cauteries made of large olive wood.
And the cautery should be made according to the thickness of the entire chain; and then take care that it is healed.
Chapter 41
Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain occurs in the affected area, and its cause is that it has been frozen and moistened, the patient is cured with what we have said and not confused, and this is ancient, then you should remove the patient from heavy humors by using foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize that.
The handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a cautery with medicinal fire, or a cautery with fire.
The second type of handle is known, which is one that cauterizes the part of the heel with three triangular cautery in this form and makes them with good depth. And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the oil or large.
Some wounds are made on the back of the head above the neck for there are four cautery.
And if you want, cauterize around the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the shoulder, and the circle contains and burns the entire shoulder blade.
This is the method of cautery in that case when pain is adhered to the shoulder and does not extend into the thigh.
And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cautery on the thigh over the area where the patient is in pain; and one cautery on the calf for four called a few of the left side.
And if the cautery for the elbow, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient feels that the pain is spreading into the area of the feet, then cautery those points here where you apply the pointed cautery with three or four points or more if necessary from that point.
And if the patient feels pain behind the knee and on the cushion, then cautery that point here with an elbow cautery.
And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn the nerves or great arteries, and that for that reason it may cause harm to the patient.
And I have also seen other cases where they cautery on the scalp and then burned in the cautery, and the bed was inflated with fire before the tumor was achieved, and fire perforated and corrupted all the foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that to death.
If the pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one separately.
And the wise say in the cauterization of any cauterizer, this is the method: make it similar to a circle of iron that its circumference is the length of one palm; and its diameter should be according to the thickness of a date or about an inch.
And let that circle be another third; and its spaces should be the amount of the width of a finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and its length should be one or two fingers, and make them in those iron edges well prepared in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it glows and gives off sparks, and then place it on the part of the one who is lying down, the patient facing up. And then cauterize that with three cauterizations in a row.
And leave that for three days; apply ointment to that wound and leave it uncovered for three days; and then cure it with an egg yolk before it is healed.
Dear sons, of this type of cautery we have not used it much because of the fear of its effects on the body, and because of the few that we have found which are harmful to the body.
Of the many who have suffered from this, the place where it is located is found.
Many doctors adhere to the method that you make two circles with an armed needle perforated in which the hook of the iron door is placed; the length of the edge should be two nuts or those that are on them.
And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said hook; and it is placed above and below, and it contains what is between them in this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the skin where the patient is lying, and cover the patient with a cloth; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that water should be like small fire, and let it boil for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient to bite and stick to it — because that bite is like fire — until the bite ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the tailbone using clean water.
And then leave it for three days and place your hand over that border where the black spot of the abscess remains, and leave it like that for several days, and then drain it; this is usually done.
And then take care of it with clean water until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, then make it in the same state as it was in the water when it was made in the water.
And this is the way of water tailbone, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe of alkali and of caustic not extinguished from some anodyne parts one, and draw it out in a new wave of which the part left behind is perforated by a small tube according to the quantity that enters into it.
And place the bottom of the other wave in a boiled water, and pour over that alkali and live caustic of clean water the amount that those take by a certain name, and put it on them with good compression, and leave the rest of the water that remains in the part left behind in the boiled water.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is currently very strong, the one that is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation is done with fire.
And of the medicines some are cauterized with which, such as tartar and acid, and cause a sore in any part that is mixed together.
And Galen reported of a man from the ancients the operation and the cure that is cured pain in all parts and sciatica vein, and magnified how it was of that one, and said that no other cure was needed, and that it was healed by a method such as this, which is very effective.
And it should be near certain green leaves, and if not green leaves, it should be taken fresh figs; and the one that is to be used should be crushed with a few grains of salt and placed on the water in which the pain is, or in the cushion, or in the chest, and tied.
And let it be left for three hours or until the patient feels relieved from the attack of the disease.
And then place that on his back and when the body of the patient is uncoiled, introduce that into the ground, where the pain ceases and he is healed.
And you should know that no one should use this cautery for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
May also Escolides say that when a goat's wound has been made in the vein stretcher, it is applied to the wound; and this cautery is made like this: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the foot of the foot and the hollow.
And then take dry goat's wound and inflame it with fire until it is burned to charcoal; and place it on the wool and let it be stretched through. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain is relieved.
This method of cautery is called a cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cautery for two pains.
Sometimes the pain in the back is caused by too many causes, such as by pressure or by impact or by excessive excretion, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and moist matter.
And cautery does not fit in this single species that is made for the infusion of moist matter.
Therefore, before evacuation of the patient, make drugs that are similar to them, which are made on their back in the place where the pain is three lines wide, rather than trying with a cautery or more, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
And this cautery is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cautery with three or four pointed cautery according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization at the beginning of gout.
Children are often afflicted with this disease; and it is said that it occurs in them due to their structure, elevation, and movement.
And usually in the lower spine of the back and in the hips, which begin to overshadow the others.
And when you see that and want to prevent it, then use this pointed cautery in the form of a circle: that holds the cautery over every part of the spine equally.
And if you want to, cauterize in the circle of the spine with two or three lines of the pointed cautery. And let the points be close together.
And then care for the area until it is healed with what we have said.
Be careful that cauterization should not be administered in gout that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Of the cauterization of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, if gout is cured by the method of cure and the pain does not subside, then perform another cauterization.
And you should cauterize that area near the joint of the foot with a pointed cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to the other joints, and that does not subside, then perform three or four cauterizations on each ankle with this pointed cautery.
And if more cauterizations are needed, then perform them with the cautery, but do not press too hard on your hand around the tip of the cautery.
And if the pain can enter the mouth and throat, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the hands and it is called sausage fingers, then make points around the knuckles as they rotate, make points on those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the mentioned places, then make points around each knuckle and on the back of the hand.
And if the pain can reach the shoulders or muscles, then cauterize all the joints of the assistants.
And do not expel the patient from good regimen and reception of medicines, because if good regimen is followed, flatulence will be expelled by this cautery, God willing.
Chapter 45.
Of the cauterization of fractures.
When the fracture is in the joints and the intestines are pushing against the belly, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use a soft cushion so that the wound does not open from their belly.
And then place the patient on your lap, and command them to hold their breath as soon as they feel pain or see the cautery or intestine coming out.
And then return that cautery to its place, and try to mend the breakage on the side of the pentenilh, where the end is similar to the majority of the parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery in this form:
as soon as it is ready, and throw sparks. And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that side where your hand is, and hold it in the right position, and as soon as you have reached the other side of the pentenilh; and repeat that other procedure if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Observe the position of the intestine at the time of your cauterization, so as not to burn the patient because if it comes out under the patient, it may cause death or other great harm.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not press the bone, do not perform your operation.
And be aware that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
And after three days, care for the location of the cautery until the wound is healed from the fire.
And after caring for those wounds, care for the other injuries until they are healed.
And the patient should remain on their back for 40 days before the wound is sealed and the plague passes.
And be aware that the patient's food should be given according to the length of time of their healing, which will help to flatten their belly, and that the intestine should not come out due to the effort of healing.
And after 40 days, administer appropriate food, and keep the patient on that diet for another 40 days.
And if they are tired from labor and repletion of food and drink, and from strong voices, because when they use this regimen for complete recovery, the entire body is healed.
And I say the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the size of it, and that which is extracted from the wound should be done away with as the clean part of it; and cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
And it has been said that the first rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with a needle.
And a line is placed that is perpendicular to the width of the rupture, and another line above; and place your hand with a clavihus cautery, but the first cautery is more slender and better.
Chapter 46.
Of cautery for torticollis.
When the limbs are bent or struck by pain that persists for a long time and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is customary to apply cautery with a pointed instrument.
And the cautery of each member should be according to its size and location, and its virtue and development, and the location of the torticollis and pain of it.
If it is healed by the first cautery, good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it; because of the nature of those pains, they are often caused by a member that approaches the affected one, so that you can obtain those cauteries within that patient before they are healed.
Chapter 47.
Of cautery for leprosy.
Some scars are treated with cautery for a great benefit, and especially if the type of leprosy that is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And so, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and has been cured with what we have said in the division and not given, nor is it, and fear that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head with a pointed cautery: one at the middle of the head, and the second behind him, facing the front of his hair; and the others on two ears; and one behind, on the nape or back.
And finally, your hand should be placed near the bone with a small pressure, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize on the meat according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then cover that one with those cauteries which we have said in the head; and with a cauterie on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on the two ears, and two cauteries on two spines of the neck, and two cauteries on the back spines, and a large one near the ribs, and one on the back, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the shoulders, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of his chest; and cauterize that one over all the joints of the said flesh and feet, and on each toe of his feet, and on the soles of his feet.
And be careful of the nerves that are on top of the ankle, do not burn those.
Some wounds are cauterized with a cautery on the ribs of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And you should know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and more effective it is; and you should know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, just like they do with other instruments, so that their body is not startled.
And you should know that the cautery sizes should be large or small according to the members and joints according to what is preceded by the specifications of the tools.
And then care for the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other medication until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cauterization of stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its length.
And insert the pointed cautery into the hole of the spine a little bit. And then care for that wound which has been entered to be healed.
And sometimes the veins are cauterized in certain places that cause pain in the hands and feet, and in the spine and the eyesight of the nerves which move that member, and it remains like that.
No presume over that which is not known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves which move the whole body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are malignant.
When warts are old and do not respond to any of the medicines, then you cauterize with a pointed cautery on that little bit according to the quantity of the white spot inside which remains white and its color is changed.
And then care for that powder of errors and of lentils with rose oil and of arnagrosa leaves, and of cinnamon or of yronda, each one a part and all are mixed, and then place a cloth and over the area where it is placed until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cauterization of the skull.
When cancer begins and one wants to remove that bone, then cauterize it with a circular cautery as it is rotated.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, as I fear it may cause an ulcer, and I have already seen that in some cases.
It is better to cauterize it with a circular cautery as we have said, or with a moth cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of the abdomen.
When some abdomen is delayed in maturation, and it is due to excess or the state of the patient, who is old and weak, or by time, and you want to accelerate the maturation of the abdomen; then cauterize it with a small pointed moth cautery in its circle; and place a bandage on that which accelerates its maturation.
If you want to make a puncture with this cautery, then place it in the following way: pause it at the middle point where it enters the skin.
And if the cautery is placed in that location where it has been left, so that the chest of the arm is relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 52.
Of the cauterization of a corroding cautery.
A corroding cautery is a corrupting agent that moves within the body, which corrodes whatever it touches as if with fire, like dry wood being consumed by flames.
Therefore, if you see that corroding cautery in the location where it has suffered a fire cautery, then place a few small and large clavils as appropriate in that location where it is corroding.
And then cauterize all parts of it until you have removed all the corrosion and there is no cause for it to return.
And then let it rest for three days, and place on the cauterized locations a mixture of oil inside until all the scabs have been completely removed and all the corruption has been eliminated.
And then carefully remove those meat pieces that are generating pus.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy where there is no corruption, good; otherwise, then repeat the cautery on what remains in the corrupted areas.
And apply some sharp medicine to the wound, which is halfway between the cautery and medication. However, do not use a cautery on burns with pus, as it will worsen the condition.
And you have already given the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and now take that which will remain after the wound heals.
Chapter 43.
Of cautery for calluses and similar conditions.
These are calluses that occur in the parts of the foot behind the patient, which is a large cause of foot pain; and cautery is applied in these two ways, either with fire or with a pointed cautery.
However, cautery with fire is that the pointed cautery is shaped like a pen knife, which should be made of iron according to the quantity that contains the callus of the entire part, and of thin blades.
And then place that burning object on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And let it remain for three days before it begins to tremble. And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it remain on that for a day until the pain is eliminated.
And then treat that wound with generated meat juice until it is healed.
If it does not convert, and there are many accidents on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with hot water, and take a cup of iron or steel or pen of the volt, and place that on the joint; and then gradually add a small amount of hot water to the cup, and turn your hand, and rotate it around the joint, and press the margin of the cup on the surface of the joint, and find the hot water in the center of the joint; and wait for the patient for a short while until the mouthful of water is absorbed by the joint, and then remove that, because the joint will be healed.
And they did so, bringing both into the other as soon as they arrived on all of them in the body.
And then care for those wounds where the roots of the teeth have been removed from those dents in which the flesh is engorged.
Chapter LIV.
Of the cauterization of trembling.
When someone has trembling due to cold in the nerves, or fever from a cause that causes it, or from another similar cause, then it is customary to cauterize with four cauteries or with one cautery on the spines of the back, between each spine put a cautery; and put a cautery in their chest, and over their stomach, put an olive.
And the trembling of that person ceases and the healing of the sick person is accelerated.
Chapter LV.
Of the cauterization of accidents to the body.
When in the body there are wounds caused by accidents, and pustules that have been made from thick, corrupted matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, that it should be cauterized over all of the fistula with a thin cautery of myrtle wood, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with the long root of a long-legged plant; or with a lenticular cautery.
And sometimes, according to this method, the points are cauterized at the beginning of their expulsion; and if they do not believe it, and the excessive means used by those, and heal from those.
However, it is better to do this before the evacuation with flebotomy.
Chapter 66.
Of the cauterization of fluxes of sick people by incision of the arcera.
Too many wounds that cause fluxes of arcera are incised because of the plague, or from the incision of apostemas or cauterization of the member, and similar, and it is difficult to remain in that one.
Therefore, when something happens to anyone, you must place your hand on the orifice of the arcera, and place your hand over that which you say is newly opened wounds before it is closed the flux of the sick person, and that it does not come out.
And then place in the fire the cauterizations of a few and many olives, by name, and blow on those before they are extinguished.
And then quickly take a small or large second instrument and place it on the place where the artery is broken, over the vein, pressing hard so that the blood does not flow out, and then insert the cautery into that wound and keep it closed and restricted.
And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove the instrument and extend the cautery, then take another cauterizer constantly used by those in the fire, and do not stop doing that until the wound is closed.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
And you should know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to close the wound in those places, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either use a cauterizer as mentioned above, or extract it when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of the veins are burned and the wound is closed, it should be tied with a strong thread or bandage, or placed on medicines that have the virtue of closing the wound; and they should be strengthened by a cushion or compression.
May the one who administers a proper restriction of his clothing and a proper bandage or by positioning causes and similar ones, does not compare but burns.
If that happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then open a small incision on the indicated part of that vein as we have said, and understand that the skin should not be removed from the affected part of the wound, and over the rib cage it should not remain; and above the ribcage, sprinkle with cold water until the skin is congealed and swollen; and cover in case of cauterization or medical necessity.
Of incisions and punctures and bleeding and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all illnesses in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cautery; and we have ordered the chapters of the sub-headings of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter to treat this matter in such a way that it may be helpful to those who seek such knowledge, regarding what has been asked.
And since I have begun that, child, you should know that in this chapter we will discuss what is described in the first chapter of cauterization.
And since it is important for you to know that in the operation described in this chapter, which involves the removal of matter, the same precautions apply as in the aspiration of the vein or incision over the abscess or extraction of the stone or incision of the stone. And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst cases, death.
And I warn you that you should not perform this operation on yourself, for some of these procedures require the skills of a doctor to treat certain diseases. And some of them may be driven to their disease and die from it, and they suffer greatly because of the severity of their disease, and the length of their illness, and the fear of death that accompanies it.
And of those who give you such advice, you should expect healing and their illness is harmful.
And therefore do not trust in anyone who comes to you with such a method; and your caution should be greater than what is customary, and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause about this unless you have certain knowledge that it works for you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
And use in the treatment of all your illnesses prediction and indication of him to whom you are converted for salvation, because in that one is with you assistance on acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O children, God bless you with His understanding and does not lead you astray and protect you, because that is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it is for you rejoicing in that which you ask about and of which you have need.
Chapter one.
On the cure of gout, which is contained in the head of children.
You should know that this disease affects children during childhood and when the newborn opens his head, he is susceptible to it.
Sometimes it occurs due to an unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease in adults; and to all those who I have seen with it, death has followed, and for that reason, I believe it is a work of the devil in them.
I have seen a child whose head was full of water, and his head was always like that until he could not put his hand on it due to the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased until he died by fire.
And this humidity is added between the skin and the bone, or it is added under the bone over the joint.
If the humidity is between the skin and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the child's head at the top, and the length of the incision should be two nights until the humidity flows out, and this is the shape of the spatula:
And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity goes to the bone, it is similar to that you see the junctions of the head exposed from all parts and the water is squeezed out when you press it to the mouth and not to your hand. So that you cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
And remove all the humidity from the incision; and apply compresses with cloths and feathers; and apply ointment of honey and oil every five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and cover the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little humidity until that member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, that sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do it as best possible.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and engage it in flow, as this could lead to death of the patient due to loss of fluid and removal of moisture.
Chapter 2.
When a catarrh or swelling occurs in the thighs or chest, and it is confirmed that this is the case, and you do not confuse it with other treatments, then this treatment would be in the incision of those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those that the patient's head has, and you approach the location with dry cloth to prevent the arteries from appearing, and you strengthen the collar of the patient with some cloth; and you consider where the vein is; and the locations of each above the locations that are close to the ears, and they are hidden in only a few people.
And then approach the arch of the foot with a probe, and then insert each one into the space of each part, entering it through the bone, and that is because of the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and then cut it at the points above.
And if the length of the incision is two such adjustments, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out, which is often frequent.
But if the arch does not appear at the surface, then measure the amount of space from three such adjustments, and then approach the probe, and enter it through the bone.
And that amount of blood that flows out is about one ounce, and it does not flow out more or less, and all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the foot.
And then consider the cause, and if there is some reason for the abscess on the bone, then insert it through that so that it does not become an abscess carefully.
And then apply strength to the wound with feathers and cloth from linen, and then care for that with ointment until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
When an ancient or sharp stone, due to humid and bad conditions in the temples, or a very hard and similar stone, and it is treated with medical methods and does not respond, then we have shown extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises the eyelids; and understand the stone that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its own pole, and it is hidden only in a few people due to force of scratching.
And if it is hidden, then the back of the patient's hand should be strengthened with some cloth; and then scratch the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears clearly to you. And here is the shape of this spoon: And then, with the help of a hook that facilitates its entry into the acetabulum; and then, extract it from the bone and remove the pieces above it until you remove the hook from the bone and discover the pieces of the tendons that were left there, from all parts.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with a thread at the end of the needle, and then cut one piece according to the amount by which its ends were elongated and contracted, and do not cut too much, because if it is not cut, the blood will not stop flowing.
And then remove the blood from the wound with a cloth or gauze.
And if the acetabulum is large, then cover it with two pieces of double-strength gauze or cord that is long enough to prevent putrefaction and promote the consolidation of the wound and stop the flow of blood.
And then cut away the excess that is between two layers; and do this at that time or another time.
If you wish, cauterize that part with the pointed cautery until it reaches the area where the edges of it are located, and it will remain in place like that of a wound dressing.
It is better to do this if the patient has fever or a scalded complexion; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and therefore it is better in such cases.
And cover the extraction of the arches that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on clean cotton properly made, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and warm compresses until it is healed.
And while you are performing another procedure to stop the flow of pus from the arch, at that time you should press or cauterize that pus, or place something over the wound, and strengthen your hand until it is pressed. And if none of those causes are present, then place your hand over the wound until the pus is congealed, and apply cold water to the area with great coldness until the pain subsides, and then strengthen it as needed.
And the thing that is more painful in extraction of archery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, so that you have sensed both locations with tent, and pause as needed, mot ignitz, until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not solidified from all this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two points is as follows. But if the sharpness of two points is better than one, because if they are as sharp as two points approaching each other, and do not incise the flesh at speed.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be kept in those and the flesh should be incised more painfully.
And this work is better in all works and less painful.
And the space between the two points is the thickness of the aforementioned.
Chapter Four
Of the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic humors from the wounds.
When the acidic humors are in the body, and they are in the veins on the top of the head, and there is no cause for healing in that area of medicine, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels like it is walking with ants, and the wounds from those are extended, humidified as if their fur is known, and their feathers are scalded by the acidity of the tears, the ancient methods in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure a spasm.
And you command the patient to raise the hairs on his forehead, and then insert three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two times: the first incision should be equally spaced along the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second along the length of a little bit less than the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And watch out for the beginning of the arches, which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the jaws to the mandibles. And if the space between each beginning is three times as much, adjust it.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloths at hand, use them to remove the wetness from the wound.
And then insert the spatula between two sharp edges, of which this is the shape of the incision: which is from the part of the temples to the second incision. Scrape away all the membrane that is between two incisions above the pericardium, which is over the bone, and then do so from the incision that moves towards the second incision. And then spread this spatula and insert another instrument into the first incision, which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place your hand on the sharp side of that scalpel against the flesh attached to the membrane, and on the other side of the bone, and push it into that until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all those vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
While continuing the incision at this point of the codex, and then make that in the median fissure between the other fissure.
And when an equal quantity of blood has been drawn, express the veins of the feet by constriction.
And then place your hand on each fissure of the old man's calf, and place your hand on those wounds that are open and bleeding and open, and make sure they do not become a pus-filled abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then cure that with an ointment made from basil icon or rose-scented oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of gout by cauterization and the descents of the humors from the parts mentioned in the chapter.
When a vein is cauterized and continues, and the veins of the patient become weak and their eyelids are ulcerated and they lose their hair, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that the materials and cauterization do not come from any but certain veins of the parts mentioned in the chapter.
And the best cure for those is this: command the patient to turn their face, and then make a small incision on the right side of the forehead, near the temple (and start the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples which are bruised due to mastication), until it reaches the bone.
Dry out all the pus with a sponge or dry cloth, and then fill it between the two lips of the incision at the old wound or with the cloths of the patient. And then apply a poultice on top of the swollen parts to prevent abscess formation.
And when you see that the abscess has decreased, then rub the bone until it reaches the new flesh, and apply a dry dressing that makes new flesh, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of collofania and mix them, and make it into a poultice and administer it on these wounds to promote new flesh growth.
Chapter 6.
Of the treatment of that which is found in the armpits.
All the cause that is found in the armpits is one of four species, either it is mineral stone or a similar cause to stone, such as iron and verdigris, or it is a plant cause such as celandine or fava, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and similar substances, or some animal.
And therefore when stone is found in the armpit or other similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and pauses the armpit in the sunlight, and if you see the stone, then distills some cause of purple oil or saffron into that, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nostrils for the event of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because those movements are forgotten in these causes.
If it is not possible to extract it with your fingers, then administer extraction using the instrument called the epicucious subtle, of which this is the form:
And if it is not possible to extract it with the epicucious, then administer extraction using the sharp instrument of double use.
And if it is not possible to extract it with that, then make a thin needle of copper and insert the end of the needle into the ear trumpet and seal around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out but the needle. And then extract it with a strong attraction, as many troops have reported that we have found.
But if it is not possible to extract it in this way, then take some unripe or ripe fruit and place it on the edge of a spoon, and wrap that covered edge with a clean cloth. And then insert that into the ear trumpet and facilitate it, and remove the ear trumpet from the moisture.
And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to cut that part which was affected by abscess or spasm.
The method of cutting that part is to first bandage the patient with the vein sephasica and then remove the bandage according to the method of the virtue of the patient, and then place that cushion between your hands and convert the golden thread to the parts above, and make a small incision in the edge of the golden thread where the grey matter of the patient is located. And let the incision be of lunar shape until it reaches the bone, and when the bone is found, if you can use appropriate instruments, then make that incision at that time with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
And if the cause is one of the grasses that we believe and is inflated, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your command, then take a thin spatula according to this form: and administer to that person the antidote of that poison which has fallen into their ear.
And do not do that when you think that the person is already moistened by the vapor from their ear, and pause them in a comfortable position, and prop them up with pillows or subtle gestures, or with anything that has been mentioned so far, which is praised for its extraction.
May the water that enters the ear canal be used as a sneeze conditioner at the beginning, and fill the patient's ear with old wool, and place it on the ear in which the water is, and if it is removed, it is good; otherwise, take many thin needles according to the length of the above, and heat them in the fire for a short time, and the patient should insert one of those needles into the tragus of their ear and strike the other needle on the needle inside the ear. So do not stop that with the needle until all the water is removed.
So do not stop that with the needle until all the water is removed. And if the wound is open and you have a paper or cloth, put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is burned to the maximum.
And then put another cord and do that many times until all the wound is opened, and remove that which is underneath as is said of the stone extraneous to the eye.
In the extraction of beasts entering that ear, if it is a small one, use the same method and the same tool as we have said in the division; but if it is of great size, which causes pain to the side of the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and precision, and the cause of it is the most difficult of all the other causes that can occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you cure that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
And if some cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp instrument, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of this form: And insert the thin end of the needle into the ear, according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then strongly pull out that which was inserted, and do this repeatedly until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey your instructions, then you will open and close the circuit of the needle with beeswax as we have said; and then administer distillations that have been used in the past for treating worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that you use to fund the oils in the ear with this instrument of which this is the form: And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the catheter here where it is necessary. And if you want, take the rag and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour some oil or herbs, or whatever you want from these medicines into the catheter -- and that is in the earthenware --, and then insert the rag above and press it with your hand until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the catheter and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And that which is in the earthenware should already be heated with a small fire. And be careful that the liquid you will distill in the earthenware is not too cold, because the medicines of earthenware cannot bear that.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of the breaking of earthenware.
Some people have had some broken earthenware from their bellies of those who were not perforated, and that has happened in some men, breaking of the earthenware in the middle of the earthenware by plague or by nothing at all in that; and this breaking sometimes happens in the front of the earthenware which does not know the excrement, and sometimes it happens in the parts in front.
And in the case where an injury occurs at the front of the body, and it is not understood, it is often difficult to treat.
And in the case where the cause is understood, cover the patient's head with a cloth and observe that area. And if you see an outgrowth appearing, use this thin probe in the shape of an 'L':
If the end of it where the width is small has one sharp part and the other not, and the probe is two spans long so as not to scratch the head.
And if the outgrowth is made of flesh in the head or on the body, then use this thin and sharp instrument to cut it away quickly before it becomes fully formed.
And if the outgrowth is on the front of the head, then use a thin and sharp needle to heat it slightly, and then place it on the flesh of the head.
And if the patient feels the outgrowth and finds it difficult to remove, due to its size, forcefully press it away with difficulty; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the head.
And then place a cloth of the second quantity of the wide tape that you have wrapped around the thigh; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any bandage and push it into boiling water and powder it over the wound according to the third, and use it; and if you see that the cloth has become infected, then remove it and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made of oiled rosin, until the infection has passed; and then cure it within the time it takes for it to heal.
If there is an outflow of pus, then immerse a cloth or towel in boiling water and place it over the wound, and use another remedy that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
On the treatment of ectropion, which occurs in the eyelids.
When some humors occur at the pores of the bones, some are dry.
Therefore, you should hold those who are holding them or the cushion, and cut those who are on their ribs, and place your hand over the areas according to the trisectors.
If there is pain from cold venous blood, then you should cauterize those who are on the surface with a fine cauterizer.
The best cauterization is to incise and remove the dry humors when they return from the ribs; and when they are cauterized by fire, those ribs are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Cure for great pain that comes to the pores of the bones.
Humors occur in the pores of the bones due to some cause that resembles great pain in its strength and hardness, and is called great pain.
And there is an accumulation of thick humidity in the pore above and below.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider whether the greatness arises from that which appears under the eyelid and is moistened at all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Then place an incision over that part under the eyelid and remove all parts easily that may cause it to escape, and suspend that one and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with stitches; and cure that part until it is healed.
And if it is small, then it will not be harmful for that part where the oil of it restores that and encases it.
And if the greatness declines to the parts within the eyelid, then remove the eyelid and suspend the greatness with an incision, or another that you indicate of incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid is elongated by the incision, then it will not be noted in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with what is inside that will heal it.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of the eyelid above the wound.
Axcirnath is gray matter that is produced in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and causes their catarrh the most; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on those.
And so you see those people always talking with their mouths open; and on their mouths open while sleeping; and those have their eyelids under their eyebrows, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of infection is in the eye; and when you press the area with the fingers, you push infection into those.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses their head on the chin, and place a cloth under them and on top of them make a circle, and according to the amount that contains all parts of the body, and place that over that and press with the fingers of both hands all around so that infection is added in the middle of the circle, and then put a sponge in the middle of that humidity and insert it into the opening for the latitude, and the opening should not be larger than the opening that is made in flap surgery.
May you cut the cord completely until you reach the umbilicus, where in most cases, the umbilicus is severed according to the form of a white grain.
Then remove those bandages that you have wrapped between the patient's thighs and fold them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful not to place the sponge in the wound so that it does not reach the bone and the other side of that.
If you do not see it at the beginning of the wound, then place a small sponge in the wound until the bleeding stops; and then remove those that we have mentioned; and moisten cloths with warm water and apply them over the area and strengthen those sponges.
And remember that they sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the wound to prevent that which is left from that moisture.
And care for that until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a poultice made of certain herbs until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch those parts to the wound and make methods of maladies as with frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that is the cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by atactini at the beginning and suture; or by cannulas as I have said.
And so cover the head of the patient with a cloth; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it is converted, it is good; and if not, insert the needle in the part that is farthest from the eyelid behind, and make the needle penetrate above, and that — close to the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — close to the hairs, and pull the thread above to the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
Approach the part of the eyelid behind the eyelashes and insert a small blade into the lacrimal canal; then remove the pus and place it under the eyelid or on a piece of cloth, and hold the eyelid open with your thumb while applying pressure.
However, one should pay attention to the shape according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, which varies among men, and those who require a larger incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And approach the blade above the two lines that have been held, and begin from the larger lacrimal canal to the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And place the onion in one of the two angles of the eye socket, and remove all the cornea, and adjust the incision with two pieces of thin wool or gauze, and wipe away the pus, and let any excess drip onto two cotton balls.
And after three or four days, approach the stitches of the wounds and care for that.
And if you want, leave the stitches in place and care for that with a dry and constricting agent, because the eyelid should be sealed with the wound and its adhesion; but stitches are better. Therefore, I will now show you the ancient methods of taxanir.
But in his care for the patient, it is a good operation, and not in fear.
And there is another method in taxanir, and it is that you place a figure on the eyelid like a mirror, and then lift the eyelid three fingers apart and bring it together according to this form:
But if it is not possible to do that, hold the fingers apart, and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other end of the thread into the larger lacrimal canal, and the second end of the thread into the smaller lacrimal canal, and adjust the threads to be equal, and then raise your hand to the height that we have recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is unwell.
If a boil occurs on your skin or in your wound, cover that boil with wax and the same ointment, and apply it.
Some wounds under the eyelid that are converted into eyebrows, then cover with what you used for the wound we mentioned earlier; but stitching is more artificial.
To bandage the legs is as follows: And you should fold the eyelid and cut the figure that is according to what I have mentioned; and then, by art, make two bands or thin strips of them, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs should be less than the width of the space. And you have already incised at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each thread under that which superfluously hangs from the eyelid of the eye, and press the bands of each part very tightly, and leave it for several days until the skin around the band dies and becomes rejected and rots within a few days if it is not removed.
If it is too late, then break the humor with lancets, and then cure the pain until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
Of raising the pricking hairs in the eyelid when the hair is hard.
When they are unnatural hairs, hard, rough, and pricking the eyelids, then perform the operation in this way: you take a thin needle and place it on a soft and sharp cedar, and then adjust the ends of it and notches as subtly as possible. And the length of the needles is the quantity of one palm.
And then you can make another thin needle from it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you want.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and position yourself close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
And then introduce the needle into the eyelid at the point that needs to be sewn, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelash, removing any excess above the eyelid.
And then pull the eyelid up and insert that into the eyelash, and have one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand out and insert it into the eyelash, in the place where the eyelid is not sewn, to the eyelash naturally.
But if it is not sewn, then insert it into the parts behind the eyelid that you have composed at that point, where it will stay sewn under the eyebrow.
And then place it against the eye, as you will sew it and the eyelid, and grind it and clean the eye, and leave the bandage for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its place and heals well.
And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural skins, and elevate it to that one, or let it lie flat until it has stretched out enough space, and then elevate it.
Chapter XIII.
About the cure of ehratism that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When it occurs in the outer part of the eye, and the contraction of the eyelid occurs when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, and this ehratism is called leporine, and whether it is natural or accidental, it is caused by poor consolidation of the skin or dryness or cauterization, or by similar conditions.
May the method of the operation in this be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of linen, and tie them together when they have healed.
And do not use remedies that dry out the causes of which they dehydrate and constrict, because if you do so, it will return to being worse than at any other time without fire having been used.
Use in those of causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and apply the water in which they are boiled along with their seeds or yarrow oil, which should be liquefied by heating all the oils, and apply this mixture to the affected area, and cure it.
The treasure of your remedy is that you perforate all the affected area that is not consolidated according to its original form at the beginning.
This operation, which we have mentioned, is only a correction of the consolidation that does not return the form of the area according to how it was originally.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of consolidation that is made in the eyelid.
This consolidation that is made in the eyelid, which is not properly called consolidation; and it is of two kinds, one natural and another accidental.
Accidents are caused by pressure or by cuts or by burns or by similar means.
And the method of operation for this is that you take a needle with which to make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal into the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the other hand, and cut away from the needle, and insert it into the wide gap. And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken part, and convert that part of the eyelid, and make the two cuts on the side of the eyelid.
And make the ends of the two cuts at two angles of the incision, which you made when they converge, and make the other end of each cut at an angle so that when they meet, a figure is formed.
And this figure is written in Greek letters: alpha.
And then remove the flesh from that part as much as it is thick after the pain, which is called the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and bind them with wool thread; and then care for those with what we have said about softening medicines and poultices until they are healed.
And if you have made an incision or suture or cauterization, then you should make the incision flat on the skin of the eyelid according to what is prescribed. And then separate the poultice between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the cure of incisions when they are raised or lowered, that it should run in the operation according to what is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the skilled craftsman always prepares an instrument in each possible way that is possible to enter and make the figure return to its natural form, or close to that, and the patient according to what suits the operation and tools in the best arrangements.
Chapter 15.
Of the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck under the eyebrow and prohibited from its natural movement and works, you must insert the extraction of the ray below the eyelid, and raise it to that place, or extend it to the eye.
And then you insert the adhesion into a thin space, which should not be sharp to avoid discomfort for the patient and leave the space that does not descend to the eyelid and its sharpness.
And your incision should be made with ease until the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salt water in the eyelid, which you wash; or distill it on it with a solution of zinc in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the corner of the eye, and place over the eye a piece of lint soaked in oil of roses, and then use the third day's remedy of consolidating agents until it is healed.
Chapter 16.
About the beginning of an eyelash and the thickness of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
You should know that an eyelash is of two types, either nervous, which is similar to a fine hair; or non-nervous, which is similar to white flakes, the type that when it touches the eye, often takes on the form of a wart and is then removed.
And these special types do not begin until the main lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the vision and prevents light and movement of the eye.
When the worker begins at the beginning of the eye, he should place his hand on the patient's head and raise the eyelids with his other hand, and then lift the eyelid with his thumb, and then collect the eyelash from the wart with a pair of tweezers and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or of a buffalo or of a wild boar, or of similar animals, or of strong iron, or by doubling the tip of the needle little by little and inserting it at the base of the nail, and pressing firmly on the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin from the side of the nail that is the pupil. And continue to insert the needle into the back of the patient.
And then you insert the thin wire or small forceps into the lacrimal duct and remove the flesh of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become continuously flowing tears.
And sometimes cut the nail with the sole or firmly extended, as we have said, and then scrape off the skin from the side of the nail that is the shape of this:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic with the wire and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the injured part of the body with a small amount of salt or a piece of cloth spread out, and let it remain there for several days; then care for that part to ensure it heals properly.
And if the nail is not broken and you cannot insert the needle or it does not stick in that place, then use this type of needle to cure the injury with medicines, and it will heal as it should be and as recommended in the division.
And if you want to cut that part, then begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp knife of fine sharpness according to this form: with fine sharpness. And if you see that it is thinned and confined and placed in that place, then sprinkle your own urine in the area made of cloth spread out or with rose oil or salted salt, and cover the area for several days.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is inside has been removed, but if the opposite pus is not in the area, then leave that part and cure the pus when it begins to heal.
And repeat your operation until it is healed within that reasonable time.
The inflammation of the lacrimal gland, if noticed in its location for great harm, should be suspended by an onion; and incise that part, and do not stop the incision because you do not want to stop the flow of tears.
And then drip in the lacrimal canal and let it heal within that reasonable time.
Chapter 17.
About the incision of an abscess and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the location.
Some flesh is born in the location of an abscess, and it is over-pressed before it covers the pupil, or approach or strengthen on the eyelids and strongly compress the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled to the rose of a balustrade.
The operation is that the patient places his head on the chair; and then open the eyelids of that one and collect all that flesh with an onion convenient to that, and that with a forcep or a cestus; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished by the cutter, and guard yourself from the location that you do not descend that which you should do your operation.
And your incision should be made at the same place where you inserted that or the flat blade which we have recommended in the beginning of the chapter, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of the wound approaches this chapter's end.
Then, when your incision is completed and the entire wound has been cleaned, fill the wound with salt-soaked cloth, or pour in the powdered herb and similar to the corrosive medicines, and place a damp cloth over the wound until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
And if there is any cause for concern and the wound is not healing well, and you fear an abscess has formed, then drain the wound and treat that abscess with what cures that abscess, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the flesh that has occurred in the wound of this kind.
But if your patient has any other treatment for the wound by natural or accidental means, do not use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member can bear that operation.
Chapter 18.
Of collecting blood from the wound.
Blood flows from veins that are tumor-like on the wound and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they remove the wound over a period of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound from which blood flows is strong and not another disease than bleeding, then you collect that blood.
And if you command the patient to hold their head up, and suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of soft doubled material in this way:
or two bands gradually in a coil in this way:
And then those veins are collected with soft, thin forces, and thinness, and wipe them away hour by hour until they are again visible from the wound and turned back.
And be careful not to damage the wound at its extremities; and if your operation on the morning gives light to the sun, and you are a firm in your operation that you do not incise those veins.
When you have completed the task, then pour warm water or rose oil into the wound to help reduce the inflammation that remains from the saber.
However, if it is not possible for you to collect all of it at that time, then apply the entire amount of it that relieves the pain from it, and leave it on for several days until the pain is reduced and it is ensured that an abscess does not form.
And then repeat the process over it until it is healed.
This is the shape of the forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of reducing hernias to their place.
When you treat hernias with a pointed cautery or sharp medicine after the story of it has not healed, then do not insert into it but cut through the abscess to allow it to mature and remove all the moisture that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then use this tool of which this is the shape:
And if it is known that the head is hard, and made of iron, and the cap is round as it is made to be pierced by a needle or an awl for a delicate puncture (as in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and gradually rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from the sickness and remains for forty days without being renewed or becoming an abscess or having any accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then you should reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and you should take a thin iron or sharp medical instrument, and when you have exposed the bone, then you should take a tribo in this form:
The external edge of the iron triangle is rounded, and its tip should be extended into the extremity as often as possible.
Then place that one on the bone, and the other near the lacrimal; and lift your hand a little from the wound, and then turn your hand over to rub the iron through the bone, and the patient will feel pain as if it is being torn apart by the force of the iron when you remove your hand.
Therefore, then apply a hemostatic and drying ointment to the wound as you have been taught.
Since the flesh and the wound are healed, then the matter that was exuded from the parts of the body returns to its place, so that is less painful on the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the elevation of the wound.
When the wound is elevated to its totality and does not cause harm or decrease in the excrement, then loosen the bandage, and then follow it, and then place several leeches on the neck for good succession; and then apply a liniment made of acetate, aloe, and sulfur, and strengthen the plaster on the wound with powders.
And the method for cleaning the bones is to take cloths from lion's manes, and each cloth should be doubled in four places; and make those threads.
And then place one over the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose. And then apply strong pressure with a durable, tight cloth; and repeatedly clean the incisions with succession; and after removing the cloths, leave the wound straight during the day and night.
If during the time the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
And after removing the ligament, keep it as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the bones and the bandage and the cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
Of the beginning of the elevation of the pupil.
When the tear in the pupil is disrupted and it elevates and protrudes through the eyelids as if with a knife, and it takes on the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from below to above, and then insert another needle double the size of the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate; and then leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double and lift up that part of the uvea around the needle, and apply strong pressure.
And then remove the needle and place it on the woolen cloth soaked in white wine and lime, which will cause the thread to harden.
And then care for that part where the pain is healed.
And some bandages gathered from all the parts are placed in a circle around the wound, and then perforated with a thin needle that comes to the bottom of the wound, and drain the bloody serum, and lower the bandage and enter it soon.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of gout.
This disease that is called gout is not other than a kind of inflammation that is adjusted in the wound, like water descending, and it is not that one.
The best way to work on it is to make the patient lie down on the bed prepared and dressed, and then take the main vein in both arms and that one through which you see the inflammation coming to the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and close the wound, and the disease will be seen as before.
If it does not go down, you know that it is a sign of illness.
But if it is not prepared, you know that the descent to sanity is like what we have said, then do so with the patient's hand between your hands and take a thin spatula and put it on the conjunctiva near the edge of the cornea in the eye (where the eye is), until the sickness is gone.
Then when the sickness is gone, you should distill in the container with water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
And then cure the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the water descending from the container.
We have already said the specifics of the water in the division and which is suitable for piercing according to the speech declared, then that second one for healing.
Then you should make the patient lie down between your hands on a soft pillow and hold the container firmly.
And place your hand close to the eyelid of the left eye, if the water is in the left eye; or place your hand directly on the right eye.
And if the water is in the left eye, take a spoon with your right hand; or if the water is in the right eye, take a spoon with your left hand.
And place the tip of the spoon near the crown for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the outer side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then pour the water and turn your hand with that.
And penetrate into the eye and feel that the spoon has reached its end due to the water.
And cover that the length of the spoon is equal to the space between the pupil and the end of the black line, which is the crown of the eye; because you will see that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And place the spoon in the place where the water is, and then quickly pour it down another vessel; if the water first falls on the cloth that covers the patient's eye, then wipe it with a clean cloth and place it in his eye.
And if it is necessary to pause for a moment; therefore, if the water descends, then pause at that other vessel in front of you that does not need to be emptied.
And when it is dried and does not descend, then extract the almond with ease, and rotate your hand in the water, and dissolve a small amount of clear gemstone salt in that water; and place the wound on that cloth, which has been soaked in rose oil, albumen of egg, and honey, and apply it to the wound.
May those who live in our time pause on that three-legged table with that album of egg.
And if you do not obey your almond with the instrument of the wound because of its hardness — which is one of the men whose wound is hard to heal — then cover it with that spatula, which is called the alberid, and this is its form:
And then pierce it at that junction, and do not remove your hand from the wound, and do not stop until you have made a small hole in the almond.
And then enter through the second incision that we have said.
And prepare the patient for surgery, who has been made to sleep deeply in a position where they lie on their back in complete darkness, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on their chest to keep their nature calm and not move their head to the right or left of the entire body.
And let the bandage be according to its position on the third day.
And then remove that from the complete darkness and expose the free view, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
And do not do that during the hour of healing or as soon as possible after the infusion. Having said that, you should do it for the sake of water being able to flow more freely and forcefully through great and violent regurgitation.
But if an abscess occurs, then remove the bandage within the seventh day and correct that with the ointment that causes the abscess.
Then you examine the patient's face and place your hand on their mouth to control their breathing, which exists in the deepest darkness.
Then slowly raise the patient's head and discuss their causes.
And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from performing certain operations, and then you should be skilled in the operation.
And we have already reached some of those that are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Arabian desert by perforating the ground where water is found.
However, I have not seen any such thing in our land that has done this, nor has water been found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can be above those who do not know those things:
And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their external parts are like this subtle triangle, the sharp end being like that form.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of meat in the nose.
When meat is stuck in the nose, various adjustments of which some cause certain causes, such as a spider's legs or polyps; and this malady is called polypus, which is similar to that represented by the pea. And from there meat cancer arises, which is black in color; and from there it is meat lion that is not of black color.
Therefore, in those meats that are not fraudulent or cancerous, cover what you do for the malady between your hands and place it in the sunlight, and blow through your nose, and pick out the tumor from those meats. And then extract it from those parts that are deformed, and then cut through that which you have comprehended from those meats with a sharp, thin knife of the one part where you know that all the meat is already stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the abscission is possible, then you should remove it with one of the thin instruments to facilitate it from there. If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has occurred, then pause over that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been drained and all the cavities have been closed.
And then sponge off the nose with a damp cloth or water. If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then you know that it has been healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate after the wound has been closed, then you know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose where it was not reached by the abscess.
Therefore, after closing the wound, if there is any swelling in the place where it was, then massage the mouth with the amount of oil or medicine that is necessary, and examine the patient and introduce an end of the cloth into the nose to help the breathing or for another cause that is possible.
And once that is done, draw the patient's scent inward towards the nostrils, and place it on their pillow, as children at school do when they perform this action, and it is the likely cause for that person who wants to do it.
And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose and mouth, and administer a meat broth made from meat that has been in the patient's body, and do this while you know that the meat is already in the patient's body.
And then remove the patient, and place their nose in a bowl of vinegar, and do this for three days or more until all that is left of the meat is rotten.
And at the end of the cause, place a gauze in their nose to keep it clean until they are healed.
However, if you find that the treatment is not working, use this method instead.
This is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
And make something like silver or amber, which is similar to a small open lamp, with a small bowl, and the same as the meat.
And if you want, make a closed canula like this with a cane, and the canula of the instrument at the end is to purge and is flat, uncovered; to which has a handle in the back of it, and hold it when you remove the oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and of the suctible causes.
Chapter 25
About the nerves outside the nose.
The nerves outside the nose are visible and magnificent in other days, but they are hidden when you look at it.
And for that reason, you should insert that at the beginning of the appearance of the disease, and extract everything. And then place your hand or use a cautery or medicine that is burning in the area where it was.
But if it is late when the insertion is made, consider whether it is pustular, hard, of black color and little sensation, then do not touch that iron which is an abscess crancos; because those who inserted this abscess ended up with great malice on that one whom they had.
And if the abscess is of lion color and not black, and when insertion is possible in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that sense with fear, and cure the area with that which dries and presses into when it is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of suture of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
When there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, do not compare it to any other operation, but only in some men.
Then cover, when any cause of those is found, whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
And if the lips of disruption of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then cover that you excise each part of their codex within which it does not cause harm. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and on top of those sprinkle healing dragon's blood and three grains of triple powder, and place a thin layer of diaphanicon plaster or any other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and cure that within which it is healed.
May the solution of continuity or needles be added as we have recommended in the abdominal stitching, or add the solution of continuity with a thread as you have done and make it known.
Chapter 27.
Of the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the genitals.
Barbed wire-like objects are found in men's genitals due to the lower lips of their labia, which are hard abscesses similar to nails, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the labia and each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with a soft material until the wound is strengthened, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a remedy that has hemostatic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
Of the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
When there are many vagabonds around the adjusted jaw, which the ancients called albus, then cover that area with an onion or hold it with a pair of forceps and insert it into its place, and let the saliva run out or swallow it.
And then place your hand over the wound or apply other stanching or styptic powders.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it again secondarily and cauterize it, because the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for teeth falling out.
When sharp, rough, and sometimes vagabond scales are adjusted on the surface of the teeth, in the parts where they are located, and some are black and are formed into yellow or greenish spots before that corruption occurs through which the gum becomes and the teeth become loose.
And then cover the patient between your hands and place the cap of your hand on their head, and remove the teeth in which those scales appear similar to sand before any cause occurs from them, and that makes the blackness and yellowness and other colors disappear when they are changed.
If it is still not clear what you mean by that, then repeat the reasoning on those points on the other day and the second and the third until it becomes clear to you in what you are interested.
You should know that the teeth have required various shapes of razors and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you know which razor is used to cut the part of the tooth and another razor used to scrape between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
So that you cure the tooth of its pain at all times and in the entire extraction of it, so that there is no cause that delays the course of it when it is extracted, because it is a sublimated substance within which is the extraction of it.
May you also be certain when the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, because the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen by the operation of the teeth.
Then, since you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and you know how to do it, first cover the circumference of the tooth with some space where there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum on all parts, and then remove that with those called forceps, or with subtle forceps starting small and gradually until that concave part.
Then, bring a large needle with strong thread for good conversation or to stop the leakage, and place the patient's head between your thighs where you can hold it so that it does not move, and then remove the tooth in a straight line in a way that does not give more pain to the patient or cause him greater pain.
And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and place it next to the tooth on all parts to facilitate and make the removal easier as it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, first cover that break and strengthen it with a thin wire so that it is not broken during your construction on that part.
And you should work carefully with exquisite scarification around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it apart, and return over the patient for the main cause of their pain.
And guard yourself from doing what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, which they do not administer as we have recommended; for those who are experienced in such matters bring great harm to people, and all their reasons are untrue, or some of those, or that they extract from that with false bones of the jaw as those who have testified.
And the eradication of it is washed with vinegar or with salt water.
And if there is an outflow of pus, as those who are experienced in such matters do, then cut off some quantity of zigam and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that zigam, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is the method that is praised for the long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
And if there are times when the thick handle is needed before they are not bent, then use short forceps.
And if there are times when straight forceps made of Indian iron are needed, then use them in the extractions. The tips of these have teeth that interlock and grip strongly, and some are shaped like the beak of a stork, which is called a ciconia, and they are very strong.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of the bones of the lower jaw that are impacted.
When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand on the location where it is lodged for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then use analgesics or hold the tips of the forceps, which are shaped like the beak of a stork called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The outer parts of their thighs were cut open with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth or you hold them with these forceps, then carefully place your hand on their chest and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small hook with this shape.
And if the short end of the hook is thick, make sure it is not too sharp so that it does not break.
If the mouth is opened, then good; if not, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramatrix with some roughness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it be triangular and have a more delicate end.
And now you can use this instrument with two prongs, which has the following shape: And other instruments that you will need for tooth extraction; because it is very important to make this instrument, which resembles an ice pick, and this is the shape:
Of the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some kind of deformity, and is not thin enough to be a triangle.
And another wise thing is that the instruments for teeth are also similar to other instruments.
The artists are skilled and subtle in the art, atroba because of this they mean that the operation and various diseases; for some diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, because of their different forms of various species.
If the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is thinned or broken, then it should be carefully handled in its place where it is convenient for the instruments and the forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you to handle this one:
And if there is some deformity little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone of all is fully formed; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick it and its black core, and heal it within so that it becomes healthy.
Chapter 32.
On the care of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not fit naturally in their place, especially when they grow towards women or the venerable elderly; therefore, you should consider: if one tooth is not close to another, and it cannot be extracted by a drill or cautery, then you should remove that tooth. However, if it is not connected to another tooth, then you should use this instrument, which has the following shape; it resembles a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian iron with an edge that is very sharp.
And if you have inserted this instrument into the tooth over several days due to its hardness and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if the prominent tooth has been exposed to the jawbone, then you should use this iron file from India with the following shape:
And if the iron is from India and the mold and the pointed tool are made of brass, which are sharpened like limes, and the teeth of the die are ground one by one in days of work for convenience, so that no other tooth is worn out and broken. And then draw lines along the edge of the bone, and scrape it with a sharp razor.
And if part of the die is quenched and scraped with the tongue, then make sure that you polish it inside where the roughness of that fraction is removed and smoothed, so that the tongue does not stick to it and the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
On the restoration of worn-out teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth due to blows or falls, and the patient cannot bear it, and you have cured it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then use gold fillings instead of silver, because silver turns black and becomes porous over time, but gold never changes.
And if the bone is so delicate and coarse according to how much can enter between the teeth; and the method is that you take the bone and double it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases between two moist teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the treatment until you reach the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge so that it is not moist.
And let your thread be the one that strengthens the bone against the edges of the teeth so it does not escape.
And then remove the excess parts of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place as needed, and convert them into the healthy tooth and the moist tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave that which is tight as it is.
But if it is loose or broken, strengthen that or those with another bone in such a way that it remains in place at all times.
This is the shape of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness in two healthy teeth, as follows:
And when it is made that one or two teeth return to their cavity in those places, and they are recultivated as we have recommended, and remain so.
Only a skilled and knowledgeable craftsman can do this.
Some vegetables are suitable for some causes of cow bones, and they are made into teeth as follows: placed in the place where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain so for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is behind the tongue, some vegetables or it is natural to which man is born, or an accidental and accidental one that has already been consolidated.
And the operation in it is that the mouth of the patient is opened, his own cap is present in his throat; and he raises his tongue, and approaching it, inserts that nerve according to the latitude until the tongue is separated from its position.
If there is any difficulty or resistance in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use force and cut it through the layer until it is torn and the resistance is dissolved.
And be careful not to make an incision in the flesh and that you cut here and there, and let the pus flow out.
And then wash the wound with vinegar or wine or salt water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out, as this would cause another complication.
If the pus flows out, place your hand over the wound to stop it; but if the pus comes out, then cauterize the wound with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 35.
On the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Some tongue wounds occur near the tongue, resembling a small sore, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural operation; and if it is not filled soon, it becomes maggoty inside the mouth.
The operation involves opening the patient's mouth and examining the sore.
And if you see it of a dark or black color, hard and without pain for the patient, then do not touch that part which is crooked.
And if it is declined to a white color, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and insert that sharp instrument, and cut it from all parts; and if worms come out during your operation, then you place a cloth over the wound until it is restrained.
And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and cure that one and the other with the same treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 36.
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are in the groin and other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that are similar to cotton, which are deformed and are called armpits, which when you heal them with what we said in the division and is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of black color, of little pain, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the sake of healing; before entering it, let it mature, and then either you will break it or it will be broken by itself.
And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, if it has already receded from it with caution completely or if it has diminished in some way; and then make suction on the patient, and the head of it should be in your hand, and open the mouth of it, and the servant takes between his hands the most noble instrument of which this is the form:
And if it is made of silver or of iron, and is thin like a knife.
Then when you press the tongue and show it to the abscess, and catheterize over that lesion, then take a lancet and put that in the clyster, and pull that to the parts forward as much as possible. Another thing you pull from some cause of the membranes, and then incise that with an instrument of which this is the shape:
Another thing you pull from some cause of the membranes, and then incise that with an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and thin.
However, if this instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that with a needle of which this is the shape of it: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And then after you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from water.
If there is diarrhea, guard against drinking water of decoction of senna or of fig leaf and similar to those of the astringent causes that restrict the flow of urine, and cure within that which is healed.
And some wounds in the mouth or other abscesses or those two ear infections, and insert those second that I have said at the beginning of the twelve measures equally.
And you have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her mouth, the abscess tended to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her mouth, and the woman breathed very straightly, and had already been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
And the abscess had already caused so much that it had half a finger inside through two holes.
Therefore you should have made an incision in one of its openings, and pulled out that, and thrown away a large portion of it, and then you should have inserted the other end of the wound, and covered her mouth, and held her tongue, and then you should have inserted the opening in that abscess.
And then you approach him with a large amount of linen, but do not remove any of his blood, only a small amount of sanctum. Therefore, the absolute remedy for that woman is to begin immediately to drink plenty of water, and then bring food, but do not cease to incise that abscess many times over a long period of time, and another abscess will form in place of that one, which incises until it is prolonged.
So you apply an ointment and cauterize the wound of that person, and then apply this additionally; and then you walk around and do not clean what God has done for that person.
Chapter 37.
About the incision of a wound when it becomes an abscess.
When catarrh enters the wound and it becomes an abscess and is long, then it is not called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is large and round, then it is called a bubble.
May it be that when the wound is healed with what we have said in the division, and you do not compare your cure, and if you see that the abscess has already been removed from the wound and is subtle, then you should incise that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of black color or of dark color, and is not at the center, then you should attempt the incision of the wound, where there is fear over the patient.
When you see the second assistant that I mentioned earlier who has long and white hair, then make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that shapes it and place the tongue on a new, clean surface, and pull that one down and insert it into one of two instruments that are called tweezers in the beginning of a chapter about needles.
And be careful not to insert it more than what is adjusted over the natural term of its addition, because if you insert it too much, you will damage their speech.
And when the insertion is done, use what we recommended in the beginning of a chapter about needles, and cure that one until it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the insertion, then use anesthesia in the cauterization of that one, and the assistant of the cautery should only be sharp water, and you should place the cap of the patient on their teeth, and take their tongue with the instrument we mentioned, and take some of the water we mentioned in the chapter about cauterization, and comfort them with that living cause, and do not press it too hard or too delicately, and fill the concavity of the instrument which is in this form:
The external part of the cavity where the medicine is placed with the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument of the medicine on the wound, and the patient turns his head to the side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person does not drip onto the surrounding area of the wound and that it does not cause any harm to that person.
And then place your hand with the medicine on the uvula for the space of about one hour until that thing is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you want, take a piece of cloth and wrap that around the end of the spoon, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the spoon into the cloth in a small canula until the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and leave it there for three days or four.
If you need to repeat the medication, repeat that one, and after the cauterization, wash the area where the cotton was placed with cold water, change that area of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat the burn with an embrocation, and give drinks internally until he is cured.
This type of treatment is safer than beginning with a longer period of fear.
Some wounds are cured with the subtle liquid that is more gentle than cauterization, and it is cured in this way: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, scorched Arabic gum, camomile, and a similar amount of herbs as those of the plants, and adjust all those causes or some of them in a bowl, and let them be submerged in a very hot agriotage; and boil it, and let the bowl be well washed with decent water, and let there be a strainer over the bowl, on which a tool made of copper according to this method is placed.
If the patient's hand is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula over the palate, then the uvula becomes obscured.
And then repeat this procedure until it dries, and be careful not to perform this cure at the onset of abscesses, because it would exacerbate the abscess, and do not make this mistake, but rather declare the diagnosis of abscess from there.
However, if this instrument is not available to you at present, then take a cane and fashion a clot of hooves from it, because the mouth of the patient will be soothed, as the hoof cloth prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the extraction of splinters and of that which sticks to the thigh and other causes.
Splinters stick to the thigh or foot or some other cause.
Then carefully remove what is visible from that place, above which the tongue is placed, using a spoon-like instrument, so that it can be declared what is in the mouth.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the stomach, make the patient vomit, so that the food in the stomach can be expelled; or the patient may have swallowed a piece of bread or a small piece of meat; or take a sponge made of sea sponge, wet it with a strong liquid, and place it in the patient's mouth, where the throat is and the food is extracted. And also take an eel and wet it with a strong liquid, and place it in the patient's mouth, and swallow it; or take a piece of bread and moisten it and place it on the tongue and swallow it.
If those causes are not expelled, then use an instrument like this to remove them:
And if it is a large one, make it smaller, and in its outer part, which you will insert into its mouth for ease.
And hold the patient's head elevated in suspension, and be careful of touching their jawbone, so as not to cause pain or damage to the bones or spine, or what the doctor might do with their hand.
However, if the patient feels pain from that insertion, due to their knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and pushing it downwards, and pulling their hand with the instrument in suspension, all this according to the amount prepared for it before it is removed.
Chapter 39.
Of the extraction of blood clots attached to the throat.
When blood clots are treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with forceps, consider this in the throat of the patient at sunrise, so that you have understood the tongue of which you have recommended the instrument.
Therefore, if you see the blood vessel, extract it with a small or skillful instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible to remove that one, then take a concave canula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and place your hand over the concavity of the canula with an ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood vessel is dead and falls out of the wound) and keep the patient from drinking all day.
And then take a full cup of water and wet the mouth of the patient with that, and clean the mouth with that; and do not let any cause stick to it, and make the patient drink an hour later another with their hand, when the blood vessel feels the water.
However, if it is not forgotten that we have recommended, then scent the patient with camomile or assafetida with the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, as in four days.
And there is another method of operation in suffocation of that kind, you take an oven in which there are burning coals and the oven covered with a blanket in the middle of which is a hole, and it is placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then give it above the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not lost until you know that the suffocation has reached the bloodstream, which immediately causes death.
And if not, then repeat the suffocation more slowly, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary this regimen should be abandoned.
This is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the veins when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but it has some curvature: The one who should be at the head, and its end resembles the beak of a heron, which is long, in which is asperated with lime, for when they find some cause, that does not leave it.
Chapter 40
In which is the summary of the speech on the recognition and cutting of abscesses and their removal.
Abscesses are special masses, from various types of inflammations, according to the memory of them, of each one in this book.
And they are different in puncturing and cutting them by various methods, of which one is for the type of abscesses themselves to enter; and because they understand about the moisture.
And the second method is for the places where the accidents of the body occur, because the abscess in the head is another from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the fleshy part is another from the abscess at the joint; and each of them has a different surgical operation.
And more often, some abscesses that do not need to be pierced but rather allowed to mature in their own time and place.
And other abscesses that should be lanced when they are ready, and not matured according to their own time and place, such as abscesses that are near joints, if an abscess approaches a joint, then it is prolonged inside until the pus inside it is drained, and often the tissues or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a main member, and if you delay its perforation, it will not be matured in time and will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, so lance it, but do not lance it before it is ready, as this could cause infection, only lance the one that is near the anus, so that it does not spread to the surrounding tissues and is elongated away from the parts of the anus, and it should be made into a fistula, or it should be made at the end of the abscess that is not healed. May you know the time of rupture of the abscess, and it is when it is matured.
And you know that it is matured when the pain ceases and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in rigor and pulse, and the increase in the head of the abscess, and other symptoms.
And you know that the rupture occurs in the place where the abscess is placed, and from there comes the cure of the exudation.
The rupture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body, if the abscesses are in the joints of the arms or legs, and in the places of the fingers, of the strings of the nerves, of the arches; and, at the back, in all equal places where no reflection occurs; because in those that are reflected, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until the digestion of that part is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that one before, the duration of the life of that person is prolonged and much pain is caused, and the lips of that part are hardened and the depth of that part.
When pus-filled abscesses are perforated according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member indicates.
And if you are administering small perforations, in large abscesses, make a wide and deep incision according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where it is necessary that the tissue be incised and cut, when it is made, as if to make a hole, as in the case of those that occur in the armpits and groin.
And of those that have incisions with three angles; and of those that are made as if in the shape of a leaf of myrtle, as in the case of the abscesses of the armpits.
And of those that are treated with round and crescent-shaped incisions, similar to those.
When the one that does not have any such thing as superficial abscesses, you make a shallow incision only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to pierce it, as you would not want to extract all the pus in one hour; taking out a part of it, and the next day put a poultice into the other side, and then take out a larger part, and do so gradually until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very young, weak, or an infant, a child, or elderly and in decline, since the animal spirit becomes more aged and resolved at the exit of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Be very careful with this chapter, and use your piercing in the way that removes the pus and consider whether the pustule of the abscess is few, or a flat section, then you administer any medicines from it or from another source; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the piercing are large, then make sure to press in each area until they meet evenly.
If part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out in that area, you should cover it with old cloth or fine fabric made of linen, as when you have treated wounds or cuts, their moisture; and strengthen that by the third day; and then proceed to process and cure that with the same liquid that enters before it is healed.
If you accidentally have diarrhea during the operation, then you should administer cold water and vinegar in which a linen cloth has been soaked, and place that over the location of the diarrhea, covered with a blanket.
If the diarrhea persists, then you should administer remedies and cures and powders that have been recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in the winter and the location of the abscess is in a place of many nerves, then you should cover those with vinegar and oil cauterized, and place them over those locations.
When it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, let it be known that you should apply powders made from ground herbs mixed with oil or vinegar and oil, and all of this should be done within the first three days, as we have said, and then let it be known that you should remove the abscess and clean that area and administer to it whatever is appropriate within the time it takes for it to heal.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, as I have already mentioned, there are different ways of treating each type of abscess specifically.
Chapter 41.
About the sectioning of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and those of a special kind that contain membranes that are their own; and the species of these are called nodes.
And among them are those that are flat, and among those that contain moisture similar to cheese. And of those which contain moisture similar to pus, and similar to them; and of those which are hard, like stones.
And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those which do not fear, as you should extract those which do not cause resistance.
And the operation in the dry section of those which you extract with an instrument of the form that approaches it, which is called entromes, until you know what it contains.
If that which it contains is moisture, then divide that instrument according to its length by section through the surface in this form:
And begin in the section of the line of B to the line of G. Therefore, as the moisture is evacuated, then you excoriate that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because troops returned, if they are from that cause.
And then immerse it in Egyptian honey, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it overnight, because that liquid corrodes all that which comes from that layer.
And then repeat the Egyptian poultice second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the poultice until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you should incise it in this way: with a sharp cut, in the shape of a crochet, and then make an incision between two lips of the cut, and scrape off all the contents, and strive with your skill to extract the membrane that contains that.
But if your surgical skills are not up to it, then do what I told you first.
Similarly, apply the poultice of incision and healing as we have told you; incising over the poultice is easier, because it is less painful and less moisture.
Some people have certain remedies for these abscesses that are in the head of those who never get wet; the cause is that when you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and atrobegui the abscess with a deaf, rough, white stone, which cannot be quenched, and if anyone is struck by it, that person will be plagued.
In other parts of the body, accidental abscesses in the head are not covered in this chapter, as with abscesses that occur on the heads of children and require their removal, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And place your hand over the lower part of them to prevent the spread of the disease to the lower parts.
Then use the appropriate remedy for that cure.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofula that occurs in the neck.
These abscesses often occur in the neck, armpits, and groin; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and their causes among them, and all scrofula from these is within their own tunic, and as with neck nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recommended.
And the specific types of these scrofula are moles, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
If it is the type that you have seen in good condition in the Tactile test, whose color is propitious to the color of the coda, and is not attached to any part, and is not annexed to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the diaphragm, and is not protruding, so that you incise it from the dry surface of the part above the part behind the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score it on all parts, and extend two lips of the coda to the size of an inch, or of a small inch if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more important that the vein or nerves are not incised.
And the space should not be too sharp, which does not adjust your hand to incise, or which disturbs the patient, and which is not necessary to incise; because if you had incised a vein or diaphragm and prohibited it from your operation, then pause in the place of broken glass or other powders that keep the sane flowing, and clean the place, and leave that inside which has paused the sharpness of the abscess and the space is becoming soft and is beginning to drain. When the tumor is removed.
So return to your operation before you complete it.
And if there is any cause of other small scrofula under it, then incise those and clean those.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover it as it is not to incise that scrofula from its root. Before covering, make sure that it is doubled strongly and that it does not fall out by itself.
And then complete the wound with a piece of old cloth that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and care for that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, cover it as you adjust the two lips of the wound and glue them soonest possible so that there is no excess.
But if you see that there is excess due to the size of the scrofula, then cover it as you incise its root and suture it and that which is called.
And for the scrofula that contains humidity, make a superficial perforation here where it appears to you in the location of its maturation, and pause the perforation of that which is the lowest part of the neck, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, using instruments similar to those used in dentistry, in order to remove that which is corrupted. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then you cure that instrument of animal origin before it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the drying of the head of the abscess during its suppuration.
The ancients used this drying in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who did that.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have a deformity, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the abscess, because it cannot be done well without causing all the veins and major injuries to the patient.
In those who have abscesses in the mouth or throat or two boils, when the illness is not in the tooth, one should use the section of a leech to drain the pus that is formed due to inflammation.
So when we want that, we should cut the leeches into three circles of the circles of the leech, or four small sections for the width in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section is in cipher, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is free of flesh and the vessels of sand from it are hollow.
And if the doctor is afraid, then one should extend the tongue of the throat with an onion, and then tear the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sand if there is any cause from those.
And then cut the lip second, as we have recommended; and it means on the section of the canal through the flaccid one which is of that and this is the cause of the disease that is from it and for the abscess of the foot.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then, when the time comes when that puncture is feared, add two strips of the skin of the wound, and let it alone to heal by itself.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal before it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is nothing but that one sees that those who have already opened abscesses in the body of the patient, and the patient has died, and his mouth has been closed, and they have incised the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, commander, leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and that malice lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, you should treat the wound in such a way that it heals within those three days.
And what I have seen is that a servant holds a knife and inserts one part of the lung tissue into the patient's wound, and it was called the cure for that, and then he covered the wound with a bandage as if it were the wound of a dead person, and then exposed the wound and covered the healthy flesh that was around the wound.
Therefore, you should confess that there was no incision of the vein or guideline, and the wind was from the wound, and cure it within that which fire has healed.
And do not harm the servant if they do not refuse in the mouth, and then return to their previous dispositions.
And now tell you that in the section of the epidural there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
Of incision over abscess which occurs in the groin forward, and it is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess named hernia of the groin is a large second in the color of the body, and it is caused by the women.
And it is of two kinds, either natural or accidental.
And in the natural one, there is no cure.
And the accidental one is of two kinds, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other kind is similar abscess which is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not let him make incisions in him with a knife unless it is small. And you should examine that and look at that part, and if it resembles a gangrenous wound, and is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should incise that area with the gangrene and extract that which contains the black and purulent matter; and if it does not resemble a gangrenous wound, then you should examine the entire area and cure the wound with what you find before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 45.
Of the separation of the kinds of gangrene.
Of the different kinds of gangrene that I have already mentioned in the division.
And you should be careful to distinguish between gangrene and a wound that causes doubt.
So you say that a wound is characterized by heat and fever and severe pain until the boil of the excess is subdued; and it is a putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
When there is no fever, heat, or pain, and if that lion is at the foot of the bed, it is proper to place it there.
And if the second color of the body is like a swollen tumor, and its beginning is similar to a blister, whether larger or smaller, and it belongs to two species, one being oily and containing humidity, and the colors of humidity are mottled, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure of the fever, remove that and inquire about that instrument called "intrame", according to its form, which is appropriate for this.
And it is useful for the inquiry of abscesses and all swellings, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate its tip little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
And then place your hand according to the size of the abscess, and remove the instrument and consider what is found in its traces.
And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you scrape it off with a shallow cut as I have mentioned in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the imprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
And dry over it with a cut of the shape of a crook according to this form: As you have been taught, suspend that with an onion, and excoriate the entire cord of that part to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag over that and remove the pus from that place.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that pus, and it may be necessary to leave that behind, and then you remove it later when there is no longer any cause from that place.
But if it is removed with some cause, too much or not enough, then the pus returns as much as possible.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place over that which sets the abscess cautiously, and cure that from another cure until it is healed.
If it is necessary to remove a great deal of pus, then take both lips of the wound and cure that part which contains it.
If the pulse is opposite or not, then cover and fill the wound with charcoal powder that is vitrified and leave it for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns to its normal state; and then return to incising that which remains.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for incision and perforation.
Of those that are the forms of probes, and of three kinds, which are large ones, which are long, and small ones.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They are made of iron, of silver, and of the ends that are curved decently, in order to avoid injury to the instrument when it is inserted into the abscesses.
And these are the forms of the experiencers, and they are named Alberic, and one of them is called Berid.
And there are three spices, one of which is great, and the other two are lesser.
The form of the great experiencer, its shape:
The form of the greater experiencer, its shape:
The form of the lesser experiencer, its shape:
It is suitable for those abscesses, wounds, and boils, because among them are of the bones and other causes.
And there are made needles, large lions, as with great golden needles, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of copper.
And they are made of black lead, which are like those that for them are opened the abscesses in the cavity of the ones that are reflected, that are reflected by their light on those reflections.
And of three types, first those that are long, and the others that are short, and the others that are narrow, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
The great experience of the plumb line:
The lesser experience of the plumb line:
The smallest experience of the plumb line:
The forms of the nails are of three special types, first those that are simple, which have only a curvature, and there are three kinds: large, few, and short.
And of them there are hooks, and there are three kinds.
And of those that have two curvatures, there are three kinds.
And of them that have three curvatures, there are three kinds.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a few simple nails, the shape of it:
Form of a large ounce of gold, it has two curves: Form of a medium-sized ounce of gold, it has two curves: Form of a small ounce of gold, it has two curves:
Form of a large ounce of gold, it has three curves:
Form of a medium-sized ounce of gold, it has three curves:
And these are the forms of the cautery knives that are sharp and cut the nodes and abscesses, and they come in three types, four of which are large, medium-sized, and small.
Form of a large cautery knife:
Form of a medium-sized cautery knife:
Form of a small cautery knife:
The edges of those that are made with sharp cuts and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the excision of nodes to avoid the risk of incising a vein or nerve, and for those it heals the patient and at once brings tranquility by the application of the dressing that is used for the excision of the abscess.
And these are the shapes of lumps, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
These are the shapes of warts and their similarity to mushrooms, which is made into alcohol.
And it is in the outer part that the pricked spot is hidden and in that place where the parts divide and are deformed, as you wish, as you can see.
The shapes of pustules, which are hidden among the mentioned parts of the perforation of abscesses and do not pierce the skin, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the shapes of those:
The shapes of boils that are removed from the flow of pus, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes of which:
These are the shapes of warts that are circular with some length, and they are subtle.
And you should have great, sharp, and few knives, so that for those absences of blood flow from wounds, you can cut quickly in cases of necessity, and later when the first aid is not enough.
However, do not use those knives to cut into all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the sides of the thighs, and the breasts, and the nipples, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to their fleshy wounds.
And some wounds are made with those tools, which are similar to small fishhooks in this form; by means of which the blood is cut when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must start from a vein or an artery.
And some wounds are made round in this form:
Chapter 47
Of the treatment of men's breasts that are similar to women's.
Some women inflate the breasts of certain men to compliment them for sleeping well, and then they deflate the breasts, and assemble the breasts of women, and roman apostemas, far away.
And to the one who has that, cut those parts with a sharp knife in this form, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then excoriate the entire wound, and place the ointment of flesh on it, and adjust the two lips of the wound together, and cure that before it is healed.
If the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude as in women, then cut it into two pieces higher up, and make two sections similar to the lunar figure, each of which contains the other's end, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. And then excoriate the coda which is between the two lips of the wound, remove the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the cure before it is healed.
If you do not complete the initial step of cutting into that which causes discomfort to the patient due to their anxiety and due to bleeding, then immerse the wound in corrosive liquid and leave it there until it eats away at the gray matter, and then cure that area which is now clean.
Chapter 48.
About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, which contain a pus pocket.
And among those that contain moisture, some should be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from line .G. to line .B. And as soon as all of that which is in the abscess of the sac is evacuated, then you should complete the wound and leave it until the next day.
And as soon as the wound has healed, it should be treated with an appropriate liquid until it is clean.
If the pus from the glands of the neck and the scrofulous nodes is present, then you should lance it in the same way as we have described in the section on scrofula equally.
If the plague is spread to an area that cannot be reached, then administer the cautery as we have described in that case.
Chapter 49.
Of the section of abscesses that occur by wound or by vein.
When the wound is broken and the cord is consolidated on top of it, abscesses and signs occur by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by artery or vein: because when the abscess is by wound, it is longer attached to the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a grating sound in that place.
And the one that is by vein is reduced to the surface of the body.
The section of this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are located in the shoulders, and in the elbows, and in the neck, and in many other places of the body; and it is a great one, so you must avoid its cure by surgery, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
May you place above that which is theirs due to inflammation of the orifice of the archery, cut in the dry section in the long; and approach the section with tweezers and approach the archery, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
And approach that which is with an awl and make it penetrate into the other side, and clean the archery with a double-edged blade in two places, — the one which causes you to have seen in extraction of two archeries which are in the temples.
And approach the place which is between two bands with a space within which it cannot be touched at all, and dissolve the abscess.
And approach the administration of cure in which pus is generated before the bands fall; and approach the one which is suitable for that within which it is healed.
And if the abscess is by section of the vein, then cover that you have with your hand at the location which is on your possible side of the abscess and approach the needle behind the location which you have held with your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread within which you extract from the other side, and tie the abscess with a silk thread according to what I have told you in the thread of grape of two parts at two extremities of the thread.
If you are afraid of pulling out the thread, then insert the correct needle into the entire abscess at the beginning of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of the patient's body before that which is inside it comes out, and insert the excess thread from the needle, leaving what is inside.
And place your hand over the powder that you have immersed in vinegar and oil, and then administer the cure that is made from cloves and garlic before it is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Similarly, an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when it occurs due to their compression or excessive work, and similarly.
And it is made in the most convenient place of the helper or tailor, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And if it is a large abscess, and it resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the major parts of the patient's body, and when it is stretched with force, it feels like a great shock to the patient.
And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left undone, and it is allowed to grow in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, for those who are in the joints, it is not advisable to be pierced with iron, because it could cause great contraction.
But for those who are in the head or forehead, the cautery is not done with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then do so with the forceps and cut that of the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with an uncertainty, and scrape that, and remove that; and place the wound in a suture, and cure that before it is healed.
Chapter 51.
When the abscess has occurred due to a wound that has occurred on the belly.
In some men, warts occur on their bellies and other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal because of their similarity to those that grow on the feet, whose reason is subtle and the head of which is large; and already their labia are conversed, and they are of those who are small, and they are of those who are very magnificent.
And I have already seen one, and in its belly were two parts that were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller reason.
And already their labia were turned inside out and were inflamed, and moisture was running from it all the time.
Therefore I inserted those and again in one foot eighteen unciae and the other sixteen unciae.
And the operation in their insertion is that if the patient is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, moist, of subtle reason; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and keep it in your presence, heating it in the fire, because warts from the section of which are expelled by that which is not sound; and if you find the unsound, cauterize it.
If the patient is suffering and afraid, hold a sharp knife; then take a freshly made spoon, strengthen that arm, the one we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust it in the narrow structure of the spoon; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, rough part in the arm, until it is cut off and falls out by itself.
However, if the arm is of large size, then there is some cause for fear and terror, and especially in that which is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you cut off the part of the arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to cut off the arm that is of dark color, thin touch, and regular appearance, for that is cancer.
And you will remember the memory of cancer in the future.
Chapter 52.
Of the treatment of a high fever at the navel.
High fever at the navel is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the umbilicus, which is on the abdomen, and through which the cloth or intestine leaks according to what is said about the others; or by a scar that allows blood or arterial flow according to what is called it, or by constricted ventosity.
However, if it is by fissure of the umbilicus and leakage of the cloth, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is lion-like, and appears in different positions. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that which we have mentioned is more violent and different, and as you press it with your fingers, it disappears, and return; and it is very painful, and requires much effort to introduce it back and strong work.
However, if by moisture, then it is lion-like and does not disappear when you press your hand on it, nor is it constricted or crushed.
If it is for pus, then first apply these signs to the wound as it begins to decline.
If it is for meat, then apply the pus roughly, thick and hard, and let it stay for a certain amount of time.
If it is for inflammation, then apply the touch of leprosy to it.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the eminence of the navel is due to pus from abscess, or from vein, or from inflammation; therefore, be careful not to treat it, as there is fear and anxiety about it, as was taught in the chapter where he mentioned abscesses from abscess and from vein.
And if the eminence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then apply a tent around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be held between your two hands on its surface, and then wrap the space around the umbilicus over the place where you have well placed the tent; and then extend the membrane of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or loose bandage and the manner of the bandage decently.
Approach the abscess that has spread over the skin and insert the mentioned instrument into that spot and try to find the intestine; and if you have not done so previously or if it is not visible through the skin, then you will extract the pus and push the intestine towards the parts deep within the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then take that suture material and remove any excess of it.
But if it is against your wound or vein, then circle that thread, and return to your operation; and take two needles and insert them strongly into those two fields, and push two needles through the circle you made around the abscess in a cross pattern, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let them enter the place where the flesh extends and falls off; or insert that which is subtle and can be removed, and then cure that which covers the wound with a solution that is inside it until it is healed.
If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no pus or moisture is found in it, then cover the wound as we have said and remove the sanc or the moisture that is in it, which often causes it to fester, and then apply a remedy that covers and heals the wound.
Chapter 43.
Of the cure of the knee.
We have already said, in the division, of special knee and in what manner one should be treated with remedies, and that it is important to avoid ulceration; and we have said that the knee is often affected by the most and greatest care in its treatment.
The ancients said that some knee gout is in a location where it can be eradicated, such as the knee that is in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and severe, do not cover it with yourself, as you cannot cure that one or I have not seen another, nor that it has reached that.
And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and leaving the patient, purging them of black bile for some time, and then stitching it up if there is an obvious manifestation of a wound.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from eating any food that could cause a reaction; and then examine every part of the body thoroughly without causing any harm. And then let the blood flow, and do not stop it immediately, and express the affected areas, and wipe away the blood with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible from your tools.
But if you find resistance from heavy bleeding at the beginning of a vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood is still flowing, and then care for that area until it is healed.
Chapter 4.
Of the cure of hydropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the various types of hydropsy and their symptoms, for the treatment of each type with medicines.
And in the case where only the specific type of altitudes is cured by iron, and not approximated to the specific type of timpanists or hypodermic needles, because that is fatal.
When you have already medicated this specific type of hypodermic needle with medicine and do not compare your medication, consider that if the patient has become weakened, or is another patient with another type of hypodermic needle, such as in the throat or abdominal area and similar to those, then be careful not to treat them with iron, because there is fear involved.
However, if you see the patient with abundant virility, and it is not another disease but only hypodermic needle, and not in infants or elderly, then the method of operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and administer the water to the exact part behind the penis, and then take a sponge according to this form:
If the incision is long and sharp, with a sharp tip at one end; but it should be gradually shorter and narrower in some places, so that during the operation it does not pierce the intestine, and so that it does not cause harm to the patient.
And consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, as it is often believed that you should make the section along the belly for the length of three fingers below, on the right side of the patient's body.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a problem with the intestines, then your incision should be on the left side of the belly for the length of three fingers.
And if the generation of hydrocele is due to a problem with the left side, then your incision should be on the right side.
And do not make your incision over the side on which you want to place the patient, so that the excess fluid does not flow to that place.
And then pierce the entire cord with the instrument, and insert it into that incision, and raise your hand between the cord and the abdomen, and remove it; and if the quantity is about one finger or more.
And then carefully insert the pipe into the space until it reaches the desired location, which is near the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this shape: and is similar to a silver canula; it is made of silver or of fine iron, which has one small hole on its lower part and three holes on its sides: two on one side and one on the other; and its end is sharpened according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
And on its upper part is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should hold it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, it could cause great harm to the patient due to the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur.
Evacuate the water according to the amount of virtue in it and according to what you understand about the patient's condition, virtue of the leg, and goodness of the patient.
And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held back by a thread that you should cut to allow the wound to drain, as recommended.
And then insert the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days, being careful not to let too much water come out.
However, if you are afraid of causing harm to the patient and let out a large amount of water, then cure that wound with dry sand and moist bread, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that wound with desiccatives until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the melon and the throat as soon as you have removed the water that precedes it.
Chapter 5.
Of the cure of children who were born with unpunctured urinary openings.
Sometimes, some of the children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their sister not pierced (or struck straight or not in its place).
Then, cover the wound with a thin material according to this form:
And then place a thin nail with a flat head and tie it, and let it be for three days or fourteen days.
And when you want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
And if you do not place the flat head, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area will not clean this wound.
But the one from which the wound is straight should be treated with a nail of flat head, as we have said, for several days until it is enlarged.
But those in which the wound is not in its place, it causes pain, because of those, that one who is born and the wound is not in the tip of the head so that he cannot urinate at the parts below, until the urethra raises the urethra to the parts above; and it is not at the generation, because so the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a malady caused by cold.
And the method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the forceps to the left hand, and insert the tip of the forceps into the space between the ribs, as if you were inserting a pen, or that you do not remove any part, so that the edge of the forceps resembles the edge of the forceps and that the tissue falls in the second space after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation of wound drainage, four things often go wrong with this; and pause at the place where you remove the pus, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the white spot that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the forceps and from corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the forceps.
Four things often go wrong with this white spot in the forceps and its elevation of flesh.
And one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-malignant, a woman who hangs an uncertain and abscinds that entrance where those moons are whole; and place over that submerged part in Egyptian ointment; and apply that, cure the wound with that ointment until it is healed.
And if the wound is malignant, of a certain color, then apply a pointed cautery at the beginning and end of it.
But if the wound is in the prepuce of the head of the penis not circumcised, and one part of the wound is eaten into the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then apply the medicine that is eaten into the beginning until it is consolidated; and now cure that deformity, because when you cure that together with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be trinquat.
And if you have experienced accidents in the genitals and in the black and curled prepuce, then apply that which is already discolored and which is about to be corrupted or which has been corrupted; and place strips over it with honey, which is ground with flour of scorched millet and of three thistle and cress.
And then cure that one on the other cure until it is healed.
But if there is excessive bleeding, then administer a lunar cautery in the following way:
where the cauterizing instrument is placed at two positions simultaneously, one at the bleeding site and the other on the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the tip of the penis is corrupted and destroyed entirely in the hour, then introduce a blunt needle into the opening of the prepuce so that the patient urinates through that.
In the adherence of the prepuce to the tip of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those cases where the prepuce is known, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then introduce a blunt knife through which the tissue is dissolved and the tip of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those exactly, then introduce a blunt knife from the tip of the penis and the prepuce, and cut the prepuce, which when thin, is easily pierced by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a blunt instrument, which is already hardened in water to prevent it from sticking to other parts.
And then apply a styptic to stop the bleeding before it is consolidated.
Chapter LVII.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as in other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and the latter is properly in children, it is necessary to assign in that better operation and via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of those free times, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which is the cause that I have atrobat the greater part of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a file; and they use a bandage and an introduction with a needle.
And I have already performed all these methods and no better modification has been found with scissors, with a thread that is used in modifications like the nail, which motivates the escape of the coda more above, where the coda of the prepuce is between two tunics, and the tunic is more below, and it is often necessary to have another incision and a secure pain. And the modification that is done for circumcision, and it is digital, of which tailors use, the incision of the end of the male member is not secure, where often it enters into the wound of it.
In the operation, a nail, often it causes iron and damage your operation. The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often it does not need modification in such a way that I have seen it.
But from the modification that is done with scissors and thread that is used in modifications like the nail, the good one, as I have experienced, is because the scissors are proportionally incision, for which the sharpness above is the same as the sharpness below; and therefore when you place your hand on two sharpnesses, and the incisions are made according to a comparison in a time; and it is compression of the thread that contains the foreskin of the penis in all parts, and it does not make an error of all.
And the first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, and do not do anything but tie him firmly to his back, and let him rest until the next day.
And then do everything possible to make him happy in that position. And then make sure he is well positioned and not gagged; hide the forceps in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
And then place your hand on his back and blow into the codeine, and pull out the one that is stuck at the end of the back, and modify that which is added to it from the side of the throat.
The shape of the forceps for extraction, this is the shape:
One of the extractions is not sharp and the other is sharp, so that it does not hurt the root of the tooth, and the length of the two cuts should be as long as the length of two handles equally.
The mistake in extraction is that too much force is used to push the intraoral tissue or a part of it away from the beginning.
Therefore, it is important to extend that of your hour to your finger to the postem of the area and to insert it with the same equality.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with forceps and insert it there.
If it has been more than three days, and the pus is swollen beyond the wound, then let the pus drain out carefully, and scrape that area to facilitate healing, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful of the edge of the wound, so that it does not cut you there.
And then heal that wound with the powder that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it has not been cut to the right size, and you have not obeyed the instructions above, then do not use it there.
And then heal that wound with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter .lviii.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed mass, or a tumor, or flesh, and similar to those that we have mentioned in the methods of treatment in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved and the cause is very painful, then make sure to administer extraction of it with an instrument called a catheter, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's mouth, similar to a long palm leaf, to which a thin cannula should be attached at the tip.
And the way to extract the urine from that person is by taking a thin, flexible thread and tying it around the opening of the catheter with wool or cotton for good grip; then insert the threads of the catheter into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter with force. Then suck the urine from the border and the album of the bladder.
And place the patient on a table, cover them with a cloth and rub their body with oil and vinegar.
And then insert the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the opening of the vagina; and then bend the catheter towards the belly button; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and if the patient has not reached the cause of the problem, do not proceed with this order, but wait for the correct position.
And then slowly extend the small intestine with the thread, as the urine is soaked in the thread.
And then remove that and do treatment for urine, use catheter, do not stop doing that and use catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
About the quality of catheterization of the bladder with a cystoscope and similar instruments that are suitable for that.
When accidents occur in the bladder ulcer or abscess, or it is constricted by a stricture, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called a cystoscope, and this is its form:
but in its external part it is closed. And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as often.
In the beginning is a hollow, in which that is contained, and as often as it reaches that quantity, it is added, until when some cause is drawn from there, it is drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn out, and when it is expelled long, then as often as it does the cystoscope, which is made of pitch in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw out that liquid which is contained in the parts above, because the liquid is drawn into the hollow of the cystoscope.
And then insert the crushed cloves of garlic into the incision secondly as we recommended in the circle; and then apply the moisture with that which you have applied, for that moisture perforates the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the delicate cyster is that in which the bladder is cysterized, and that is the shape:
And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then insert the needle into the hole.
And then take the bladder and place it in the moisture that you want to cysterize in the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and scald the moisture over the fire.
And then insert the tip of the cyster into the incision.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the moisture that has already entered into the structure before the patient feels it.
If you do not see the bladder present, take a catheter and make it into a circle; perforate it throughout its entire length; and introduce it firmly in those places where it is turned; and then add the circle where it was also attached, so that you can pause in that place where you want to remove the moisture, and listen and watch.
And then bring that instrument to the patient and do as you did with the catheter, and express the moisture from your hand until it reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of kidney stones.
We have already spoken of the species of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between those that form in the ureters and those that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have spoken of the operation and section for the kidney stone.
The kidney stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that sticks in the bladder.
And I will tell you about that man's explicit and abbreviated exposure.
Therefore, it is said that peyra, born in the bladder, often goes to the children; and from those signs of his, it is said that the urine which is excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that arena; and the patient feels pain in his lower back, and motas veguadas pen, and then it is dressed; and that is why those who have this disease often suffer from pain in their lower back.
And the cure of those children who have that disease within them is when they reach fourteen years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In young people, it is often caused by that which is between those.
And of that from which the peyra is larger and the cure is less likely; And if it is small, it is opposite to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that disease, cover the beginning of that which modifies the patient with crucifixion, which removes all the fissure which is in his intestines; because that fissure sometimes prevents the excretion of peyra due to its investigation.
And then approach the patient with their feet and make them comfortable and quiet in order to prevent the stone from descending to the neck of the bladder, or jumping out of the area.
And then prepare that cushion between your hands, and place the patient's things under them, in order to make the bladder entirely inclined towards the parts below.
And then remove all of that filth.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately place a towel over it.
And if you cannot remove everything from the area, then cover the patient's eye with oil on the left side, if the patient is a child, or the right side if they are an adult complete, and insert that into their anus. And then remove the stone while it is still there. And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that against the patient's body, and expel it through the parts below when the towel is in place.
And command the assistant to press the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant to extend his right hand above, and his left hand to remain on the lower abdomen, which is below the thighs, in the part where the incision is made.
And then enter a scalpel into the incision, and this is the shape of it: And then cut into that part which is between the buttocks and the thighs, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and make the incision over the stone, which is in the buttock, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision opens wide and is narrowly closed according to the amount that the stone is in the buttock, and not too much, because if it is too much it will damage the stone, which is the cause of the incision.
And you should know that there is an angle and edge on the stone, which makes the extraction of it difficult.
And from that place, there is a bone similar to a glass, round, and made of it, which is called a crown.
So if it is to the one who has sharp angles and edges, adjust it in the crack.
And if there is no such opening, then carefully chip away at that, or gently file it with a file that is suitable for filing stone, and do not remove it from there; or insert something thin and curved from behind.
But if you cannot do that, then slightly widen the opening, and if you want blood to flow out, cut away with a three-edged glass tool.
But if the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the tool into the mouth of the bladder, and carefully scrape it off; and then slightly push something else; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is necessary to chip away at that with a large section, which causes the patient one of two things: either death or because of continuous dripping of urine, for that place is not entirely solid.
When administering an extraction of the intestine that is to be removed, or engineering in the fracture of it with the forceps inside that extracts that in feet.
Then, when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen that. And place a cloth soaked in oil and vinegar, or in rose oil and water-soaked bread, to prevent the abscess from breaking out.
Then, place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
And when that is removed, poultice the wound with water and oil, and then cure it with an equal amount of fenugreek and mustard seed until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in the wound, it is hard and inflamed, and if the pus is in the bladder congealed, and if that is the case, then enter a catheter into the wound and extract that pus, because it can cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
And then wash the wound with warm water, vinegar, and salt, and apply it to all parts, using what is appropriate for the cure before it is healed.
And cover all the hours of the cure that you have placed on the cushions and adjust the medicines that are placed on the affected area.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed in it, and there is no urine discharge, then cure that with what I recommend to reach the stage of dryness, because many troops are said to be dry for this cure; and I have already extracted it, and it is that you take a needle made of iron, of which this is the shape of it:
of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in wood.
And then take a fish, and place that bladder behind the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it until the needle reaches that stone. And slowly rotate the perforator with your hand in that small stone, and you perforate the hole of it inside as you make the other one penetrate; for the urine is often released.
And then place your hand on that which is formed from the stone of the part of the bedpan where the urine is collected, for it is often urinated upon, and it is cleaned with the urine, and the patient is healed.
However, if this cure is not suitable for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place one faithful person below the stone, and another faithful person above the stone. And then lie down on the stone in that bedpan between two cushions. And then remove it. And then remove the linen and clean the wound with boiled water, which is done in the place.
It is not necessary to place linen below the stone, but rather so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other linen above should not be removed, for when the faithful one removes the stone, the fistula returns to its place and gains the opening.
And for that reason, it is necessary for you to have the right tools, whether you lift the cord above the parts or return to your own place, and take the position we have mentioned.
Chapter 61:
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are not commonly formed.
However, if you see a stone in one of those, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many hands.
One of them is that the woman is very tall and young.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled and knows how to disclose whether the midwife is a man when she is casted, or if she has already had children.
The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled and knows this art, especially the operation of the most important part.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so you need to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
If necessary, you should take a large sharp knife, which is easily found.
If you are not in possession of such a knife, then find a sharp and thin one, or present a woman who is well-versed in the making of knives, or a woman who has recently parted with her husband in this art.
Then make such a request, and command her to do everything that you will tell her, from the beginning of the investigation until the end; this is because it is necessary to determine if the woman is a virgin, in which case you should place your finger in her anus and ask her about the stone.
If such a woman is found, then cover her with your own clothes, and then command her to scratch it out of her anus.
If she is not a virgin, then command the woman to insert your finger into her vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing your left hand on her bladder, and take it out with good accuracy.
If you find that, gradually increasing the pressure on that of the orifice of the bladder to the parts behind the summit of its virtue until it reaches that at the edge of the cavity.
And then insert the needle through that opening of the neck from some part to where it is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the patient does not remain uncomfortable with the needle covered by it.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the ray through that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the amount that you know how much the stone is broken from there.
And you should know that the types of stones are small: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
So you should know what kind of stone is in that place where you mean by that which you want.
And if you want to remove the sand, adjust in that place vetriol three times and then through that for an hour until it is abscinded the sand, and then return to your operation until the stone is broken.
And make sure you prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that they can assist you in your operation.
And if you want to expel feces, and know that the expulsion of feces is from the rectum which is indented, then place powder on the area and loosen those and the structure descending, and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, because if you do, the patient will die. And cure the wound.
So when the sharpness of the stone has been lessened and the wound is healed, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
Of incision on hernias.
A hernia is not other than the accumulation of moisture in the white sinew which contains the contents of the groin, and it is called a hernia.
And some veins are in the proper pancreas which nature has prepared in the part of the groin, until it becomes another hernia; and this is the vein of the groin between the white sinew which we have said, and this is not other than fat.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which happens to the genitals, so this matter is infiltrated into them, and sometimes it happens due to a blow caused by physical activity on the genitals.
And this humidity has various colors, such as the color of it being declining to yellow or red, or black, or gray, or white and thin, and that is the one that is most common.
And the symptoms by which one knows that this aggregation of water is these: since it is in the white pus that we have said, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and similar to the shape of a bird, and appears on the genitals, because the humidity comes from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own skin, then the abscess gradually becomes longer and similar to the shape of a bird, and it is estimated by some people that it is another bird.
And if the humidity is between the folds of the genitals and the white pus, then it causes pain.
When you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, first extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside the abscess; and if there is any remaining in the bottom of the abscess, judge it as such.
Therefore, when you come to treat him with iron, first order the patient to be bled if it is possible, and then examine his pulse.
Then make him lie on his back with his head hanging over the edge of the bed, and place a cloth underneath him.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the assistant to follow on his right, who should extend his arm at an angle of about one foot from the groin to the part of the stomach.
Then take a wide spatula and cut open the groin from the wrong side towards the penis.
Then make the incision straight and at an equal distance from the line that goes down the groin, until you reach the white bone that encircles the hip joint.
Expel that person, observe, and guard yourself from the possibility that you might injure him; and your excoriation should be done gently and subtly, as much as possible according to the quantity.
Then approach with a wide-bore needle and extract all the water.
Then separate between two labia of the section and extend the needle to the parts above; do not touch the cord that contains the testicles, and insert the needle in that way that is possible for you. Insert it into him completely or in small parts, and more subtly than his lateral side, because if you do not subtly examine the insertion of it, it is not certain that the water will not return.
If the cord processes from that deforation of his testicles during your operation, then when you have completed the section of the needle, return to him, and approach adjusting the two labia of the cord of the testicles with a stitch, and care for that as you would with other wounds until it is healed.
If the corrupted heart is affected by another illness, then carefully remove the veins that are attached to it, and extract the heart, and then treat that part as we have mentioned before.
If the water is added in two equal parts, then you know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part in the same way as you did in the other one. If it seems to be an operation, then do it.
And then you wipe the sweat, and insert into the sections wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two gentles and the miracle of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top, and tie those with a bandage according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fold them with woolen carmenata according to this form; and make the edges of those that are pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one of the extremities is held in the buttocks between the two, and the second is held at the part of the underwear, and two extra extremities on top of two cushions and two other extra extremities on two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural section with a knife; and you should take a fine cutting cautery and insert it into the groove of the inguinal, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that it be discovered when the white cyst contains water, and then you take a cautery of this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that cyst, and ignite it before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the cyst with your fingers, and excoriate it with your fingers, and excoriate it with the fine cutting cautery; and insert it according to what is possible inside you that you remove everything; and be careful not to touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and longer-lasting than the usual method of section.
But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of section or ignition, or flow of pus, then cover that resistance which causes it to you, according to the treatment that is appropriate for it as soon as it is said.
If the patient is too weak, and does not want the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as I have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is incarcerated,
Then perform the operation on the patient who is lying on some raised cushions, and puncture the abscess in the lowest part of their abdomen, and cover the puncture according to its length.
And let the drainage be wide enough so that all the water drains out.
Then place your hand over the incision and hold it there, so that the water continues to drain out. And then care for that wound until it is healed.
If resistance is encountered in the outflow of water at that time, then puncture that: and this is not done except for the white cloth in the orifices of the wound which causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which the water is drawn by hydrips, the shape of which is preceded; or adjust a small pressure on the edge of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and is applied near those months or environments; and when it is applied, then pierce according to that manual method, so that the patient can pass their days.
Chapter 63.
On incision over fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the incision over this hernia, there is great fear of perforating the major structures; therefore, I see the release of it and being saved from that better.
And you should remember the operation in that place and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those places where the intestines are placed and are made for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the intestines, or due to impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the place, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And if the abscess is very hard, of which the color is dark, and does not hurt to touch.
Some veins are made by the compression of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
This is known as the dispersion of the abscess when it comes in contact with the skin, and does not require that touch.
This is not dispersed from the abscess by any cause due to the compression of the skin.
And it is possible that on this kind of section and on the other flesh; and you insert the tendons of the genitals, and then stretch the skin over the parts below, and extract that from the white membrane, and remove the suspensory ligaments of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensory ligament as you remove all of the parts of the skin.
Therefore, if the skin is already attached to those flesh, then you should remove it and insert that.
If there is an adhesion due to some cause of the intestines, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all of that adhesion and incise it at the beginning with a round knife.
But if the cause of the adhesion is flesh in the location where it is behind, then you should incise all of that which is from it, and extract the flesh as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin infused in rose oil and vinegar; and apply a dressing to it until it heals.
Chapter 64.
Of the treatment of hernia that is in the thighs.
The thigh is an abscess involuted by some wrapping similar to a blister due to the softening of the testicles, and it is difficult to perform any exercise or walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which preceded it.
However, we must first perform the operation on that second part which causes the first symptoms.
And say that you should lay the patient on a raised chair; and then place the suspensory ligaments of the testicles at their back parts; and then take the cord of the genitals, and extend it to its full extent.
And then insert the sharp instrument through the cross section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then scrape off all parts that we have mentioned in the extraction of acorns, which are in the temples.
And then place a double-headed needle in it, and insert that first into the places where we have mentioned that the wound occurred, and then insert the other end of it at the back. And then insert them in the middle place through a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added by the putrid and corrupted humors.
And then cure the pain with the remedies for other pains in which you want to be born from the fact that the veins that do not cause any harm for that.
If it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles so that they are removed or that the testicles are damaged by those, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are stablished, or that they are damaged in such a way that they are not injured.
Chapter 65.
Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the belly from the angles of the umbilicus, so that the intestines of that rupture can come out from any of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species can occur by different causes: by impact, or by squeezing, or by a loud noise, or by lifting something heavy, or by similar things.
When the swelling of that part, due to prolonged extension of the tendon, occurs gradually over time and does not occur suddenly, it is a furuncle because the tendon compresses the intestine.
When the swelling of that part is due to the section of the tendon, which begins with sudden and intense pain; it is a boil that appears differently from the usual appearance, and it is caused by the intestine, and its cause is the injury to the parts of the tendon.
Sometimes the intestine is forced out through the opening in the abdomen, and this type of hernia is called an enterocele.
Sometimes the intestine is forced out due to flatulence, and sometimes it prolapses into the abdominal cavity, and it is held in place with a bandage, and this is very painful for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it is believed that it should be avoided due to its sharpness.
The method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with their hand at the parts inside their cavity if they obey your return, and then place it on their back between your hands, and raise their legs.
And then tie the cord that is the cord of the testicles to the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through; and then place two needles in the incision secondly as indicated to close the incision with those.
And if the incision according to the quantity that is possible from that has been sutured.
And then excise that which has been left by the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white and hard from each part.
Then you enter the finger that you said in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white and hard from each part, which is left by the cord of the wound, and between the incision secondly, and solve that adhesion which is in the part behind the wound.
And then, using your left hand, lift the white cloth over the testicles to the right side, and elevate the handle of the white cloth to the left side; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And then, using your right hand, check if there is any cause of the intestine wrapped in the white cloth that is not covered. If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
And then insert into the part behind the scrotum by section, through which blood and pus flow as we have recommended in that place where we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound; and tie the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the second line are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent bleeding); and leave the bandage until it falls off.
If the patient's urine is delayed, then apply warm water to the abdomen and place your hand on the area where it should fall second after we have said.
Then treat the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of inflamed hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been seen who has been cured by iron alone.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is seen; which is that you should place the veins close to the section over that facility of him; and dry in the middle location around the pus that causes that, until the veins fall.
Then treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that is made in the joints.
Some people have broken their joints as we have said, and they have pointed out the location.
And there is no known cause for hernias in the groin; and if there is, it is rare; and it returns to all hours.
However, if the time is prolonged, it is adjusted by making a fissure in the groin before the hernia enters the groin; and this is done by extending the groin, which is as we have said, causing the groin to be stretched, and then becomes soft, and the area becomes inflamed and emerges.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery as we have previously described.
And some wounds are cured by iron in this way: and it is that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the inflamed abscess is cut open by section according to the amount of three fingers.
And then strengthen the groin white that rises the cord inside before it is discovered.
And then take the ray and place it on the area of the groin that is emerging, and press it on the belly.
And then approach the two prominent locations on the outer part of the elbow, and adjust one of those sutures to the other.
And then remove the part of the elbow, and do not incise the elbow completely, nor extend the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the elbow is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this location, as it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter 68.
On the softening of the cords of the testicles.
The cords of the testicles are softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is maintained.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is undergoing treatment for this that he should lie on his side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two lips to the suture.
If you wish, use three or four stitches or a suture to close the excess of the softened sinew at the beginning.
Then insert into the stitches; and cure by healing of the other wounds within which it is healed and fall away the scabs.
Chapter 69.
About castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is that the doctor knows that it is when he is asked about it from someone who knows the cure of it when it happens; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefits, such as horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar to beasts.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition or by incision to section.
In the area where it is done for traction, the method of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail until the tendons and ligaments of the patient are softened and hanging. Then take those and place them in your hand until they are resolved and do not appear again from the touch.
In castration done for fissure and section, hold the animal and take the cord of the testicles from the other side.
Then tie the suspensory ligaments, and make an incision on each side until two sides are processed.
Then make an incision on those that will be removed from each side. Do not leave any cause on those of the cipher, but remove the thin cipher that is over the veins.
And this method of castration is the best that is done for traction, because traction leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not desire gout.
And then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of hernias.
Hernias in men occur in two ways: one is when it appears where the space between the testicles is, and another is between two testicles, where it is shaped like a woman's breast.
And some of those who have it in the space between the testicles also have urine.
In women, it is a special case: and it is that the breast above the pubic bone is like two testicles of a man, almost all the way to the opening of the vagina, with the nipple of a man and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one of men's, and one special for women. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until it escapes the beginning of that, and then take care of those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second special case of men, where the urine is in the cavity of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
About the lentil and meat that are prominent in women's causes.
Strong lentils are adjusted according to natural causes before it is ripe and is made as usual; some are magnified in certain women until it is spread as in men and perceived during intercourse.
Therefore, you have the excess of lentils with your hand or with an ounce and incised.
And do not incise too much, mainly at the beginning of the vagina, so that it does not become a source of blood flow.
And then cure it with the cure of the wounds until it is healed.
Meat that is not yet cooked is meat that was in the horrible place of the mother until it fills that one, and very much is attached to the parts deformed according to its shape (and for that reason they first call it "deformed tail"); therefore, you have to incise it like incising lentils, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the woman is not broken, or is slightly narrow. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to an illness that has preceded, and that is caused by meat not properly cooked or by subtle or rough spices.
And it is caused by food or in the stomach of the greater, or in its costumes, or in the most superficial part of it, or in the most deepest part of it, and prevents from eating and engorgement and digestion, and very strongly prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is caused by regularly eating meat, if the oppilation is obvious, then you should avoid it; but if it is not obvious, then you should circle that with the fingers or with the ray.
But if oppilation is due to subtle spices, and it is directed towards the two lips, then you should cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand on both of his thighs, and then press the indicated points of the abdomen.
And the woman should be on her back, with her legs extended, and then extend both thighs outward, applying force until the delicate joint is broken and the impaction is relieved.
And then take lint and pour oil on it and place it on that spot, and bandage the patient to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated.
If the joint is large and thick, then cut it open with a knife or a mallet.
If the impaction is caused by flesh, then suspend it with an ointment and cut it open.
And apply the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds with bites, such as honey, dragon's blood, and lead, adjusted to the size of the wound.
And then administer a wide-bore needle to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
And hold that for several days and administer some of its juice.
Then apply the other treatment of consolidation until it is healed.
Sometimes accidents happen in the main nativity of other flesh, and then you should cut according to this method. But if there is a pustule on the neck, to the pustule on the neck that is in the main part should not be made any way with iron.
Chapter 73.
Of the treatment of hernias, tail, and red swelling that happens in the groin of women.
Hernias are caused by the opening of veins' mouths until those from which blood flows continuously; and with their counterparts, hernias are made.
And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say which receive treatment and which do not.
Therefore, say that hernias and their counterparts when they are in the main part of the neck and do not appear to touch, then in those should not be made any treatment with iron.
Those that are in the upper part of the body, on which cats feel pain, those are the ones that are cured.
And cover the woman's mouth with a cloth and extend the forceps or the sharp blade, and insert those into the teeth.
And then apply powder to those from one of the invasive powders for bites, such as garlic and similar to those.
And then soak her feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that in fresh water.
And if the bleeding from the wound persists, then make that into a decoction of smartweed and sorrel and vinegar and similar things.
And then take wheat flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a poultice with that on the back of her.
And if the wound is abscessed, it is good; and if not, make it adhere to two bandages, and at the breasts are the incisions.
And then take wool and apply it to the affected area with a poultice of coliandre or arnagloza or guarravier and vinegar, and make it adhere to the area; and then care for the area with ointment until it is healed.
And care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
Of the perforation of an injury to the major eye.
Special cases of accidental abscesses in the eye, such as granulomas and abscesses and ulcers and adherent and erpetromens and fistulas and rags and thyroids and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these diseases and the special cases of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in this section.
And if you want to know in this treatise about abscess surgery for the eye when it is one of the abscesses that collapses healthy tissue, and if you want to know how the operation is performed with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and caused by percussion and flexion and fever, and sometimes it swells and if it catches on that feeling, then do not puncture it, and cure that with what helps to bring out the maturation until it stops the sharpness of the accidents.
And then consider whether you should make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and lie on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the belly behind the abdomen, and her thighs are expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her arms, and hold them with what is convenient for that.
And then the midwife should follow behind the left and administer the instrument that is inserted into the major opening, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be mentioned.
And consider when you want to administer this instrument that you are at the opening of the major vagina of the woman, and that what comes out of the instrument is not more than the opening of the major vagina and does not harm the patient. If the tool is larger than the bone of the greater, then place powder on the surface of the bone of the greater to prevent the instrument from entering the bone of the greater.
And place the thread that is inside the needle above and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until it is inserted into the greater opening.
When the instrument is ready, touch it with your hand and oil it, then wipe it dry with a cloth.
And when the wound is evacuated, place a moistened cotton pad in the wound with some hemostatic agent; and place the bandage on the section in the bone of the greater.
And cover the greater and above the wound with a clean cloth soaked in water in which some vinegar has been built up.
And after two days, apply the ointment that is suitable for that wound until it is healed.
And some wounds are washed with the major and plague water mixed with honey, and then with water from a long-necked or astrological jar, and then return to the wound.
And if the wound is deep and soaked in the mixed honey, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, as we mentioned in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to best treat infants born in an abnormal way.
The necessary cause is that the midwife knows the normal figure of the infant at the beginning, and when you see the woman expelling the parts, and desires to smell the air, and on that she is held by someone who is there, and quickly sees the position of the infant, then you know that this part is in the second natural position, and its position is on its own head, and the second arm is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Therefore, when you see those signs, make sure that the patient's belly is gently compressed so that the fetus does not come out too much, and if it does, place the secondina on it, and this is a good way to manage those excessive movements.
Since this is another part that is not natural and not usable, when the fetus is outside the patient's feet and the patient's body is facing the patient's head and their feet, and the patient's hand is on their chest or at their foot, or the patient's head is outside the patient's belly, and it is greatly turned towards its own collarbone, and similar to the figures of the patient that are not usable.
Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all these causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And by showing all the figures of those, and what is happening in them so that it means that and is on that.
When it is outside the patient's head naturally, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, and if the virtue of the patient has already been weakened, then do that, or what the women had for the patient, and evaporate the pain of the patient with fenugreek and olive oil.
And then insert the catheter between her legs and bend that one second, or cut it at the end where that moisture is. Press the belly of the woman until she gives birth.
But if she does not give birth, then cover the woman with a mixture of pillows and a mixture of fenugreek seeds.
And then command her, approach the cradle, that she be calm and make her sneeze by condition; and take her mouth and nose for an hour, because the baby will soon be born.
And if the mother's breasts are not full at the beginning, then gradually cover them with a small cloth. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a blanket and lift her feet off the ground, and gradually lower the blanket to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
If the hands are not intact and the patient dies, then incise those and remove the remaining flesh from the body or place a cloth on the wound and remove that as well, because that person is dead.
When the child is lying on its feet, then cover it with those things, and turn it over to make it small, and hold it like that, and take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
When they are issues inside the thighs, then command it to speak, and make that extort itself in conditions, because that person is dead if God wills.
And if it is not dead as we have recommended, then return the child little by little into that second natural position, because that person will be dead soon.
And if it is forbidden to do all that we have recommended, then take some mustard and dissolved gum, and grind it all in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the wound of the woman, the lowest part of her belly. And then perform that bath in warm water until you achieve the hypochondriac.
And when the parts below are softened, then apply a poultice of myrtle and rest it on that place. And when the poultice has been heated for an hour, then place it on a hot stone, and remove that which is in the mouth of the patient, and lift him from that place, and press the lowest part of his belly with gentle compression, which often helps to relieve the pain.
The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands. It should be engineered in the reduction of the patient's intestine, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and let that go.
And if it cannot go, then make the enema on the left side, and shake the cushions of the patient violently, and gradually administer oils and medicines that you have.
And if the child is born, then make that which you have on the table, and study the reduction of the intestine, and push the fetus according to its natural figure, and cause the woman to understand when it is pushed away.
The body of the child, with its arms spread out, is lying on its side, with its foot facing downwards. The midwife held the child's hand and gradually turned it around, and that helped.
And when it becomes equal and the same, then pause over the back of the child with that which we have recommended for oil and muds.
And then command the child to turn its head slowly, and when you have done that, place a cushion under its neck and command it to lie on its back; and then command it to relax. The outcome of the prepared child is on its side.
When the second finger of the midwife is inserted in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the vagina until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert your finger into the navel to prevent it from being held and dying.
And then apply the bandage to the parts that have been divided, and place a second one on the area where the second one was placed, and make the woman understand some signs, and the man who is outside should be ready to assist if God wills.
The death of twins or many fetuses. Know that the signs of twins or many fetuses are different, and some are three or four, but this is strange and difficult to understand; but if it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one after another, and they are separated by the cord in the navel of each of those, and some signs are not obtainable as if it were a fetus by natural means, and its existence is indicated by some signs that we have recommended.
And if they are difficult to understand from their signs and reach what we have said about the unnatural figures, then you should follow those that we have recommended.
If the wise and skilled woman does that which brings ease and subtlety, and speed, and is intelligent according to all figures as it is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Remember that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarries.
Some women are formed in the first, and two, and three, and four, and five, and six, and seven, and more than ten, and it is already necessary to verify that a woman who miscarries does not give birth to vi, and another all formed, which cause is made for the glory of the saints.
And all such knowledge that should be in the science of the midwife who is very useful for that which seems to be like that, and therefore pauses on that which she knows.
Chapter LXXVI.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus, do what we have said in the division of medicine and do not deformed it, and you are able to use operation with your hand, then pause to consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
It is customary for the woman to be laid on her left side, with her head inclined towards the right and her legs raised.
The assistant should hold the patient's arms at two points or place them on the left side to prevent the patient's body from extending during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, you should moisten the mouth of the mother with oil and a mixture of tea, fenugreek, and sesame seeds.
Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and then enter her hand into the mother to facilitate the birth of the fetus, and then place her hand on the location where the umbilical cord is attached to the fetus.
In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to breathe on its own, and if so, you should look for the umbilical cord in the neck, head, mouth, palate, beard, sternum, ribs, or intercostal spaces.
If the patient's condition is on their feet, then in the penthouse, or in the middle of their back.
And that they hold the nail against the straight part of their hand, and place the curve of their hand in that location between the fingers of their other hand, and place your hand on it with ease and put the nail in any of those locations that we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
And then place and hold another nail in the position of their hand, or a third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not extended beyond its straightness, only.
And it should be made at all parts, so that the pain of their teeth is relieved as it is done in tooth extraction for them.
And that in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then cover those fingers with oil and insert those experiments and turn those that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the fetus is forgotten, then the joints are moved into a place that is less painful; and make sure that the entire fetus is forgotten.
If the arm is bent against the other and it is not possible to reduce it by the flexion of the arm, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it until everything is forgotten, and insert it in the joint of the arm or in the hollow.
And make sure to do the same in the other arm and both feet.
If the head of the fetus is large, or it has been dislocated in the neck, or it is at the back of the head not adjusted, then make sure to insert between these spines and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called "alundat", the shape of which will come from the shapes of other instruments in the capital that is appropriate for this.
Similarly, do this if the fetus is naturally large: and then make sure to insert that into the forceps, or use an instrument called "alunda" as we have said; and remove the bones with the forceps.
If the head is exposed and restrained by the furcula, then cut through it so that the moisture that is in the chest may be drained.
If it does not complicate matters and the patient is not overweight, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the left side of the abdomen is swollen or in hydropsy, then you should pierce that through which the moisture that is in it flows.
If the child is on its feet, then the direction of the umbilical cord should be towards the mother's mouth and the direction of the mouth towards the child's mouth.
If the abdomen and chest are restrained, then you should remove that cloth which has covered your hand, and then cut through the abdomen and chest so that that moisture flows out of them.
If the other members are still attached and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mother's mouth is open, then introduce your hand into the vagina, and surround the child's head, and push that against the mouth of the mother, and then insert one or two fingers, and pull out that.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, do not force it open; before doing so, cover the area with warm moist compresses. And apply ointments; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the wound is on their side, if possible, it should be pointed: and that which we have said about the living wound should be administered.
And if that is not possible, then it should be incised and extracted.
And make sure that there is no cause of decomposition in the second day.
And when you have completed all your operations, administer that which we have said about the treatment of abscesses which have occurred to the mother.
And if there is a flow of sanctum, then draw out in stopping waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was dead, and above that other fire began to burn, and above the dead fire another was made. A long time ago, the man had an abscess in his belly; and when fire was brought over, he began to tremble violently.
He was called for treatment and treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then he placed some strong-adhesive plaster on him for several reasons, and after a few days, he removed another bone; and again, after a few more days, he removed another one; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
And then he thought that they were bones from a dead fetus.
Then he continued to extract bones from him, and removed many bones, which were already in various positions in his belly, and had been there for a long time, causing him pain.
He did not think it was strange, but rather that in that case there was knowledge and help from the doctor who made the artificial arm for treatment.
Of the shapes of the tools needed to extract the fetus.
Form of vomiting that occurs when the greatest amount is eaten:
This is the form of strength in which the free are equalized, to which equality causes two vomitings in both extremities of two feet. But this vomiting should be more subtle than restriction, and it should be done either with an iron or a thick rod.
And the length of each rod should be two hands and a thumb, and the width of each rod should be one hand; and in the middle of both rods, there are two adjustments of that measure rod, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one hand and a little more, and the width of each is two hands, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the main person so that they can be opened when you turn those two prescribed vomitings.
Another similar form of that more subtle and lighter:
Make a device from wood or iron according to the resemblance of forceps. May also at the end of each of its two additions have such times, and the length of those additions is like a palm, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the main one, then you place the cushion over the left leg while hanging the right foot, and then place that which is between its thighs. And then raise your hand with the instrument according to the amount you want of the approximation of the mouth of the main one before the midwife makes it so that you want.
The form of truth that the ancients said:
Form of force that is pushed to the one who is pushed:
Form of assistance that is held in the big head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth, such times, and some of these forceps are made long according to this form, such times, with teeth at the end of which is sharpened and held. Form of anemia medication:
Form of a needle that has a spike:
Form of a needle that has two spikes:
Form of a scalpel that has two ends and by which the head is removed:
Form of two long scalpels:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more they multiply the species of that and prepare the artisans, as it is lighter to their operation and also easier for the men by their quantity.
And do not work with those instruments whether it is here or there, because the need for those is not excuseable.
Of extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is held, you command the patient to hold their own tongue, and then do that storming condition, and strengthen your hand over the mouth of it and over its nose, and if by any means it is deformed and destroyed, good.
And if not, then take an olive oil and perforate the roof of the mouth with a sharp object and place it on those herbs that are burning in the mouth, such as camphor, rough and bitter herbs, and camomile, Arabic spices, cassia lignea, and sainturea. All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the oil, and place it on the fire.
And then place a cannula of cannavier in the mouth of the patient, and hold it inside so that the vapor comes to the concavity of the mouth.
And then perform the described maneuver as we have said, and the second time it is performed quickly.
If this treatment is not effective and does not succeed, then command the midwife to place her left hand in olive oil or a mixture of aloe, and then enter it into the womb and rub it quickly, and as soon as it finds it, then take it and extend it little by little, if it is attached to the mouth of the uterus, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when it finds it, remove it slowly and correctly so that the woman does not suffer from the violent attraction. When the patient lies on their back, it is convenient to place a pillow under their head for comfort.
And if the mouth of the mother is covered, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and medication from the herb of the leaf.
However, if all the causes we have recommended are not forgotten, then keep in mind that whatever is issued from the patient to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then crestrizate it with enguent and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to rot within a few days and dissolve and be forgotten.
However, when it rots, the bad smell is raised to the head and stomach, and that causes harm to the patient; and therefore, it is necessary to administer sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies to that.
May the ancient remedy of fumigation with myrtle and dried figs still be effective.
The shape of the instrument by which the woman is fumigated is used for the retention of menstruation and the secondinea.
It should be made of ivory or wood.
And the narrow end should be placed in the mouth and the wide end over the fire, with the fumigation being done over the flames of the fire.
And hold it until that fumigation is consumed and repeat another one.
Of the healing of the child's unperforated anus.
When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which have already been thinly and firmly squeezed. Then ask the midwife to pierce that thinner part; otherwise, pierce that space sharply and make sure it does not touch the sphincter.
And then place a wool soaked in vinegar and oil over that pierced part; and then heal that wound when it is healed.
If you fear that he is unconscious, then pause in the trachea with a needle for a moment, and remove it when the child wants to cough.
And if you have accidentally punctured the anus for the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not broken, and then treat it with the same remedy as we have mentioned for healing and drainage.
For the treatment of fistulas that have occurred previously.
The fistulas that occur in the lowest part of the buttocks, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And if it is a fistula or an abscess.
And if that opening is old and drains moisture with white or thin pus, and some worms penetrate some of these fistulas.
And those penetrating worms are known by the fact that they come out through the opening and by their shape; and some use the patient's excrement for this, and it is often found among these worms.
And some of those fistulas are sometimes stretched in the spaces penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the belly.
And in the case of those fistulas that penetrate into the anus and do not penetrate, you insert your finger into the anus, and then insert a thin iron or iron rod into the fistula when it is not tense.
But if it is tense, then insert the thin iron or iron rod into that thin tent until you feel the tent or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel the tent or the hair at all and there is no cause of excretion, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of that is immediately clear from the urine, and it is prohibited to have that place treated with medicine until the location has been consolidated.
If the pain penetrates into the joint or bone and causes a sharp pain in the circumference, then it is considered a sprain if there is not a turgescence inside the bone, and a sharp pain in the circumference of the part; and that from there, it often spreads quickly; and that it does not hold in that medication, nor is it consolidated with an ointment.
And in all those punctures, it is not completely cured, and the cure of those is laborious and depends on the skill of the doctors over which it is stopped.
If in that which is not penetrating and ancient, healing is expected according to what you recommend, and that which has already been done and proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on his side, and raises the cushions of him into his, the cushions are inclined towards the belly of him, and then insert a probe, or an iron if there is turgescence in the puncture, until you know the location where the probe enters.
If you see that the patient is turning blue around the navel, then immediately insert your finger into the navel.
If you feel the tent in your finger has already penetrated and another is felt between your finger and that siphon or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not treat in that area, as it is not a healing, as we have said.
However, it should be noted that this is healing in some people.
And the medicine for which one hopes for great improvement in that is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the navel; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent flesh-covered fistulas that resemble a quill of a pen have been cauterized.
And then care for that area with bandages wrapped around it until all those flesh-covered areas have been healed, and then care for that area with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh; if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another cure.
If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the tail, which is in the anus, and between that and the probe is a thick layer of flesh or fat, and if the fistula is in that place on the surface of the skin, then dry the skin from the beginning of the fistula, and see if the probe dries, and if it is in the fistula, and when the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe is, and through the probe is released and cauterized.
Then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen of lead and have no cause from those.
But if pus comes out between you and your operation when you have cleaned those flesh, then milk that is and of the pus use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or with acute medicine, because the cauterizing with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those flesh adjusted, and abscizes the pus from the excess of humidity.
And then approach the wounds covered with bandages or cloths, and remove them carefully before the location where the arm begins to bleed, and then carefully remove the hard, putrid flesh that generates and solidifies.
And these remedies have both astringency and dryness; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended to the surface of the rectum, then insert the finger into the anus and examine that.
And if the tent is inserted and between you and it is velum of flesh or flesh, and is intended for penetration, then it is not an operation in that but a second way of trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer it in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry up that which you can reach the cavity for so that you can insert those and the cure proposed; and do not proceed with any sepsis because you do not insert the lacert containing the wound, and what has happened on the patient's willpower; and then cure that which we have said is very strong to heal; or to lengthen that velum and wound that pus which dries up that entrance proposed to the cul, as we have said, or with another sharp instrument, and then moisten those fistulated flesh which are in the section into the one where you can do the crustation; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound section, and if the orifice below is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the cul, and is still more painful for the patient. And in some cases, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the buttock and on the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form.
And then insert the probe into that fold of skin or around those; and then insert the probe into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the buttock nearby, then you extract the skin from that fold where you introduced your finger into the anus; and remove the end of the skin and adjust both ends, and leave them for a day or two, and when more of the skin is inserted into the flesh, cut those parts which are between the two ends of the skin and which cause pain.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the orifices of the fistula do not penetrate, then make them penetrate, however you prepare it, so that it is in the first, which you should not do to avoid injuring the skin; and then apply a bandage where it is healed.
The shape of the spigot that is used to puncture the fistula: the curvature of which is sharp and the other end is not sharp, so that it does not injure that which is not necessary, sometimes.
Of suturing hernias in which there is swelling at the beginning of those.
Hernias are of two kinds, either between the buttocks like this, which is of carbuncles, or they are with a greasy rash. And of those, there are small and large ones, and that the swelling comes from those immediately and is one, and its motions, and its back, and in the extremities of it.
However, those that have a swelling in the back like this, which comes from a lack of moisture, of which there is a greenish discharge or a small amount of swelling and continuous, and its color is like this.
And the cure for that which is within the belly is to command the patient to lie down and to expire into the belly while the bowels appear to you. Then you sit and support your elbows or whatever you have on your hand, and then incise those parts of the patient's ribs.
But if your elbows are not suitable for those parts due to their moisture and softness, then take those parts with dry cloth or with a cotton cloth or with a piece of woolen cloth, and extract those parts with the tweezers, and then incise those parts and sprinkle some powdered charcoal on the incision, so that they are in place of cauterizing; or cauterize those parts as it is prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing. And then cure those parts with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the wound does not allow for exit, then cauterize the patient with a cautery in which there is a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the belly and which allows for better exit when the patient exhales.
If the swollen glands deform the anus, then the cause is usually fleas, and you should remove those with your nail, or with a needle, and scrape them off, and then care for them with the ointment we have mentioned before they are healed.
And the one who is to perform the second suture should do it in this manner: take a thread and insert it into a needle, and then extract the swollen glands from the parts above, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; and then tightly tie the swollen gland to the structure, and then remove the thread and extract the needle.
And do this to all of them, and leave one of them untouched, so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
And then place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the back, and command the patient to lie down. And then leave that entrance open until the chest; and when it is filled, cure those wounds with ointment or other healing method until they are healed.
And if you do not have those remedies in that medicine, then use a needle or your nail to make those wounds moist and hold the scabs above, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that are consolidated.
Then use a stronger plaster than the first one that motivated and was excoriated; and then cure those that are healed.
You know that almsamir is clear, and not if it does not resemble the color of a corkscrew, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the ones mentioned, and it is caused by those pains that lead to the body.
And then cut that which is inside the circle of the knee, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its place; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is preceded in its chapter.
Warts are small, sharp, rounded fistulas on the surface of the body, and they cause pain in the joints of children.
Its treatment is that you extend and cut that one, or that you remove it with forceps or tweezers. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
Warts are small, furred or large fistulas on the surface of the body, and when it breaks there, it is centered in the same way as a bite from an ant, and it is made around the body.
The care for this is that you take a pen needle or a quill needle, and it should be strong, and place it into the ant hill where it contains; and then rotate your hand with the needle inside the circle of the ant hill, and place it at the surface of the flesh, and remove the ant from its nest.
And if you want to do this with a horn needle or iron needle in this way:
The part of the needle above the canula should be thin and sharp, not pierced (so it is not perforated), wrapped with what is on top of the patient's skin, where the understanding of him is ablaved and the rotation of that.
And if you want to cauterize the ant according to what is called in the cauterization of athel in the chapter of cautery.
In the form of the instruments that are administered to give cristeries.
Some wounds are made with silver or lead or melted or mallet; and some wounds are made with those instruments small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the treatment of small children is small; and the cristeries of those whose sores are foul or painful, they are small.
The shape of a large and small cristero:
The tip of the catheter of him above in which the bag is attached should be wide according to this method; and it should be at a distance where the bag is attached like that time.
The end of the tube left, which is inserted into the anus, should be narrow (not opened) like a lion, attracting to subtlety; and on one side of the tube two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track according to the size of the rays and the largest a little.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed should be one palm.
And it should be pierced by tracks like this when it is rolled up; and if the space between the tracks is the largest of the said.
And insert those tracks firmly with firm cotton, or around those; and adjust the bag; and when the bag is placed in it, it should be straight in the tip of the crister between two distinguishing strong constraints, and cristerize that one track: May the quality of cristerizing that one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be scalded according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and remember that it should not be too hot or too cold.
Then the patient should be placed face down on their back, and their thighs raised and supported with a pillow or a blanket; and apply a warm ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or a mucilage of fenugreek or a similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation. Then the nurse takes the basin and expresses the contents into it with two fingers until everything in the intestine is evacuated; then remove the basin and the patient lowers their thighs to the side.
And if that remedy does not work, hold it as long as possible; and if the patient falls asleep during the entire night, it is better to let them sleep.
But if you apply that remedy in cases of diarrhea and the patient is conscious, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin, sharp lancet from those used by children to make incisions.
Of healing wounds
And he has said in the division of wound healing that which is suitable for free, and thus he says the cure of those with money and medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diverse according to what they are made of and according to the location where they occur.
And the causes for which wounds are made include punctures with a sharp object, or cuts with a knife, or percussion from a lance, or a blow with a stick, or a stab with a sword, or similar to those of other causes.
Many wounds that are in the places of the head include those that occur on the skull, neck, chest, abdomen, and similar to those of the limbs.
And he counts the cure of some wounds because they follow that reason and rule over other wounds.
And I will begin with the simple plaques of the head, for the memory of the compositions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple head plaque occurs and is not a fracture, if it is caused by a stone or something similar, and it has been soaked in water only and is very large and threatens the patient with the danger of abscess, then you should first apply a cephalic trephine, and do not delay; and then extract the stone according to the amount of its virtue, if no other cause prevents trephination, especially if the stone that is in the plaque is small.
And if trephination on the opposite side of the affected plaque; and keep the patient away from movement, heavy food, and heavy meals.
However, if there is any cause that prevents the minimization; then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And if an abscess forms in the plaque, place a poultice of bruised bread soaked in rose oil or in honey in which it is stiptic.
If you are sure of an abscess, then pause over the affected area, if it is recent and its discharge has not changed to that of the powder that I will recommend you to apply soon.
And if the discharge has already changed to that, then pause over the wound with salves until it is healed.
If the wound is large or extends into spaces and is not adjusted by lips, then adjust those with sutures according to what I will recommend for their stitches.
If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and flesh, and is not retained by a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and forms like theirs, until it is healed.
And if there is putrefaction in the wound and does not adhere to the bone, then insert all that rottenness and remove it, and care for that.
If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not severed by medical means, then you should examine the artery, and if you find that it is not incised, then you should incise it with a needle or thread; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the blood is flowing.
If these wounds are simple and small, the cause of their healing is to powder them with this powder, which when applied will consolidate them so that air does not move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all this into a fine powder, and apply it to the wound, and bind it tightly with a bandage so that it adheres, and it will coagulate in the blood.
Then bind it tightly above the wound and leave it there until it is healed, because the medicine will not be effective if it is removed before it has healed.
And at some point, one might do that alone, when you are not present in these senses and healthy.
And this medical operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and stretched, and their recent wounds are healthy, the ones that the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer time, then do not use this powder, but first cure those with what we have said, either by placing it on those wounds with honey and water, or by placing it on those wounds with flour of ordure mixed with honey and water until they are healed.
But if the wound is a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you remove that which we have said.
And I will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in this poisonous thing.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the plague occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
If the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather to avoid treatment with that which causes great hemostasis, as well as ziniar and zegi say vetriol and similar to their four nozo to the nerves and contrazo that. And do not place your hand on any part of the plague, because the substance of the nerves is free and its continuation is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, as is caused by washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, roasted or not, and then when washed with warm water and the other stones are minoring according to this manner, and find honey.
If the plague is great, then administer sutures, or cut the lips of it, and then cure that with powders before it is healed.
If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lowest part of the abdomen, then pierce it in the most prominent location.
If an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate, dry, ligate, or cauterize that location if necessary to prevent further bleeding.
If the ribs of the chest have already been cut and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the flaps of the wound covering over the ribs of the chest and do not touch them; equalize them and reduce them to their natural shape, and strengthen them with a structure that is appropriate, and let them heal for several days until they are fully healed.
If the pain has already caused fractures in the bones, then puncture those locations, and if there are fragments of bone, remove all of them that you can; and whatever is not visible, let it heal within several days until the wound closes, and it should be separated and the surrounding area should be cleaned.
If the pain is recent, then powder the area with the recommended powder. But if the pain is caused by an abscess, then cure it with the recommended remedy that will soon come to mind.
If the pain is caused by a knife or cauterizing iron, and you observe its depth, then consider whether the patient has breathlessness when lying down; know that the pain is fatal.
And if there is no depth and the pain is recent in the patient's side, then place powder on the area of the first hour, and do not strengthen it so that the side does not remain in the depth of the wound and so that it returns to the heart and does not affect the patient, but rather apply attractive poultices and remove those dirty bandages on the same day.
If the swelling is not present, then place your hand on the patient's chest to allow the liquid to drain from their body; and make sure the patient sleeps on their side so that the liquid in their body can flow out.
If the swelling has lasted for three days or more without causing spasm, tremor, heart pain, or stricture in the patient, and other symptoms are improving, then you can be sure that the swelling is healing; and then treat it with warm compresses and other appropriate treatments until it is completely healed.
If the healing of the swelling is complete and has lasted for a long time, then you can be sure that it has formed a sinus; therefore, treat it through its opening.
And if the swelling is caused by an incision of a sponge or a knife, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat it with water that precedes sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already been incised on the bone, and you have already cut through it, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can straighten the plate, which is said to facilitate extraction.
And of the other plates in the other members, the treatment is the same as that which we have mentioned.
Of the plates of the belly.
The disorder that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
And disruption of the small ones is done difficultly by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult, so do not wait to insert them at their proper place as soon as possible, because they open and become swollen, making the instrument of that difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is to migrate, since in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned.
You should know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two common ones are used for suturing other parts of the body.
And two other private ones communicate with the other parts of the body, but they are more private in the belly suture.
I recommend you to each one an explanation and declaration.
Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then in one of the two ways: either by patience of the disruption as we have said, or when inflammation comes to the intestine due to the coldness of the air.
And then when that is the case, cover it with a wet cloth soaked in hot water alone, or if you can get it in cold water with squill, and cyperus, and spice, and embrocations at that intestine inside until the inflammation is resolved.
Sometimes it is done in a way that has astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And then, when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, you moisten the intestine with water that is covered and sweetened, because for that the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
But if the instrument of the patient is removed from this treatment, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
And the first treatment is best when it is proper that it not be dry, and not an occupation that requires dryness and failure.
Of the instrument, its shape is like this:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, and it is not as thin as a needle, but rather blunt at the end.
And then, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then return it to its natural form in its proper place, if possible on top of it, because that is better.
When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you should make the patient lie on their side, and support their legs as high as possible above their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you should place your hand on their head and the other on their chest.
Similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the abdomen, then you should place your hand and consideration quickly on the opposite side to raise the affected part higher than the other.
And thus, you should administer it in large and small doses.
And in small doses, place the medicine that you have prepared, and make sure that the minister is between your most sensitive fingers, holding the disruption entirely in their hand and adjusting its lips, and gradually move from one stitch to another if any cause arises.
And this is the common method of stitching: you take an needle, or a second needle according to the width of the wound; and hold it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and pull the needle once, or twice so that you do not put it in the wrong way on the two ends of the thread that are on the other side of the wound, on the other two ends of the suture that is behind the wound; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the suture, and you make four stitches.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the largest of them and put another needle in that, and then tie that with a thread as it is with the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness, because thin needles more easily penetrate the flesh; and large needles are difficult to insert into the thread, and therefore it is recommended that they be of medium thickness.
And it is not recommended that the needle be left at the ends of the thread intended for, so that the flesh is not penetrated too easily and that the wound heals before its consolidation.
And they should not be extended too much for, so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's body; and place pulverized cotton on the suture, which holds the tips of the needles; and leave them in until you know that the wound is consolidated.
These types of sutures with needles are most suitable for small wounds, as they have in their suture one or two or around those.
The second suture is similar: and you administer the suture to the four tips, of the cord and two tips of the needle, in a way, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the thread where it began, so that the thread that rises from the wound does not come out, so that the suture is the second suture of cloth in which the threads are strong.
Pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the mentioned suture.
And this suture is for women.
And this suture I used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and it was a tear of the major intestine, and it was near the intestines about two palms from the intestine at the left side and it was the tear in the left leg; and then I reduced that because the intestine had been out of the wound for 24 hours.
And the wound was healed in the space of 15 days or about, and that was cured and healed; and then I applied this ointment for a while, and it was in its positions.
And other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle fire, what I did not cure that wound, which was in a place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but I placed over the wound cold water for two days and frequent baths with melted honey until the fire healed.
May you direct two specific types of suture according to the narrative of the Word.
And if you begin with the suture of the cord, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And as the needle penetrates the cord and those lacerations in a straight and long direction through the entire body, and leave the end of the suture where you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from the back part to the front part in the other end of the wound.
And as you have finished making that penetration, then make another penetration in the other end of the wound from the front part to the back part; and leave the end of the suture on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the wound from the back part to the front part.
And make the needle penetrate in the same way as the previous penetration, which makes the suture in the cord at the end of the mirror that is in the part where all that penetrates.
And then, approaching from that position and pushing it towards the other side of the bed, remove the needle from the codex where it penetrates, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the bed that is on the other side with a cloth; and remove the needle from the codex that is on the other side.
And then do the same thing again, and do the same thing again in another place, and finish all of that which is deformed according to that example.
And the total of this method of suturing is that you sew the edges of the pellicies with a needle, so that you sew the bed one side of the part of the codex, and then let go of that other side when you have finished sewing.
The second special method of suturing is called Gualia's method, and this is how it should be done for both sides, as recommended by doctors who sew that part to its corresponding part on the other side, so that all parts are connected together naturally; and then apply the end of one side to the other end of that side, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you hold the needle at the end of the mirror, facing your own part of the body, and make it penetrate into that spot, and leave two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from one end to the other of the thread.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the inside of the body to the outside in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common ligature suture, and is the suture that was previously mentioned.
This is the speech of Guilia.
And moreover, they said that the suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so you insert one needle into each one, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you should use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the second suture of those that are used to sew the intestines equally.
When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, it is more difficult to suture than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of the medical treatment of plague is the judgment of the other plagues.
The reason is that when you achieve the plague recently from the same source where the air has altered it, and reduce the intestine and cleanse it and prepare it inappropriately, then place powder on it.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place on it an ointment of alcohol that is present with you and makes a hard, thick paste, and is consolidated and thickened; and cure it as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present with you, then place on it a powder that begins to draw out the pus, and change the dressing twice a day as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple wounds when the plagues are present.
If you fear that the plague may cause damage to the main members, then apply a piece of lion's wool soaked in quality oil, or in roasted oil, and place it around the area where the bones are located and leave it there.
If you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply that which has been previously mentioned, and if the infection spreads to the intestine and is made to penetrate deeply into its cavity, then apply a strong stiptic black tea.
You should know that the pus from the intestines is a more reliable remedy than that which is in the thin intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine known as "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from any disease that occurs in it; this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great size, and the thinness of its tissue, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If that which comes from the pus is the bandage, and you remove it, then reduce it according to your right hand, which reduces the intestines equally.
If it has passed through the space and is already white or black, then place your hand on the spot where it becomes dark from the blood, so that there may be no outflow of pus, which contains veins and arteries in the bandage.
And then insert that which is another on that limb, and place two ends of the hand hanging from the part of the bandage behind the wound, so that the attraction of the blood from the wound may be in the cavity of the bandage and emission of the blood from the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds that occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they saw that person who was wounded in their belly by percussion of the lance and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and made a fistula, and there was no management or ventositas.
Then I continued to cure him although he was not consenting to his healing, but I subtly introduced that which heals the wound and consolidates the area.
And then I placed over the patient that which I had prepared to prevent any further damage from the event in his abdomen; and he did not suffer from that event and remained in his usual dispositions, eating and drinking, and was eventually bathed and exercised as before.
And some experienced doctors say that when the intestine is torn and small, it should be sewn up in this way: you should take strong needles; and then adjust the two lips of the wound and place one of those needles with the thread that has the mouth open over the two lips of the wound; then when you put on those and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the intestine, where it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another stitch in the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have made stitches throughout the entire wound.
And then reduce that area and the pain; and remove those things attached to the intestine inside the intestine so that the intestine can be healed, and do not cause harm to the patient.
It is also possible that the intestine can be lanced with a sharp needle; and you should grasp the end of these thin strips of intestine, which should be very clean, and then wrap the end of the intestine around this thin strip, and then insert this thin strip into the intestine, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing is not other than the second way of trust and hope.
But if the pain is great and widespread, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it is not possible to engage in suturing, but only in drainage, and not healing of it at all.
Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
You should know that any pain and abscess when it becomes hidden and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal all the time and is not excised, then in any member it is universally called a fistula and we call it that wound.
And secondly, a fistula is indeed a narrow, white, painless lesion that exists in the same cavity as a toothache; and to remember its name, it is called a fistula, that is, an abscess.
And in wet people, the humor that causes it is quickly removed in a few hours. Sometimes this humor is moved, and it is thin, and thick, and subtle.
Here are some of the main causes, their symptoms, and treatment with various remedies in this section.
And I will now tell you how to treat a fistula, which is made by surgical means.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all the parts of the body; among them are those that reach great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or some joints composed of such a kind as is made of flesh and skin; and among these are those that are closest to the main member and similar to it.
And among these fistulas that follow this method are difficult-to-cure diseases, not receiving treatment, and requiring hard work and ignorance.
And if any fistula does not reach these places that have been mentioned, and you wait and believe in its treatment, and want to know about it, then try to examine or feel it, and if the fistula follows correctly, and you can find it by this method.
If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the probe's lightness lifts the weight of the patient's body and helps to straighten the twisting.
And if the fistula is very horrible, it is not possible for you to put the probe into it.
Then incise the orifices with their own instruments, as the moisture that you use to clean them also cleans the other orifices and removes it from there.
And then carefully inquire, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or protruding one is in the cavity of the patient, or if it is a fistula with many orifices and is located entirely above your strength, or your endurance, or the cause of the patient's pain, and similar to the signs and causes of accidents to the abscess.
And when you have understood all those causes, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula close to the joint, or in the location of salt, long from the joint, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have already told you.
When the wound is dry after the first incision, remove what is in that filter and rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the skin and similar, and cure it within that it is healed.
If the wound is long and deep, then cut it as much as possible in front of you, and remove all rotten flesh from it; and administer poultices wrapped in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the wound, which you have understood with iron.
And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the wound of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed to you, then inquire about that and dry it as we have recommended, unless you prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and it is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that which holds the corruption; and cure that which is inside where the flesh is to be healed.
And if it does not heal and there is no gap as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and then you expose it again and carefully remove the cause of it and clean it thoroughly, and strengthen it with a firm bandage, and then restore that.
And then if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot do anything but leave that alone.
And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use fine forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you have the strength to extract all of them, then do so carefully without any cause that weakens your strength.
But if you face any opposition due to some cause of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then insert those ligaments or flesh that are there, and remove the bones.
But if you are not prepared to set the bones of your hour, then place a poultice on that area that will soften that area and let it enter where those flesh and ligament bones are, and keep the poultice from consolidating and strengthening the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you are afraid, place it under the wound submerged in three parts of oil, or under the wound submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in any of the oils, because when those ligaments soften, and the bones are separated from their position, and the attraction of those is alleviated.
If there is a large bone like those of the thigh or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is standing, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the place where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has been in a patient's thigh to hold and assist in your operation.
A young man around the age of 30, who has experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts of which is over the matter of which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a great abscess, and not because of an external cause.
Then the fire was extended to the thigh amidst the error of the doctors before the abscess was burst, and matter flowed from it, and its cure was postponed until the bed became fistulated, and in the wounds orifices were created which all drained off poison and humidity from the body.
Then the patient was treated by many doctors for two years, and fire was not applied to those wounds but in the arm, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of that patient and the matter that flowed from those wounds, which was very thick; and the body of that man was completely yellow and the color of his skin was jaundiced.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those wounds and reached the bone.
And then I quickly examined all the wounds and found that they extended from all parts of the body.
And then I showed and inserted into one of the wounds, through which I described a part of the bone, and at the same time I found that it was rotten and corrupted and degenerated; and already a part of the body had penetrated into the mesentery.
And you should have already discovered and prepared that which was covered by the bone.
And you should have already dissected and prepared that which was not in the bone but that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and you have already discarded it.
Then place the restoration of the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it does not consolidate.
Then you should have again dissected and discovered over the bone secondarily over the first discovery, and again continued corruption in the bone.
And you should have prepared that which appeared from that corruption, and then you should have performed the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
And then you should have discovered over another way and not ceased to incise the bone little by little particularly and to perform the restoration of it, and it was not restored until you had incised about a palm of it, and that extracted from its marrow, and then you should have prepared it with medicine, and it was consolidated better and healed.
It is not necessary to repeat the operation of excision of the patient's limb unless for the disposition of the surgeon and the scarcity of the patient's tolerance and fear of death, because an accident can occur in all hours due to excessive evacuation.
Therefore, the treatment is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of the patient's own flesh; and it is well to position the patient in their own body and return the function of the limb; and it is carried out according to its positions and not against it in any way or cause harm.
If the limb is in place of the body that has been recently fractured, then follow this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strong thread at the end of that prominent limb, and command anyone who extends it; and pause that bandage of thickest wool from the first bandage; and put it over the flesh that has been left by the bone, and extend the protruding part of it so that it pulls the flesh to the parts behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
Pause the table from underneath the bones improperly, for when you do that, it is not forbidden to use the saw that does not corrode the rotten flesh.
Cover the sawing over the rotten area little by little, for if it is in the hollow of the bone corruption and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used for sawing.
And if the bone is rotten and not eminent, begin from one continuous piece to another, and the corruption is in the middle or in a separate part, then you should remove the flesh from all parts; and pause the sawing from underneath, and place the saw of the first part where the corruption ends so that the sawing of the other part continues.
And if the sawing is according to the location of the corruption, do it a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, insert the saw into the rotten joint, and saw the bone where the other part continues.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in the reason but in the sinew.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and clean it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and if any tendon is crooked, correct it for you, when no opposite vein or nerve comes out.
And you should know which are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones, according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and hardness of those; therefore, you should prepare all kinds of instrument suitable for that operation.
And you should know that that operation means to you in the special case of the instrument that is needed; when you are greatly studied and long and well known in the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, therefore you already have them for yourself that is suitable for each instrument for every illness.
And you should form at the end of this chapter the number of simple instruments that you will use in processing, which you will prohibit from being used on others. Forging iron:
Forging another iron:
Forging another large iron:
Forging a ruler: The head of this ruler should be in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
And it is not advisable to use them only when the joints are corrupted or the mouth is very wide open.
Forging a smaller razor:
Forging a broad razor:
Forging another well-made saw: make the arc of it as small as possible and the sharpness of its iron, and the handle of it should be well-made. Position of him/her:
Shape of a razor in which there is a hollow:
Shape of another subtle razor:
Shape of another curved-end razor:
Shape of a small razor similar to a needle:
Shape of another smaller incisor:
Shape of another one; this resembles a saw, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is used in certain places in the surgery of bones:
Shape of a saw that is suitable for the surgery of bones that are pierced through:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly covered with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the ends of incisors and the sawing of bones.
When the extremities are affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or when you have treated that corruption for the cure of those medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption leaves the member that was not affected by any cause, then in such cases you should insert that member into that hot bath to remove the corruption, so that the patient may escape from that greater harm to the member.
And the sign of that person who has been affected is that the member becomes black within the time when the fire has already burned it, or if it swells up and enters into that member which is already there and takes over the whole body; and therefore I advise you to insert that.
Similarly, if the cause of the corruption is the pressure of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion mar or from a viper or from a rattle-snake and similar.
And if the corruption or pressure is in the extremity of that member, then you should insert that member and not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the main body.
And similarly, if you approach the wound, then insert the needle into the edge of the fireplace, and do not give space to corruption until it takes hold in the fireplace of the arm.
And if you want that one, then insert the arm inside the code at the joint.
And if another corruption passes around the code, then that one is the death of the patient; and in the treatment of that quantity of virtue, administer other causes.
And similarly, do the foot when corruption passes over the toe of the foot, then insert it inside one of the nuts.
And if you take hold of the heel of the foot, then insert the entire foot. But if it can enter into the knee, then insert the leg inside the joint of the knee.
And if corruption has already reached the knee, then in that case there is no cure, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you tighten the ligament in the part that was left last, and tighten another ligament on the spot; and extend the assistant a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the assistant another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide until all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And let there be placed a cloth of all parts over the wound so that it does not touch the area, and let the patient's injury and abscess be adjusted and treated carefully.
And if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the area continuously, or place some powders that restrict the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment before it is completed.
And then apply a bandage to the injured member at the appropriate place, and cure that before it is healed.
And you should also recommend to that person who has such an accident in his foot, the same type of accident that you and I have recommended, which occurs because of the black color in his foot due to a burn that is similar to a fire burn.
And that corruption first occurs within his own foot before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
And then that person prepared for himself some medicine that was more effective than the cure going to the member with the intensity of his pain and burning of it, and the unsuccessful treatment did not heal the foot at the joint, and it became healthy.
For a long time, it has been known that this disease affects the mentioned part of the body.
And then it came to me, and I perceived that this excess of the aforementioned substance, which is placed on the face of the medicines, is due to the purification of the body of the patient; and if it does not cause a reaction, it begins to go to another part of the body.
And I was told to incise the face of the patient, but I did not want to do so hoping for the reaction of that excess, and more than fearing the beginning of the incision of the face of the patient dead, because the virtue of the patient was uncertain.
And since he was disappointed with me, he returned to his country and reached me that that man prepared and incised his whole face, and was cured.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful in what is done with this disease, and that it has meaning by which it is meant and by which it is done.
Of the care of the sinews and quality of the castor oil with medicines.
When abscesses occur in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place looks like a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach deep corruption, and it does not press on bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinew, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until the corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
And the treatment of it is to insert that codex entirely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and you make sure that it does not stick to the place due to its corruption.
However, if you hope that the codex will stick and that that corruption has not been achieved due to deep consequence, and in the codex there is a spot on the face, then you treat it with a castor oil.
And you should consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that yields an odor of fat, then use this Egyptian remedy which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc received in equal parts, and adjusted in a vessel, and its coats over the fire until the medicament becomes honey.
And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the sinus with that, and strengthen its outlets, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that spice; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pudor remains.
And some of those days are cleaned with ash water, when you are not present this medicament; and you should take the ash from wood, and put it on the water; and then add that and cleanse that with it until you confirm that the sinus is now open.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse that wound with honey and melted lead mixed together, and cleanse it with vinegar and honey mixed together, because honey melts and washes, and vinegar makes it stick and more so when there is an excess of stipulation and dryness.
And when you have done this several times and feel that the wound has recovered, then cleanse it with water that makes flesh in it.
And if you take some finaline and dissolve that oily vinegar and vinegar stiptic; or if you cleanse it with some medicines and other ointments that have the properties written in the treatise of ointments.
And if the orifices of the wound are narrow and cannot receive the needle of the syringe, then slowly expand it with that small iron until it is expanded.
And similarly, if the anus is dilated, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave the amount in which the space between the buttocks contains additional.
And if the anus of which the intestine passes through is raised to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the intestine can pass through behind, because when the intestine is constricted in the presence of sinus, the flesh in it is generated.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest environment of the largest bone according to what you want, then prepare the member for the preparation that passes through which the intestine usually passes through according to what is appropriate and that there is no cause in it that holds the intestine.
May one who is above the opening of the sinus, which remains open at all times to prevent that which is adjusted in its place from coming out. And so that you know whether what comes from the arm is matter or little, or is digested, or is not digested.
And if you consider the location of that sinus, whether there is pain in it or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is secreted over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or has formed an adhesion, then you should remove it or tear it apart on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the dressing and renew the poultice.
May one who is above the sinus approach the space where subtle viruses are, for the healing of which you should not despair of the adhesion of it, because the healing of that takes time, as in some people in which generation of flesh in those wounds takes a long time, and from those in which it is done the opposite of that.
If the sac is found to be filled with undigested food, it means that the sac does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sac is delayed and prolonged, then adjust in the desiccation of medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dry as soon as they are added with a decoction of diarrhea, when they are in the adjustment with an excess of cinnamon.
The most effective remedy is to take a decoction of diarrhea and dissolve it in rose oil, and place it on the affected area, and use that.
This is similar to that action, when there is no undigested food, use honey when it is thickened, and use that; or take mira and aloe and make a powder, and sprinkle it all over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply this mixture to the sac; and sprinkle the powder over cloth and strengthen that.
Some people administer long-lasting and radiant astrological remedies (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of eggshells and centaury, and use those simples or adjustments, trim those and crush and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use that.
If the sinew is not healed by this remedy, then you know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and it has already been examined in the bones or other hard members or in the ligaments; then cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
Of the treatment of broken nails and toenails, and added incisions of the finger and sectioning.
The nail is an abscess that has not been present at the finger of the hand or foot, and it often occurs in other similar ones, and if it continues to be valued and its treatment is highly prized, or it is a caustic abscess, or it is corrupted, and quickly decomposes and rots the tip of the nail, and it quickly rots all of it, and quickly pervades its corruption into the bone until it smells fetid, and the end of that limb is blackened.
And when you have that same iron that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover it so that you insert the entire excess that remains from the nail, and then cauterize the area near that, as a pointed cautery is helpful in this case.
And if the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts divided, and they begin to prick and lead that one to that, then cover it so that you place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push that one through and insert that flesh with ease, and then place over it what remains of the flesh from the medicines that were burned corrosively until it is completely healed; and then cure that one.
And if the corruption has already entered the bone, then cover it so that you insert that bone and the extra, because there is no time when that bone in the corruption will be healed.
If you see the corruption and decay in that, then insert it into one of the nuts according to what is remembered, and cure it within the time when it is healed.
If the toenail is broken or torn off, and there is severe pain in that area, then first apply a bandage to the patient, and then dry the toenail with a sharp cutting blade across the transverse section above it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is below the toenail, because you will cause the patient severe pain and unnecessary damage to the adjusted flesh in that area; and cure that area with this.
This is not adjusted, which is not found in the bodies of most men, but it is fleshy all over, and it is often in the bones, or it is in the toenail.
And it is not found in the joints of the body, or it is the origin of that in some of those nuts. When born from those nuts of that tree, the first is not bad, and the second born at joints is weak.
Of those born without flesh, the section is lighter, and you should insert that one into its own cavity with a flat blade.
When born from the joint's cavity, the cure is difficult; therefore, watch out for its abscess.
When born from those nuts of that tree, you should insert the flesh at the beginning into the round opening around the bone, and then use one of those suitable saws to cut it, and cure it while it is healing.
When the consolidation occurs between those bones that are bent or by the birth of the man who was born with it, or by the consolidation of plague or by burning by fire, or by similar things, then cut that consolidation before they return to their natural form.
And then place between their clothes some oiled rags so that they are not consolidated too lightly, and separate between those, or place between those one thin layer of plaster until it is consolidated according to what you see.
And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the palm of that hand, then dry it according to how it is prepared and suitable for the shape of the member.
At the beginning of the joints, they are varicose.
The joints are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come out of the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the abdomen, and especially in the abdomen of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer a purge of the body to relieve black bile, some of which is strong enough to expel it, and then draw blood from the patient's great vein.
The cure for them is done in two ways: one is that it should be incised and thrown out the black bile, and the other way is to raise the vein and extract all of it.
The drying of it is done in this way: first, the abdomen is anointed with oil until the black bile is resolved, which is feculent from the abdomen, and then strengthen the patient's abdomen to the most superior part of the couch under the thighs, and then dry the vein at one, two, or three places, wide section, and then raise the black bile above the lower part of the thigh into the body, and out from the top, until the amount and number of times you want to take it, and the patient bears it.
And then approach that one, and command them to refrain from eating foods that generate black bile causing gout.
And repeat the treatment with leeches when the veins are full and that does not help the patient.
The elevation of their leg should be done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is swollen with edema, and then place it in hot water and massage the leg with a tail of a snake until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or it should be exercised by exercise strong, if bathing is not at your present, until the member is scalded.
And then apply the codeine in the direction of the vein for sectioning in the long or back of the patient's foot, or at the bottom of the patient's foot you should give it as a drop, or at the bottom of the patient's foot you should give it as a tale.
And then apply the codeine with one drop and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sensation, and it should be appreciated that the patient who sometimes that question declines to black.
And so, when you have taken out and from the codex you used that white thread as a string.
Then place your hand in that hole where it is raised and shaken from the codex, and hang that lion's claw on it.
Then cut another section close to that section for three times, and then scrape the codex from the part above the vein where it appears.
Then lift that and insert it into the back section of the tail, and then extract it and lift it into where it is inside the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above it.
And do that into where you extract it from the section that is most superior or most different from all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-bladed needle and tie it to it and extract it, or insert the thread behind it and rotate your hand at all parts where it is shaken. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it is difficult to lift that part and it comes out over the patient, causing harm.
And when the whole area has been cut out, place your hand on the wound covered with wool soaked in wine and oil, both rotten and unrotted, and heal that wound until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the straight line as we have said, then cut it at all the parts of its tortuosity and in the places where it is wrapped, and suspend it with forceps until you lift the whole of it.
And be careful that you do not cut the vein and do not wound that part, for it is difficult to lift that part; and use your prudence in that matter.
The shape of the incision made on the vein:
It should not be sharp as the forceps or have a sharp tip to avoid wounding the vein; and it should be made of flexible lion's claw, because if it is too thin, it will cut the vein by its thinness; having enough thickness as we have said.
Of extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the hollows of lowlands, as in Aetius in the Arabian lands and in the dry and barren lowlands where there is little greenery.
And it is often generated in other parts of the body besides the hollows.
And its action is of putrefaction that comes from the feces, as with poisonous worms and tapeworms and roundworms and other worms generating between the feces and the flesh.
And the susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is due to this vein that happens in the hollow and inflamed; and if the location is blistered, the vein should be opened from the place of that blistering, which seems reasonable from the plant.
And then with the appearance of this, you should wrap around it a weight of lead from which the foot is like a drag of one drag, and do not let go of that and leave the lead suspended from the hollow.
And so many times when some reason causes those parts to be distorted, wrap that in a poultice and place it on the affected area. And if it is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that which is still inside until it is outside, because if you insert that, it will be twisted and go into the flesh and cause abscess and poisoning in the area and ulcer.
So that it may be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and there is no longer any cause in the body.
And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in their length of 20 palms and 10 digits, and I have found that it reaches up to 20 palms.
And if it is inserted during the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the tract of it and pierce that through the long tract to the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has some wounds, and especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes to that place very painful, and it is taken from which orifice it comes.
And then cure that which we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cattle sickness.
This disease is not named in any land because it has many wounds on the animals and it is a worm that is not between the skin and flesh, and it goes through all the body puffing up and falling down, and it is shown at the feeling of its own member to member until it breaks the skin and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors which happen to be worms and serpents and earthworms in the belly.
And it is feared for the harm of that, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then very strong fever occurs in the body and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many wounds.
And so when you want to cure that and extract it, first do not force its movement and appearance to the sense, and then hold tightly what is above it and what is below it with a thin and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and not exposed, then place a pointed cautery with fire over the location where it is, and the main cause that is feared is the corruption of it which corrupts the location as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then tightly hold over the supercilium with a strong structure, and then dry it and extract that; and then have the patient use medicines to evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section above pain.
This disease is not named in our land gout, and it is the pain that occurs in various members, and it moves from member to member.
And I have already seen the second one that I will tell you. I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and it had been there for an hour, I saw that inflammation move like worms in this way, but more slowly than it would be if it were live silver when moving from place to place.
And then the pain of that place disappeared and remained in the muscle, and it was like this for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
And then it recommended to me that it turned around in all her body after I saw it; and it was too wonderful about the change of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen that in the lower legs after that way, but I had not seen words that could explain how pain could be mutated from member to member. I have not seen that thing in women as it is in the female body.
And I have not thought that it was because the woman was old, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this case the sensation of that warmth is changed.
And it is necessary that this aftercare not appear in those who are delicate and have bodies humidified with veins constricted.
And as you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, then do not apply the heat to that place as we have said, but strengthen it and rub it gently on that part until it is inside that warmth covered, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see that thing in the thighs, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and carminatives those bad pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
From the extraction of sage.
Sage is diverse according to the species, and according to the parts of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small ones, and concave, and dull, and solid; and from them some have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have stars.
When symptoms occur in the servant's body and cross the bone, and are above the cyphac which is on the brain, because of the vehement soda, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding and vomiting of anger, and great fear is abscised from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is above the location of the wet white substance similar to pollen, and it has a similarity to the adhesion of flesh.
And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then you should refrain from the cure and extraction of the sage until it is necessary.
When the symptoms of the sage are close to the heart, which is located on the right side, and feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and its movement is similar to the movement of the polyp, and comes from the black plague, and that fear and coldness of the extremities, and sweating, and shivering; and then you know that death is approaching.
And the symptoms when the sage has completely filled the lungs with black foam from the plague, and the vessels that are close to the neck become inflamed, and the patient's color changes, and they breathe heavily and demand a breath of fresh air.
And if the sage is in the membrane that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it is made by a great sudden pain and a great groan, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
If the saw is used in the stomach, then strong vomiting of undigested food may occur.
And if the saw is inserted into the abdomen and remains there, some intestine, cloth, or intestine that is torn may be expelled, and there is no hope of healing from its extraction.
And if the saw is inserted into the bladder, and urine is expelled from it, and some cause of death occurs from this, and there is great pain in the patient, then know that it is fatal.
Just like the face, neck, and shoulder, and back, and ribs, and the scapula, and the breastbone, and the sternum, and the ribs, and the scapula, and the back, and the neck, and the face, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the saw does not pierce vein or artery and is not a poisonous saw.
And I will recommend this to you who have seen that these saws are of this kind, so that you know how to use them for the cure of the patient.
The cause of which is that in a man, a cyst forms in the lacrimal duct of his eye, and it is extracted from there to the other side, behind the ear of his head, and it is healed, and does not cause harm to the man's ear.
And another cyst was extracted from a Jew in his ear, behind the ear, and the cyst had already been hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his skin, and it was a large cyst among the sharp cysts of the Turks, with no eardrums.
And the Jew was healed, and there was no harm to his ear.
And another cyst was extracted from a Cretan man in which it was located in the groin, and it was an Arab cyst, and it was this one that had eardrums; then he inserted something into it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his groin; then he carefully removed it, and the Cretan man was healed.
And another surgeon extracted a sword from a man who had fallen on his belly, and he thought that he would die from it; and since it had passed thirty days and he was not moved for any reason of his condition, he inserted it into the wound and closed it over it, and he was healed, and no harm came to him from the accident.
And then another man fell with a sword in his back, and the wound was closed over him, and after seven years, the sword became stuck in the skin.
And then a woman fell with a sword in her belly, and the wound was closed over her, and she was not moved from her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in some of her natural functions.
And then another man fell with a sword in his face, and the wound was closed over him, and he did not suffer much pain from this, and similar symptoms to these.
And the sword was extracted from the man of the king's prince who had fallen in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the direct part, and the whole sword was hidden.
I was called to treat her within three days in the sick person's bed.
And then I again examined the patient's wound; and then I asked that person who was skilled in such matters, but I did not find them; rather, I felt the pain near the third rib, and then I suspected that the pain was from the patient's side.
And I applied a plaster in the place that has both constrictive and digestive virtues, confident that this place would help me to see the patient's side, so that I could remove it from there.
And I did not notice any significant accident in the place where the patient had reached; and I continued to apply the plaster on her for several days without any accident; and the wound healed gradually, and the patient remained out of bed for several days until one day she felt pain in her stomach and told me about it.
And then I applied an acute and corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it was ready; and I asked that person who was skilled in such matters, and I removed it from there, and again examined the patient's side, which adhered to the skin.
And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine until I can see the end of the spear, and pass through it for several times within four months.
And then approach and apply pressure to the wound as it becomes more inflamed, and insert the forceps into it, and remove them, and do not overlook any details, you will continue to subtly and ingeniously work on that with various instruments until one day you can hang it from those instruments like a hook, according to the shape of those at the end of the capital, until you extract it; and then restore the wound.
And according to doctors, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound becomes consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there is no harm in it in any case.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some spearheads for which you can understand and interpret that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narrative or interpretation of them.
And the skilled craftsman knows how to compare the few above the motive; and he knows what is present with what is absent; and he must acquire new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes in the art when they occur.
And thus it is said that wisdoms are not erased from the members in which they are fixed but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite of the other side.
And that which is erased by the place in which it is inserted, or wisdoms proceed in a fleshy place, and are attracted and erased.
And if it does not obey the command of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it and leave it for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and the attraction of it and its exit are alleviated.
And similarly if it is fixed in bones and does not obey your command, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and moisture on each day, and it will be erased.
If you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then it is customary for you to pierce the skin around the joint in that bone of each part until that place is widened by the saw, and then extract it.
If the wound has already been covered in the body's location, and is covered by sensation, then you should inquire about that area, and if you feel that area, then you should apply those remedies that are suitable for its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the crowding of the wound and its length, and there are no nerves or veins, then you should perform on the wound through which it can be amplified and from which the wound can be extracted.
And if you have those remedies that should be held, then you should remove the flesh in which it is attached from all parts and make an incision according to what you can do; and work on that, if you cannot on the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ribs and twisting of those through which it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the wound in any location where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make that obedience; and subtly work on the subtlety that the wound is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction and from that extraction.
And if you cannot do it in the same hour, then leave it for several days until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be joined, and then repeat the procedure when the patient is relieved. But if it causes counteraction of the blood flow, then administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
And guard your skill in the beginning of the vein or nerve or cord, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the poison; and do this for its facility, tranquility, delay, and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and according to your recommendation.
And therefore, make the poison counteract in such a way that the patient is in the figure according to which you should cast the cure of the poison in him, which is more beneficial. But if that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But if the poisons that are outside of the other part, or that have already affected some parts to the other parts, or cause softness in the extrusion of the poison due to the sensation of the part below the neck and sometimes eminently; then you should cut it off from there; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
If it is held in the bone, then slowly turn the blade against the second contradiction before the saw enters the bone, and enlarge it as you insert it, and then remove that.
Or, leave it for several days, and then reinsert it when it is possible.
And if the saw is in that, then slowly push that against it.
If it has fallen out and you want to administer impact, then insert it into that, if it is deaf, make a hollow in order for the concavity of it to fit into the blade of the saw and then push that against it.
If the saw is concave, then slowly push that against it, because the saw is attracted by it.
And if the saw is poisoned, then make sure that you hollow out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible for you to do so, and then treat that with what is appropriate.
And if the saw catches on the chest, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close to where you touch that with the tent, and it is possible for you to cut over that, then cut over that and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then remove that, and afterwards apply a plaster if necessary, and treat that before it becomes healthy.
Form of forceps used to grasp the teeth:
With their ends shaped like a beak that are made like a vice when placed on the tooth to prevent it from being loosened:
And of those there are special types, large, thin, and flexible, according to the size of the tooth and its thickness, and the width of the jaw, and its construction:
shaped like a ray in order to facilitate the instrument's insertion into that concave tooth and its impulse against it:
Of venapuncture.
The veins of venapuncture, which are usually punctured with their needles, the sixteen of which are two pulsatile veins located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in the two lacrimals of two cheeks that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegials that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called algelic —; and there are two veins that are left the tongue. When the veins that are located in the chest are cut, one of them is called cephalic, and it is also known as wild grape; the people call it "the cap vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of one branch from the basilica, and another from the cephalic; and they name that vein in the people "the vein of the whole body", and the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic thigh, and it is called "citillar", and they name that vein to the common people "the belly vein"; and the arm vein, and it is located above the fire, and it is the vein that is cut, and it is the vein that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the saphenous vein, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest inner ear, and it is located in the two grooves.
And in the leg and thigh there are three veins; one of them is located behind the curvature of the wild grape; the second is saphenous, and its location is behind the domestic thigh; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild grape thigh; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
The swelling of the veins that are close to the armpits is an ancient and persistent disease, causing ulcers on the head.
And the quality of the treatment I recommend to you is that the head of the patient should be shaved, and the head of the patient in the occipital region where the veins are ample with good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a band that appears on both sides and their locations are close to the armpits; and ask for that one, and if you feel the pain of those, here is the remedy.
Then take the lancet, and that one that is incisive, and then introduce it behind the vein in the hollow where the flewbotomus comes to the bone. And then raise your hand over the vein and the hollow, and cut the vein with an incision. And the length of the incision should be about two digits or around that; and make it as deep as you want.
And then apply strong herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
And already preceded at the beginning of the book, the initials of those and their cautery.
Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the improvement of phlebotomy is ancient and side evil and often obtained and courses of excessive fluids poured into the veins.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is the second that I recommend to you: strengthen the patient by inserting a needle where the two veins appear at the sensation for manifestation and demonstrate their polarity by your own hand; then you will know.
And then you will raise the cord above the vein at the parts according to your own hand, and introduce the phlebotomy incidence behind, and raise the vein up; and insert that as you have done in the other two veins; and make the blood flow according to the amount of your necessity.
And then remove the bandage from the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it over that cotton and herbs and leave them inside to be healed.
And if it is preceded by their remembrance, and of those who have begun, and the attraction at the beginning of the free.
And the judgment of flebotomy of the front vein is approaching the flebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient maladies of the face and to emigration and rogue and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of the flebotomy of it is that you have recommended to me; so it is that the patient strengthens their neck with a cloth in which appears the vein; and then take the instrument called the fossorium, of which this is the form of it:
And place the point eminent on that vein at the top of the fossorium above it and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity that you wish; and then remove the puncture from the patient and strengthen that within which is healed.
And some veins are opened by the flebotomy long, however not that the flebotomy is of acute extremity as with the other flebotomies, before the extremity, and flebotomy that one according to the transverse, because the bones are prop and very difficult to break in the vein when it is subtle.
When the inflammation of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes due to scabies in the eyes and inflammation in the eyes, and to facial diseases.
And the quality of the lancet is that the patient holds his neck firmly with a strap, and then you place the lancet there, and you stand over his head.
And if the lancet is made transversely along the length with a slight point, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, then the end of it is broken.
And then let blood flow from the vein until it is necessary for you, and place your hand over those wounds, and hold them with a bandage, and then remove those.
When the lancet from the nasal vein is compared to acute fever and violent sweating, and to facial diseases such as scabies and inflammation that occur on the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy in him is that the patient strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand, and takes the phlebotomy needle long and places it in the middle of the back of his second straight, because the vein does not appear here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover that you slowly move your hand with the phlebotomy needle little by little and make the blood flow according to your need; and then apply it to a bandage, because that is restored much better.
May the value of the phlebotomy of the four elements be constrained to the beginning and end of leprosy and other diseases, and to motas malautias and inpetige and bad ulcerative corrosive ones as well as herpetic.
And the quality of the phlebotomy in those is that the patient strongly bends each one in his neck with the bandage; and the artist is on the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a bed.
And then slowly widen the artery along its length with a small, pointed needle; and remove as much of the second substance or as much of the second substance that is necessary to be removed; and do the same with the other vein.
And then remove the membrane and strengthen both veins with a thin, narrow strip of material to prevent the patient from being frightened, and leave it inside until the wound is healed.
And the use of the needle in veins is similar to the treatment of small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around them.
And the quality of the needle lancing is that you do it yourself, and strengthen the collar of the patient with a band, and then rotate the lips of the patient and look at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that which is more is that in the circumference of those small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
If you have any doubt about which of those is the correct one, then you should examine the most prominent and clear of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the upper lips.
It is customary to apply the lancet of the cephalic vein to the locations that are in the gum, to the patient's tongue, and to other parts of the mouth.
The quality of performing this procedure is that you should follow the patient's instructions between your thumbs, and lift their tongue, and observe from behind the tongue, on one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then perform the lancet on each one; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, because they are arteries.
And the veins that are punctured in the belly, which is where they run through all men, and the puncture of them is made in two ways, either by pricking with a lancet or olive oil to a subtle declination; or by cutting with a scalpel, and applying pressure, and this is the form of it:
its length is as follows, and it is suitable for opening convex veins full of thick blood, and those that contain thick blood clots.
And this lancet is of smaller length and more subtle tip, and it is suitable for puncture of thin veins that contain thin yellow bile.
The main vein of the basilica vein is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the abdomen and the chest, and from that which goes to the chest and the belly.
And summon the phlebotomist, when phlebotomy is done there, who will guard that place and be above-tense in that place, where there is an artery, and if it err and adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy, incise that artery and cause blood flow from the sanctum, so that no one phlebotomizes that place without phlebotomy being done there, before slicing with a lancet.
And if the basilica does not appear by manifestation, then you should leave that place and move to another, or surround some of its branches; or phlebotomize in the place of the end of the arm, where that is manifest, and slice it with a lancet as we have said.
But if you want the phlebotomy of the upper arm, then you should first feel the structure of the arm that you touch the place before knowing the location of the elbows, and then press on the arm; and then bend the arm and slice the vein with a concave section with a lancet as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion does not cause damage to any part of the location of the artery.
And when you see, as you stretch the ligament, inflation in the place where you have well-placed your hand, then that inflation is an inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
And if you see the blood flowing in the femoral artery as thin as the golden hair of an infant, and the blood is very fine, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then cover and press your hand on that for a long time; and after removing your hand, if the blood is abscinded, then move your arm away from that.
And guard the patient from the bedclothes of their bed, and be overly cautious with them and do not move that for several days until they are healed.
But if the blood is not abscinded, and you see that you must not present medicine to that, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is contracted, and the blood is abscinded; or take a pincer, and do that, and take one hand and stretch that over the place of the vein with stricture descending to the ligament and to the bones through the other side.
And if the wound is amputated, it is well; and if not, then cure that part of the body where the amputation was planned according to the previous remembrance of the location of the powders for amputation.
The amputation of the wound from that part is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
When the dark vein is used for flebotomy, it is very useful to extract the wound from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And the flebotomist should be careful about the flebotomy of that part, because it is near a nerve; and therefore, if he adjusts the needle of the flebotomy and punctures the nerve, it will cause great pain, and it is difficult to heal that part, and often it does not heal completely. And this nerve appears subtle to some people and is not shown, so the flebotomist should be careful when performing flebotomy on that part and avoid the nerve with his strength.
If the vein is between two nerves, then you should cut the vein along its length.
The advantage of venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and relieves the symptoms of headaches.
And if you want the venipuncture to be done properly, then have it done by a skilled phlebotomist or a skilled acupuncturist; because it is the safest of all veins, as it does not involve the artery or nerves.
However, in some men, it is often found that an abscess forms when it is not punctured in the first percussion test, and they do not notice it until later.
The first one is of the type of phlebotomy that is administered only for the preservation of health and for hope of the patient and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that phlebotomy should be done from one of the veins that are in the body, such as cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that phlebotomy should be done at the beginning of primevespera, after breakfast in primevespera and autumn, and in winter at dinner, when signs of repletion appear.
And phlebotomy should be done and the third day or on the first day after three hours have passed since morning.
Phlebotomy that is administered, more when it is necessary and convenient to that, or of blood or of day, at all hours and at all times.
And the type of person who should not be phlebotomized until they are fourteen years old, and women who should not be phlebotomized except from the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be phlebotomized.
And if someone wants to perform phlebotomy for any reason, let them first examine their veins with a lion's claw, and hold the opening in place, so that the excess blood does not flow into the phlebotomy of the veins, which are pure, and do not prolong the main members.
And do not perform phlebotomy on those who are suffering from nausea and drunkenness, nor should they be evacuated from illness or drunkenness until that has passed, nor should it be performed on those with hydrate, and more that phlebotomy should be feared in colic passion and vomit, and in stomach, and in multiplication of cost and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and in all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether it is corporeal or animal.
And consider in the subtilization of humors whether the body is heavy, with food and drink, and with medicines if that is possible for that.
And if appropriate and no cause prevents, or it is exercised by some exercise to prevent the joint from becoming stiff.
And pause the phlebotomy of it on the chest during the day, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
And pierce that chest of that person is guarded on that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as we have said, such as labor and excessive pain, and joy and similar things to them.
And to their seat make sure the causes are present in the use of which customarily men have for aromaticity and odor, and baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is put out or that of that person who should be phlebotomized.
And if appropriate, extract the arm, and wipe that with the hand of the phlebotomist three or four times; and then tighten the bandage and wrap those three or four times.
And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
And if the stricture is too cold, when it is not equal, or the stricture is superfluous, then prohibit the flow of the bile; or it is softening, and then prohibit the body from moving completely.
And therefore, for that reason, the fleubotomist should be stopped and kept in mind in all these causes.
And then remove the fleshbottle, but if the vein is punctured in a wound, then it bleeds; and if not, you repeat that process again in another place near that location, or over the wound if it is not inflamed.
And if the location is inflamed or the patient becomes frightened, then leave it for a day or two, and do not strain the wound, because it would cause more inflammation or not heal properly.
And then repeat the fleshbottle process if necessary.
And if the puncture is small and the wound is healing slowly, and you fear that it may not heal enough, then repeat the fleshbottle process in that location with proper alignment and adjust the puncture by a little, and make that wound inflamed until the location is inflamed, because the location becomes inflamed in some people due to too much puncturing.
But if you see that it has already become inflamed, then do not repeat over it, because it would not help and would cause more harm; and place some cloth on that wound, because it would help the healing process. And it is better in this place that oil and other oils be used.
Similarly, a wound of oil is administered in all flebotomy through which the veins are pierced, and they do this by using a Triagical and Sagazene needle when it is placed on one of those over the area, so that the blood is subtilized and rotated when it is thick.
And if in the location of flebotomy a large abscess is generated, which occurs due to bad weather conditions, and more so in that which has not been drawn blood but only the bad weather, or in the puncture of the vein, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt on the spot, a little heated, and strengthen it with it for an hour, so that it is dissolved.
And make sure to do this near the yield of that blood from that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in the location for several days, do not do this; and if you want, place on it some cause of willow and of mint dissolved, or some cause of suc de mentastre or of calament or a similar cause of that.
When wounds become infected and form abscesses or swellings, they should be lanced with a lancet from the basilica.
And then place your hand over that area, and if you feel softness there, then apply compression to that area, otherwise that swelling is bad and harmful; and therefore guard yourself from placing your hand on that area for any reason that we have mentioned, which could cause bleeding from the aorta.
And apply a styptic to that area to make it resistant, and then care for that wound with the other treatment until it is healed.
And cover the wound with a bandage that extends from the aorta to all of man according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color that remains on the aorta after it appears.
And if the aorta is black, then leave it inside until it turns red; and similarly, if you see it thick, then leave it inside until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, then wait until its sharpness is softened.
And when the person is tall and strong and has a need for extraction of pus from a boil, which should be enlarged by incision of the vein and the flebotomist should be on the left.
And in the case of a thin person, do the opposite of that, and have them extract it in small incisions, and make sure the wound is straight.
And the best thing to administer in vein incision is that it be a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of flebotomy saves from flow of pus and from injury of nerves, and is more laudable and safer than second-hand flebotomy by length and width.
And when syncope occurs during flebotomy, and have them take that during the flebotomy a small amount of warm infusion of millet or simple oxide; and extract it from the vein in three or four incisions.
And if the complexity increases, then take during the flebotomy a warm infusion of wormwood or wormwood infusion with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or aromatic wormwood infusion with an additional odorant.
If the tongue is swollen and causes difficulty in speaking, and its cause is a lack of moisture, then take some flesh water and add an essence of subtle odor; use aromatic oil, and rub it on the affected area.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of this chapter for evacuation.
To do this, you should apply the other methods that we have mentioned in the second chapter for the purpose of dissolving the swelling and removing the second layer of the tongue, which is caused by a lack of moisture, as its effect is to gradually remove the swelling, according to the amount of its effect in the continuous days.
If you want to apply this method and remove the second layer of the tongue, and if your body is strong, then do this seven hours or nine in the morning after the first tongue extraction.
If you want to move the swelling of the body in the opposite direction of the part that is affected, then it should be done on the second or third day.
When that body in which the pus is deep and sharp and causes fever, it should be drained in a vessel and a large amount of it should be drained and the opening should be amplified to prevent syncope, so that you have preserved all the conditions of abscess drainage; and that your hand should be placed on the thighs of the patient, to prevent them from dying of syncope, because undrained abscesses cause that when the abscess drainer is ignorant and negligent.
And do not do when you want to lower your arm and evacuate the second vessel, since the orifices of the vein have already been closed and it is difficult to remove the pus, because you press against that vehemence and bend it unnaturally, for that is very bad.
Having the layssa inside when performing second drainage; or do not do that because the pus is coagulated in the orifices of the vein; or place on that tyriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and press that against compression lightly until the pus is out and gone.
If the vein is inflamed, leave it alone until the abscess has subsided.
If it is necessary to remove the pus again, and there is no excuse, then you should sign it in that place or in another vein on the other arm.
The vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in the place of the femoral or popliteal veins, when they are not found or are hidden, which are composed of those.
The quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should place their hand in warm water until the vein swells and appears clearly.
Then strengthen it over that part with a narrow bandage; and perform phlebotomy transversely, not lengthwise or diagonally.
And make the incision wide and perform your phlebotomy on that part where you performed phlebotomy on the joint of the hand.
If it is forbidden to let the pus flow, then you should place your hand in warm water and let the pus run into the water until you achieve your purpose.
If you were in the days of summer, then you would be excused from the examination of the mouth in cold water, and the same is true for the body in cold water during winter.
The puncture of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it does not have a pulsating artery or nerves.
The puncture of the sole of the foot is comparable to the diseases of the leg.
The quality of this puncture is that you strengthen the patient's leg or your own, rather than placing it in cold water, until the vein is inflamed and demonstrated at once; then perform a transverse puncture; and if you do not notice anything in return.
And remember that you do not leave the patient with the puncture, because it has the nerves of those exposed parts of flesh.
And repeat the patient in cold water and let the blood flow into that, because if you do not do so in cold water, the blood will clot in the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the bone is extracted according to the amount of necessity, then pause over the vein or salt and oil, so that it is not solidly consolidated; similarly cover what you do in every straight way.
The signs of the abdominal massage of that of the left breast are that they are compared to the illnesses of the womb.
And do the same in the abdominal massage of it as you did in the other one.
The sign of the vein in the abdominal massage is that it is compared to the illnesses that are in the part behind the chest, such as its illness of the main, and retention of menstruation, and illnesses of rashes and ulcers of thighs and legs, and their similarities to the illnesses.
And the quality of the abdominal massage of it is that the patient enters their own hand in cold water and does over that friction until the veins appear; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein takes apparent from the said point, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot like ramps.
And then, if possible, remove the widest vein or from under the cushion, place it on the foot, near the wound, which is best and most healing.
And if you remove the vein from the surface of the foot, then be careful not to touch the nerves that are under that on the surface of the foot, and pause your vein incision as if you wanted to insert it through.
And make it your own vein incision.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should immerse the foot in warm water and let the pus run out through that opening which is to be drained.
And if the vein cutter makes a mistake in the first attempt, then repeat the vein incision on another spot, which is healing; and do not fear of causing harm, as long as you guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same for the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the spot as we have said is near the cavity of the wild animal's tail.
The pain in the joint of the leg when it is injured by a pointed instrument.
The quality of the joint injury is that the patient enters into a state of shock, and quickly and strongly presses the cushion of the leg from the side of the thigh up to the calf, forming a long, thin band, which does not appear otherwise.
Therefore, when it appears, you should apply the bandage in a diagonal pattern across each finger, and this is better; or incise it at the beginning or remove it by sectioning, because the area of the leg is sore.
This is especially true for men who are not accustomed to it; and if you apply it too much, and it does not appear at all, then bandage some part of the leg, and this is the one that appears on the back of the foot and around the ankle.
Be careful of the nerves, and apply the injury to the amount you wish.
Then remove the bandage and place your hand over the area of the bandage, pressing strongly on the injured area, as it is usually healed.
From the symptoms and the quality of using those.
Ventozas are from corn, or from earth, or from vein.
Ventozas are made in two ways: one of them is the incision and extraction of blood, and the other is ventozas are incisions.
This incision that is made by incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the incisions that are made by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where incisions are placed in the arm, and the last part is the back of the head; and the middle part is two parts of the neck; and incisions under the jaw, behind the mouth; and incisions of two spoons; and incisions of an auhoster, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and incisions of two forks, and they are from two bones; and incisions of two cavities; and incisions of two cushions.
When the pus is not extracted from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason the virtue is not obtained for those, as it is usually done by phlebotomy; nor does it cause any harm if the pus is not extracted by fire or by some bad condition caused by inflammation inside the body before all the body is evacuated.
If it is necessary to cause pus by illness or continuously, administer it throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the hour and at some time.
And therefore when it happens in some of those cases, and particularly if it is in the third or fourth toe, then we command that a blister be made after two or three hours have passed since the day.
And the reason for the blister on the nape is that when it corresponds to gravity in the head and at that point where it is poured into the veins, but rather that this be close to the evacuation of all the body.
And this blister is in the location of the lumbar puncture of the cephalic.
And it is not good to use that which is of fragile complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason we do not recommend using those of the old ones, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
But for that reason we recommend that the one who performs it be constantly present on it; and for that reason we advise you to command the blister maker that he place his hand a little away from the blister, so as to prevent the generation of oblivio.
May the ventilation of alcohol be in place of fleubotomy of the femoral vein and vena cava: and for that, compare it with asthma, and with the constriction of the lungs and the wound of the stent of the lungs, and with cough, and with the inflation.
And cover that the ventilation of alcohol be in a small amount, because if it is paused behind, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the ventilation of alhagdahan compares to the accidental pains in the head and to obtalmia, and emigration, and pre-cavity, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of fleubotomy of the vena cava.
And cover that commands the ventilator that he does not press his hand during scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause accidental bleeding.
And ventilation behind the mouth compares to alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those that are in the mouth, and it is in place of fleubotomy of the hemlock that is in the upper lips.
When a bandage is applied to the two splints, it is used for retention of heat.
And the bandage of the two splints is used to apply pressure to the femoral vein, which is located in the thigh, and to the popliteal vein, and to the great saphenous vein, which are all superficial veins that are close to the skin, and to the small veins that are among the larger veins that reach the three veins.
And command the bandager not to proceed with incision, as the area is exposed to flesh, and then leave the nerves and arteries there.
And there is a bandage that is applied to the buttocks and used for the hemorrhoids of the anus and for the ulcers that are left.
And tell the bandager to use a large bandage, and that it is made of wool, as the area requires strong compression; and also remove the thin bandages that are under the incision.
When the bedclothes are removed from under the patient's back, they pull the spine of the entire body, and alleviate old pains of the ribs and stomach, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and alleviate constipation and diarrhea; and take the place of a fleam for bleeding two veins, and also for cupping, and of two leeches.
However, it weakens the entire body and causes convulsions in men.
And from the bedclothes cupping is applied to the same place as the bedclothes of two cushions.
The quality of the position of the bedclothes is that they are placed at the beginning of the view and are warmed by heat, and do not prolong the position of the bedclothes, but pause them a little, and remain them constantly, and that the humors come to the place for the occurrence equally. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and repeatedly incise the skin in small portions, and then consider the position of the body.
Because that man who is of thin flesh and prone to ulcers, you should shave and apply a plaster, but not cover the wound completely, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the blower to fan the incision and apply a small amount, and simultaneously facilitate the skin.
And if the skin is thickened, then shave twice, because in the first incision, the path of subtilization to the skin and its moisture is found. And in the second incision, the process of extraction of thick skin is obtained.
And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough incision in the third incision to obtain its rear.
And finally, when we want to extract the skin in small portions or a small amount, provide us with an incision.
And if we want to extract a large amount of skin, make a large incision; and if we know that the skin is thick, then shave it with a prior incision.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only to the extent of the knife.
And if the one from whom the wound is thick, hard, black, and its pores are straight, then apply oils that make the locations of the bowels more lenient, open, and resolved; if it is in the summer, use olive oil of aloe or olive oil of violat, or olive oil of amelliorated donkey, or olive oil of cement of goat; and if it is in the winter, then use oils such as narcissus, lily, camomilla, or sandalwood.
And if the excess is thick, rough, then apply the oil of amber, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anethi, and similar oils.
But if the intestine is of large pores of tender flesh, then it is prohibited to use oil, and instead apply water that has been boiled or boiled with salt, or water of goat, or water of borax, and similar waters.
And for those who have much moisture in their joints, wash their feet with warm water or a mixture of vinegar, salt, and similar substances.
And for those who have thick excess, wash their feet with warm water or a mixture of sage, mint, or camomile and similar substances.
And the foot should be kept dry afterwards; having taken care that it is administered close to the fire for an hour or two, and that it sleeps close to the foot.
What should be done before washing the feet is that they are leeched or bled.
If the person who is to be leeched or bled is feverish and has inflammation in the joints, then take cooling causes such as vinegar, salt, warm water, laytugus, secanabin, and julep, and similar substances.
And place them on their food such as bread, meat of partridges, and cooked vegetables seasoned with warm water, and similar substances.
And of that one whose complexion is freckled, he takes in the morning essence of almonds, or essence of saffron, and sumac, and some fragrant meat between old and new; and it is recommended that he use little milk and food, and pause the meals of him, fish, canary, pigeons, small birds, and doves.
And it is recommended that on the day of windy and rainy weather, the milk should be greater than the meal.
And it is recommended that some milk be given to some men in the morning with Tyrian alpharac, or with medicaments of musk, ground musk, or alcelita against windy weather or rainy weather, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick is subtilized; and it is not recommended that they take that scalfatz.
The incisions that are made with their scarification should be incisions that are paused over the fetus, and above the womb and gout, and above the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the pedicle of the wide one, because these members do not suffer incision over them.
It is not sought for those but rather attraction of blood from the member, such as with a ventous pad over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the member of the nose; and use of that to dissolve the ventosity freely around the member, such as with a pad on the belly and umbilic; for that rarefies the member and removes it and relieves the pain that resolves the ventosity.
And it is placed on the bones when they are injured or broken, for by the power of attraction strong blood heals the injury and eradicates the pain from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed on the leg and the ankle, it removes the ventosity in those who are swollen.
And these ventosities are administered by views with success only; and some are administered by heat.
And some are administered full of cold water in the illnesses of the ankle.
And that is why the ventosity is full and large, so it is cold water alone or water in which herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
The method of administering a ventricle of two fingers: the width of the orifice should be twice the size we have formed; and the quantity of the potion should be the thickness of one palm; and it should be on the left side of the body, in the location where it is in the circuit, the largest part of the body, the trauma should be small according to the quantity that enters into it like a needle.
It should be made of lamb's wool or citrus, with large margins, lion, equal and tense so that it does not leave the member in its position over it.
And it should be at the midpoint of the vertebral column or iron, where the candle is placed to hold the fire.
And this ventricle should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the potion should be less than that according to the diseases and the state of the one who uses it.
And the ventricle of children and the old should be different from the ventricle of young people and large bodies.
And the quality of applying this ventricle with fire over the member is that it extends the muscle with fire decently by placing a small candle of wax, and place it on the midpoint of the vertebral column in the middle of the ventricle, so that the fire is ignited around the part that is not burned the body of the patient.
And place your hand on the patient's body, and the other on the area we have mentioned, until when they are holding their breath and do not need to open the mouth and let the steam over that area, then the breath will be dissolved soon.
And apply the second medicine according to your method, and repeat that if necessary for that area.
In the breathing medicine that is administered in the patient's disease of plague, which does not have any transverse or longitudinal lines, and is not administered except that it be filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
And this is the form of it: And this breathing, the more it is large, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in any member except in the members in which it is impossible to position ventosas, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a naked member of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsucking insects that are in the dirty waters of polluted rivers.
And then, after letting them drink water from the dirty waters where they were famished, and there was no cause in their belly of those; and then, let the body be emptied at the beginning with a flebotomy and ventozas; and then, apply the patient's member under which it becomes red; and then, place them on it.
And when they are full and case.
And if it is possible to apply the place with a ventosa, it is better in the future.
And if not, then wash the place with warm water and apply cold water; and then, apply and express it.
And if the body of the sick is prolonged, then let them lie in the bed of bloodsucking insects, and that water is residue, then you put a cloth of freezing water into it, and place that above where the residue is hidden.
And if the swelling is multiplied, then powder it with three-grained vitriol, or with similar substances like stiptics, until the swelling is lanced; or place the most dried beans on the affected area, and leave them until the beans stick to the area, and then lance the swelling.
And if necessary, perform bloodletting repeatedly, when possible, changing those veins.
And if bloodletting is prohibited from the affected area, then apply pressure to the swollen area with a recent wound or insert a needle into the area until the swelling subsides; and then place them, so that those areas that are still slightly swollen are immediately bandaged.
And when you want to remove them, powder the affected areas with a small amount of three-grained aloe, salt, or ashes, and then quickly remove them.
Here begins the prolegomena of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
Oh, child, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and common people, as well as those who at some time will not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the sciences on our earth is hidden; and I have not done so at some time, but rather because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And then direct oneself to experiment and study throughout the length of one's life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns the greatest science and on which I have made my best experiment; therefore, I open it to you others and deliver it from this occupation of length; and I open it at the end of opening; and I show it at the end of declaration; and I form it into several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections on the breaking of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin the memory of broken and different limbs of each one. Let us then say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters according to the understanding of which in the beginning it is possible for craftsmen and a station upon the truth of those; so is you and those who know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when something happens to any fracture or dislocation or torsion or cast, it is necessary to begin with the lancet or cutting of that, or whichever, if no cause prevents, as is due to weakening of virtue, or that which happened, or is old in decrepitat, or is time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating such foods of fresh herbs and of the flesh of young birds and of crabs; and prohibit coarse meats and filling with foods and all food that fills the veins of sanc, before you are sure of apostema caut, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first usual state.
And when the bone begins to be restored, then feed the patient with nutritious foods that are heavy and heavy in nature, such as their food made of wheat flour, water, rice, peas, and meat of cows, and hooves, and fresh pee, and large and similar ones, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more lightly and milk.
And you know that when the bones are broken in men who are in their first youth and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their members.
However, nature adjusts and annects to the broken bone from all parts of a similar cause in which it is swollen and strengthened that enters and consolidates and binds together, until venom comes from strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent that of its works.
For this reason, it is necessary to place the patient's legs in a position where they have heaviness, viscosity, and heaviness, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fracture vary according to the type of limb, for example, a fracture of the rib is different from a fracture of the skull; and similarly, a fracture of the rib is different from a fracture of the arm; and likewise, all other limbs are different from each other.
And I will recall the memory of each type of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
There is great variety of fracture in the body itself. The types of bone fractures are diverse in their own ways; for example, some are caused by bending, others by the length of the bone: and some fractures are due to the shoulder blade, ribs, and adductors, and others are not, as is the case when preparing to write, and the fracture is in the back and disruption in the skull, and the small fissure.
And in all cases, a particular torture is used for the recovery of the second after it has been remembered in its different locations.
Great swelling of bone fracture. And for that, it is known as bone fracture: the swelling of it, and the presence of a prominent eminence and sensitivity at the touch, and its location when you place your hand on it.
And therefore, when there is no swelling in the location or no sensitivity, it is not necessary to touch the bone with your fingers when you touch the patient's movement and they do not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
However, it is possible that there may be swelling or small fissures, without you being able to feel them with your hand and compression of all; however, place something over it of the medicines of which you remember at that moment, which is appropriate for the location; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
And you will know that the location when it is curved and not divided into two or another, as it remains the entire part of the comparison, then place something over it from your hour to the rectification of it, which happens after postema caution.
If an abscess occurs at that location, leave it open for several days until the abscess ceases; then apply a poultice of equal parts of linseed and egg yolk that you can make with levitation and engine.
You should know that the healing of the abscess and its puncture are more dangerous than the bone in which the suppuration occurred.
Then apply strength to the second one when it comes to remembering it.
But if the bone is affected, it is necessary to extend this member by cutting it from two parts, whether the thigh or the foot; or if your hand is small, use two cords or a cord and your hand.
And place your hand at the position where you place it while the member is being extended, and puncture those additions with an engine and according to each method that you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not occur on the patient due to your operation or the injury; and puncture yourself according to your power that you apply the bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
And if you touch your hand at that time appropriately and see any other cause here, correct it and equalize it by the amount of your skill.
And if you excessively extend and compress it, as foolish doctors often do, it can cause the formation of an abscess by their operation, or it can cause contraction in the member, as we have seen in their foolish operations.
And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on which one I recommend; because you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and form according to the type.
And for those that are small like the arm and the elbow and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with a very fine cloth.
But for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, it is customary to cover them with a soft and durable cloth, because the flexibility of the fabric connects the large limb strongly and evenly to the fracture in all parts without any macula.
And then, after that, your evacuation of the wound, place a suitable bandage over that fracture, with three or four layers as soon as the limb becomes clean; and strengthen your hand on the bandage.
And then go to the most distant part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it as much as possible so that your bandage does not slip from the location of the fracture. And then, using a bandage, approach the area around the fracture and gradually soften the structure until you feel a large piece break off.
And then, using another bandage, wrap it around the other side of the injury over the first bandage, and gradually approach the bandages to the part beyond the fracture; and your operation should be on the structure of the bandage and the softening of the second one that we mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place a cushion or cloth between the bandages that is equal to the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is tortuosity in it; and if not, do not place anything on it for any reason.
And then place a cushion on the other bandage, and gradually place these pointed bandages decently soon, if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area; and then place the cushion over that which secretes the abscess and which has the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and then strengthen on those points.
And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of steel; or of palm branches; and let the width of each needle be according to this form and figure:
However, the star that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the needle should be according to the size and proportions of the member; and strengthen the other end with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the thread below as we have said of the structure, and it is that your structure should be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the structure.
And that the threads should be thick and thin, and made of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of pulling out the hair of folded threads of cord of silk, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
And using very thin needles is not convenient, because you will not be able to sew those things that you want, and you do not want there to be any space between them.
And if the patient is sewn at the extremities of the ribs near the incision, then place a cloth or carmenada wool over that area so that it does not cause harm to them.
Some fractures are caused by trauma, and some are due to disruption in the chain, and you will find memory in that one in the second chapter of singularity.
And you should know that not all broken bones are sewn up on the first day; the reason for this is that the bone, when it is large, does not want to be placed over the ribs sooner than five days or seven or more, according to your security of the occurrence of an abscess.
And this is the method of the plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and torsions.
Translation: A plaster made like a cast for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, where it is not recommended to have heat or moisture: take powder from ground flour, and it is the medulla of the farina that should be mixed with the movement of the mold in the walls of the mold.
Translation: And if it is like that, but you crimp this alum of wool, and place the comfort of the non-sharp or subtle; and then use that.
Translation: Another plaster for the restoration of fractures and dislocations and torsion: recipe of asafetida, of lotus, of acacia, of enula, and migrach, which is made from a thousand grains of salt, of all ana drac. x; of myrrh and aloe ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and cribbled and mixed with water or wool if the complexity of the patient is scalded; and then use this plaster, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers to many men.
Another method of applying a splint that is suitable for fractures and twists: Take equal parts of marshmallow root, mallows root, acacia root, and Armenian bole, in the ratio of 6:3:1:20.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contrition, and their sieves, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Method of applying a splint to joints and separated bones from those places, and for painful accidents in those areas and fissures and fractures: Take some cotton and soak it in a mixture of equal parts of vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
This ointment does not have the virtue of healing, but it is useful for preventing abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Another method of applying a splint that heals broken bones: Take some willow leaves and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make an ointment from them.
Method of applying a poultice administered for the healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the recent inflammation of an abscess: Take some marshmallow root, camomile, and violet flowers, flour of eggs, all ground together and mixed with water, if the member is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then apply that wet cloth of cold or warm water and use it from it.
Another method of plaster that is stronger in resolution than this first one, when dealing with a long-lasting abscess: take the roots of althea and semens of lily, balm, melissa, majorana, flowers of violet, camomile, all parts equal; all should be ground and mixed with soft water or warm water or honey, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
May Ypocras not be dissolved in its own free state that it be placed on the limb that is injured, but a cerate made of wax and oil should be used; and recommend that it be applied between coarseness and subtlety.
May Gualia be seen that it is placed on the limb that is injured and for the causes in which exsiccation is used to reduce heat, such as ice, ice packs, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Remedy for applying to injury and pain: take equal parts of ground human bones or animal skull, salt, and honey; grind them with a mortar and pestle, and make an ointment.
If the amount depends on the type of wound that was injured and how it should be dressed, consider whether it does not cause pain or swelling, and if the bones are not broken, do not leave it undressed for several days. If the wound causes severe pain, swelling, or inflammation, then change it in that hour, and apply the ointment to the wound.
Take a cloth and sea sponge lion, wet it with cold water, and soak the wound in that water until the swelling and pain subside; then rest the limb for an hour; then place a warm, oily, or rose-scented cloth over the wound, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided, and the pain of the wound has been relieved.
And then gently apply that thin structure and apply a small plaster, but do not strain it too much by your initial constraint, and gradually heal that which is inside.
And if you see that the abscess and swelling and pain and inflammation and all other symptoms have already subsided from everything, and if you need plaster and constraint, then apply it equally as you did at the beginning.
And if no harm has occurred to the member of those that we have mentioned, then do not remove it, but wait three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you have appeared by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constraint more than in your initial constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to what preceded the recall of it.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more tired than usual, then know that the nourishment cannot reach that place; therefore, rub that area with a thin, warm, oily substance throughout the day, and do this for three days; and after this operation, the nourishment will reach the member, and it will be healed.
If that which the foolish restorers of the fractured limb do not restore to its original state when it is not healed, according to their method, and if they restore it according to its tortuosity, it is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were done correctly, it would enlarge the ancient ones in their freedoms and aggravate that which they have done.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion goes through the entire bone, which is then the bone, just as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the entrance to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of fracture that is contraction or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion by a sharp object or impact on stone, and similarly.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is on the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture is that it occurs in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called capillary.
And this fracture is made by impact or percussion of stone, and similarly, which causes some fragment of the bone to break into pieces, and it is made in the concave place as happens to the ribs when they are struck and broken into pieces, and their fragments enter into the parts inside.
And this is more commonly made in the bodies of human beings, such as their ribs.
And all these special fractures are marked by pain that is similar to that of stab wounds. And you should examine everything in its place.
And you should recognize all these special fractures by detection of those and by investigation of their causes and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the wound, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the patient's symptoms at the beginning, and if you see by the symptoms that manifest themselves clearly on account of the pain, such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of wounds, fever, and sweating of those, and similar to those of the symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not cured.
And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to the pain, then you hope for healing, and then you begin the treatment of it.
When this cause occurs, if it comes to your hand in the beginning as it is placed and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the fourteenth day, completely prepared.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study in the position of the bone giving on the seventh day, having that which is left after the bone is corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents have occurred.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and atrophied, then you should study in the position of the cut and atrophied part, according to what I will recommend to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient placed on the bone, and discover according to custom and your possible skill according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cauterized, then you should stop at the patient and that which is left, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and oiled, and make a second dressing of the wound before the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flowing pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
The first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor tool, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor tool, slightly wider than the first one; and this is the form of it:
And then administer the wider incisor tool.
And you should have various incisor tools, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are at the end of their sharpness, and they are made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor to avoid damaging the head and causing that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should drill around it to allow you to use incisor tools called non-deepening taravals.
And these are not called anything else but that they do not penetrate the end of the bone at that point, so that the taravel has a rounded tip or margin on that which is left of the cap similar to the edge or a small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
It is advisable to take many of these needles that are suitable for each bone, as long and as short as the length and breadth of the corresponding needle.
This is the form of three types of needles: The quality of perforating around the bone broken is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it against the skin until you know that the bone has penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where there is a quantity of flesh or around that area.
And then insert the fine scissors that are between each fracture of the bone, and do as much as possible on that area, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the purpose of removing the fragments that have appeared at that area, as with fine forceps.
And be careful not to touch any cause of the sinus with the scissors.
And so, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extracted, cut it like a scalpel, similar to an incisor, but rather more sharp and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if there is any small piece of bone remaining, take that tool that you should have from the instruments; and apply it to the wound to remove the remaining pieces.
And the other method of operation is long and difficult, which was said by Guy de Chauliac and Laurence; and this is the saying about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed the end of this slow and light scalpel, which is its form.
And the lens-shaped part is sharp and does not incise any cause, and the sharp part is in two parts in front in length, as often; that the lens-shaped part should be adjusted to the bone by the face of the sharp part incising into the bone.
Approach with a small, sharp knife and make an incision in the skin, and you should be careful not to cut any vessels that could cause an accident during the procedure, and if the physician was the most skilled of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
And if there is any cause for annexation to the vessels of the skin in those places where the incision is made, make an incision at the end of the knife in that circular shape, and release that from the vessel, which is released from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and that which is cut or remains on the bone is the surface of the bone, and it is rough and subtle, then cover that roughness and remove those subtleties with razor blades prepared for that purpose, in various quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently as possible, and the most suitable one in that place where you lost your operation that bone broken and the figure of the bone.
And when you administer the first dose of medicine in your ratio, which you use to thin the bones at the beginning, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle part of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and subtle fracture, administer treatment according to what you have lost for its rectification.
And it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the skin is torn when you remove the bone, then you should take cloth of the second quantity of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in vinegar and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this as gently as possible without causing pain; and then administer a thin layer of latex, and do not press it except for the quantity that the wound has, only to keep it in place.
And leave that one to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess caut; and then remove it and then administer medicines that are excessively dry, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of ashes and aristolochia, and similar things to those.
And you should make these medicines into powder that is ground over the wound, such as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which is that it removes and does not bite.
And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not net; and it is not in the deafness of tongue or other; nor does it allow to aggravate in it; because when it is adjusted over the membrane of the brain, corrode that and poreys that, and happen upon the patient that malicious evil.
And happen upon the top of the head, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is deeply treated with that, and it becomes black on the surface of it; and therefore consider now if it happens to the patient those accidents that we have said, know that it is dangerous for all.
If there is no other illness except for the one that is placed above, and it is due to the effectiveness of that medicine that cures that illness, then cover that part with a piece of honey and four pieces of roasted garlic, and place a cloth over it; and then place it on the affected area and apply the appropriate treatment for healing until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces equally, but rather one of those parts is more rounded, or some of those parts have bones, while the other part is cartilaginous and does not break, only its shape, twist, and width change.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then cover it with a small piece of the same nose, and align that fracture with the other side, until it returns to its natural shape. And this should be done by you for your own convenience, and beware that you do not cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit to see through it, then cover it with a small patch.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And if you can restore the patient on the first day after the fracture, do so; otherwise, then bring the seventh or tenth day to pause the dressing of the abscess.
And if the fracture is in one part, then insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, or if it is in two parts, then place two pieces of cotton, and make sure they fill up the entire opening of the nose.
And tell the ancient healers that the cotton should be wrapped in a border, and moved around all day, but not seen by me; having covered the piece with alum mixed with powdered molasses, and then leave it until the bone is stopped and the cartilage is strengthened.
And some bandages should be inserted into the nose, in place of a gag, unless it is wrapped in a cloth from the lion; and if you have already broken the fracture of the nose, more violently than the patient is prohibited from inspiring.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you want, do that, and if you want, make gags.
And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply the nose with a cerate or a poultice made of bread and honey, or with diachylon.
However, if no abscess is caused, then cover that deformed part with flour of sizami and powder of chalk mixed with egg white; and place a cloth from the lion on it, and do not let the nose touch anything.
However, if the bones of the nose are fractured or crushed, then cover those with it, and extract those with instruments that are appropriate for them; and place this laceration, and heal that with what encases and consolidates, and with ointments that are suitable for it.
If there is a bleeding nose, then apply pressure to stop it and insert a tube into the nostril to prevent further blood loss.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jawbone is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look to see if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely broken into two pieces, but curved to the parts inside, then it is likely that it will heal on its own.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the left side into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right side of the jaw, then introduce your finger from the right side into the patient's mouth; and push against that softness of the fracture to facilitate the deformed parts, with your other hand on the opposite side of the bone; and hold it in place.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line as much as possible to realign it.
And if there is a disruption of teeth to the point of breaking, then use those materials that you hope will remain intact, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them over the broken jaw, and place them over the doubled-up cloth, and place a large, properly made pad, or a single weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hang it above the second that you have prepared for the application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be at ease, and place a lion's tongue decoction on their wounds.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then wait and remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that mixed with powder of moli, album of egg, or flour of chickpeas, so that you have already removed the cement from it, and place a lion's skin over the application.
And then, with this annex and adjusted, apply the ointment to it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three weeks.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess, then administer the same remedies we have mentioned for fever during the patient's recovery, and that abscess will also heal.
And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the bone has been separated or not, then carefully apply the appropriate remedy for removing those fragments from the wound.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them using a probe according to your need.
And when you have removed those fragments and they do not remain, then enlarge the wound openings if necessary; otherwise, place one of the appropriate remedies on the wound and cover it until it heals.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the scapula when it is fractured.
The scapula is broken at the part where it meets the shoulder blade, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than the shoulder joints; and it is more difficult to restore; or it is such that it has happened in the shoulder joints, and it is difficult to restore; or it is such that the fracture is in the arm.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is in the arm, is to have two assistants, so that one holds the injured arm and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck to that part.
Then align the fracture with the bones in front of it as it is made in the second form of the curve, and not in the prominence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool from the patient's head above, and make its size according to your need; and extend and elevate the furcula and bind the cloth in your hand inside, so that the fracture is aligned as it should be.
If you cannot pull the tip of the sternum to the fractured parts, so that it reaches the prone, then place the patient on their back, and place a large cushion over their chest muscle.
And the assistant massages the chest muscle to the fractured parts before the bone of the sternum is raised to its position in the prone, and then you correct the fracture and equal it with those called ribs.
However, if you feel any sharp pain from the sternum and its surrounding area, then do so over that and remove those sharp pains for ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then use one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, since you have placed the forceps under the sternum; and this forceps is made of iron:
And its shape is similar to a hook, and its width is according to what you need from it, depending on the size of the bone or its fragility.
May the length of it be second to what is possible for the operation; there should be two extremities with times, and one extremity should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone's tag is wide, and it is safe from pus, then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if pus does occur, then pour in a cloth with warm water and rose oil, and place it over that.
And even if the bone above the broken leg is not displaced; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage is softened or you remove the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the ligament.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm in the new position; so that the helper can raise the patient's arm from the side of the other, and thus elevate the fracture of the clavicle at the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of the other.
And do not remove the bandage unless an abscess occurs in the wound within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the wound at that point, and adjust it to the structure and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some exercises are done in certain people at that time.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
A splint is broken in the affected area and not the fracture itself, but the edges.
And when the affected area is broken - and it is broken in the middle of the affected area - and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare for the treatment of it and reduce it according to its natural form in any way possible.
And place your hand over the area with powdered egg white and lemon juice; and place a folded cloth on it; and place a thin sheet of tablecloth according to the amount of the splint or more.
If the sheet is concave in any part of the splint, then level that concavity with lemon juice, and place the sheet according to equality.
And place a bandage over it with prolonged humidity and by the construction of a decent and firm hold of the sheet until it is not released from its own place.
And consider the ligament in each day; and all the time it is softened, apply another bandage and strengthen it and make it even if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their left side.
The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is from the bones of which the beginning was not feared or their dissolution.
And if the wound occurs in the bone of the foot and place it under the skin, then you cut it on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if it happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in some places of it and that ends up; but the extremities of it are somewhat attached and comminuted.
And when the patient's leg is broken, it bends at the fracture parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, and cough, and much sweat and vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from feeling.
The restoration of the broken bone is that the patient is placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; then press the muscles of the bone, and adjust the ribs of the bone to two vertical positions, and gradually perform the operation of the bone and its alignment according to all possible and appropriate methods until it returns to its original shape.
Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone on a thin layer of salt or honey and similar substances on top of it, so that you can wrap it in cloth; then gradually apply the poultice to the fracture so that it is not too tight; and when the wound has softened, strengthen it with a proper bandage. Also consider the wound throughout the entire hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it.
And if the need arises to remove that part of the body that is affected by the disease or inflammation, pain, or abscess that has occurred in that area, then you should cut and remove that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what has happened due to that hand's healing method; and then return the plaster, if necessary, and adjust it within the structure until it is healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You should know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur except in the broader parts where they are divided; and from the extremities of those parts, nothing happens to them except due to that which is cartilaginous. And you should not be blinded by the feeling of it, but rather make an inquiry about it and the mentioned ones.
And the restoration should be as equal to the fracture as possible, within the structure, until it is covered and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that one, if necessary.
If the rib fracture is directed towards the internal organs, the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, similar to the puncture experienced by those who have cried out, and for this reason the bones are covered with a bandage; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting, which is difficult to cure.
And the ancients used this method with great success.
And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth to generate inflation and ventilation, so that the abdomen is filled and extended, and the fracture is pushed away from the internal organs.
We do not use this method to avoid causing an abscess, unless it occurs; and if it does occur, we now help with that.
And they said to them that it should be placed above the wound and squeezed with great force; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will attract excess fluid to the area due to its weakness.
And they say to the patient: cover that place with a wool that has already been submerged in hot cauterizing oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, which should be the same amount as when you wrap the second time; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage, then cover the patient with a blanket, revealing the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument that contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bone to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the loose lips of the wound, if it is large, with a bandage, and cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs, then you cover it and insert powders in hot rose oil and place your hand over the area, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him lie on his left side while he is recovering.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of the fracture of the sacrum of the back and neck.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and are similar to those in the sacrum of the back. And when such an accident occurs to anyone and you want to know if it will heal or not, consider the following: if the bones are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move or strengthen those, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and feel no pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
And if you feel pain in them when pressed or pricked, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see the same thing in the sacrum of the neck and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider the feet of that person.
When you see that it has already become softened, if those things happen in the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes paralyzed and cannot urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of it is to prick the abscess with a needle that you place on the spine, or with a thorn dipped in honey or garlic; place some of those on the abscess to help sedation.
And then place one of the plasters that provide comfort and relief, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if there is an infection of the bone or some cause that has already been separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and splint that bone; and then adjust the wounds of the plague, with stitches if it is large; and then care for that with some flesh of the meat, until it is healed.
If the back of the thigh bone is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then you should insert your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible; and if necessary, apply pressure and splinting, and then strengthen that.
If you feel broken ribs in the chest, then cover that area, and hold it, and treat the wound with the cure that is preceded by healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
Of the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they are broken, the fracture of them is only communication in the extremities of those and they are inserted in the length and decline to the parts intended; and the patient experiences pain at the location and puncture, and the blanket is shocked when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that which is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have prepared for equality, entering as much as necessary until it is restored to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or that already declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their back until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place another hand on that star of wood or of coda, and strengthen for stricture over the one you do not fear puncture of fracture or removal of the star.
And equalize the concavity of that which places that one inside of which that one takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until that which is sedated the abscess, and place your hand on that one which precedes that; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has cover.
And if there are fractures or dislocations in the bones, then treat them accordingly.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
The humerus is that which is between the ribs and the shoulder joint.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you hold it with your hand in this manner:
and if it is attached to two ends of bands, then suspend it from the elevated place.
And follow the patient on a chair; and when you reach the broken arm over the thigh, it should reach the elbow of the same place where the curvature of the bone is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over that, or the nurse extends it to the parts below; and the doctor should put the fracture back together again as soon as possible until the fracture returns to its place.
And the other assistant should make sure that the patient is lying on their back and holding their head with their hand; and then command two assistants to hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other should hold the broken part of the body; and each of them should extend their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with your hand and on the other hand with the other hand, and each of the two assistants should extend their parts.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the cloth on the side of the body and the other behind the fracture to protect it.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the body, then place the cloth on that spot and on that part.
Equalize it with that and its work, and when it is equaled according to what is covered and applied properly, then press on that if it does not cause an abscess.
If an abscess occurs, leave the stricture in place until the seventh day, and place a wet bandage on the sore in advance of the wound, and apply rose oil until it is ready to be reopened, and then strengthen it.
The method of strengthening it is to place a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then adjust the arm on the assistant, and place your hand on the affected muscle.
And then cover the cloth and strengthen the arm on the assistant's shoulder to prevent the arm from being in a sling, if there is no cause for the broken bone.
And then use slings.
And then place a sling over the fracture that is higher and stronger than the others; and between each sling, let the length of the sling be according to the fracture, added by three digits of the whole part.
And then strengthen the slings with the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And your structure over the area of the fracture should be straighter. And as the fracture becomes more curved, the structure becomes smaller.
And if you see the position of the ribs and the structure as we have said in the time when you restore the member to its original position, then do so.
And if you fear infection, then leave the structure and ribs inside as we have said on day seven.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the wrong place or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member due to the arrangement of excessive structure; and therefore correct everything as we have said.
But if you are unsure about any cause of this, then do not remove the bandage for three days or more.
And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant's full of wool equally, and consider at all hours of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not separated or dissolved, or that the bandage is softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
Pause the food of the patient according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is digested; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth.
It is customary for the assistant and the nurse of the patient to be strong for ten days; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth and bathe it and medicate it with the remedies that correct that one.
And if the fracture is not healed after one or two months, then you should not remove that bandage and those splints.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two knuckles; one is small and is the one that is closest to the wrist, and the other is large and is the one that is placed behind the small one from the wrist.
And if the larger or smaller knuckle is broken alone, or both are broken at once, it is very painful.
When the small intestine is cut above, its repair is more difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
When the large intestine below the fracture of the patient is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And it is even worse when two bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small intestine above, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its repair by gently extending it.
But if the large intestine is that which is broken, then one should apply more forceful extension.
And if both intestines are broken, then one should apply the most forceful extension.
And one should apply the figure of the hand to the repair and extension of the intestine over a cushion, and place the patient's hand above, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should be lying on a pillow.
And place a cushion underneath their head or arm, to prevent the patient from moving.
Then approach the assistant and extend their arm on the side away from their body or arm, and another assistant should do the same on the other side.
And approach the doctor to set the bone as best as possible according to its figure.
And if there are nails in the bone fracture, then drill through them all to remove them from their place according to your skill.
And if the nail appears to be separate and not according to your hope for its restoration, then do as we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is in a difficult place, and you have already treated that chapter, then take care of that cure.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then you should apply a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and be careful not to press too hard or too lightly, and strengthen the cloth over that thin structure until the abscess gives way; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared paste of powdered myrrh and honey, and place a strong bandage over that fracture.
And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is always in the major positions, or if there is a fracture in one or two places.
Then place your bandage on the location of the fracture as tightly and forcefully as possible, and when more strength is needed to apply the bandage above or below the fracture, place it more gently than previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and not hard or sharp, and the best one is the one that is strong enough to move between subtle and rough, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close to the fracture. And if there is any cause for which correction is necessary, such as the one that has already occurred to the member, and then you should make sure that you bring the member with a straight tail before that problem stops.
And do not force the member until it is ready, and then return the bandage.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has regained its shape and similar to those, then with your skill, rectify all of that.
And if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gently loosen that one a little and let it rest for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
However, if the patient does not experience any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not let it slip within approximately 20 days or around those times.
And let the hand of the patient be suspended over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their backs.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is strongly restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexions and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the little finger and those mentioned.
You should know that at the pinch of the knee and at the joints of those mentioned tart, there is a fracture, and do not touch them without proper tools.
When the patient has a fracture or wound, make sure they lie down and equalize their legs, and then place your hand on the extended leg.
Then, the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that are misaligned with good alignment.
And then make sure to apply bandages and poultices, unless there is a pus cavity; and then place your hand on the wound according to its size, and you have already wrapped it in linen.
But if the splint is in the parts behind the belly, then make it similar to a sling, and command the patient to hold that with their belly splinted; and then tighten the cloth longwise.
And the cloth that supports the belly should be in the one where it is lifted, so that the belly is applied to the palm; and tighten it according to what is needed.
If the fracture is at the parts deformed, place your hand on the other side of the part below in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then place the structure, as if it is being rolled over the palm between the mentioned bones.
If the fracture occurs in any of the bones of the mentioned joints, then if it is a long bone, place your hand as strong as possible on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight object to elevate the fracture and not make it worse.
If the fracture occurs in any of the other mentioned joints, such as the elbow, wrist, ear, or ankle, then place your hand equally and lightly on the palm; or all of them continuously, which is better; or place it over that small straight object, as we have said in the long bone.
And consider, in your treatment, and apply that, the position of abscess cautery and opposition — against the operation — against that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to how it is repeated in the narrative.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the bone in the thigh.
The bone of the thigh is broken and is felt second to have changed to the part denoted and to the most inner one.
And the restoration of it is done by placing one bandage over the fracture and another under the fracture, and the patient lies on their stomach and on their face.
And then the assistant extends the entire bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is near the root of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the part of the tendon, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is near the root, then the bandage should be placed at the back to the root, and the extension to the parts behind.
And then the doctor should equalize the bone by putting their fingers inside as much as possible until it is reduced according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good connection; then cover and apply ointment and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. If an abscess occurs in the area, then leave that person for several days until the abscess is ready to burst, and then return to your treatment.
The structure of the bone is as follows: a cover that wraps around the fracture, bend it twice or three times, and remove the excess; then wrap the leg and the thigh in the cushion.
And insert the long piece of cloth between the thigh and the cushion near the ankle, and bring the ends of the cloth from the side that is less affected by the two parts, and then wrap it around the cushion and thigh to cover what remains of the bend.
And place your hand on the thigh in the location of that fracture, and place a stone on the bone of the cushion.
And then fill the empty spaces between the cushion and thigh with many cloths, so that the fracture is consolidated.
And then begin to strengthen the fracture from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move further away from the location of the fracture, your fracture will be smaller and more flexible and softer.
And then gradually extend two extremities of the patient to the parts behind until it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part to prevent the bandage from remaining in its place.
And then place the structure over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar things; and if any of those causes occur, then count on removing it from there, and correct what has happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said before.
But if the bone that breaks is not broken, then try to align it as much as possible; and if you cannot, perform an operation on it and realign it, and treat that which precedes the memorization within which it should be healed.
And some bandages are strengthened for this fracture of the bone or others that are adjusted to it, as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
In the restoration of the patient in such a manner-made bed, do not cause the patient to have paralysis; and if restored alone, another cushion should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the paralyzed one is quickly supported.
You should know that the cushion is strengthened in several days or a few months or a few months, and all this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other dispositions.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the humerus bone.
You should know that the fracture of the humerus bone heals slowly, but does not cause any damage to the nearby veins.
But if it causes any damage to the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and this is a common or less common problem, and over this all depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of the humerus bone should be equal to that which was broken from its parts, and this is done by joining and connecting it according to what is possible in equality, facility, and manufacture.
And then place a poultice on that round stone, if necessary for it; and apply pressure with a tight bandage to this.
And then consider all the arrangements that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a poultice and similar to those that are suitable to prevent any accident from occurring to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You should know that in the ribs there are two bones of which one is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the costal.
And according to the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the same restoration is made as for the arm; and the operation of this is one.
And if both bones are broken at once, the ribs are completely split in two.
And if the thin bone is broken, the ribs are split into two parts.
And if the largest bone is broken, then remove it, as this is not something you can treat.
Then administer extension and equalization and ligation of the fingers according to that.
However, if the fracture of the leg is not healing due to lack of nourishment, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the leg there is a cause for an operation on the arm, and that is when you equalize the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will place weights of iron that are placed behind the causes that are placed on the sole, and they are made entirely of palm branches; align them with those that have a small groove, and do not be from the hands, and be the longest among them according to the length of the leg, and the deltoid into the farthest back.
And then wrap each cloth in two folds according to its length, and place one on the side of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the deltoid into the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the two sticks in three places on the patient's limbs and at the middle one, where this structure is forbidden to lean on the right and left parts, and it is a good distance.
And then a small stick of the length of the patient's back is administered; and it is placed on the back to prevent that one from moving.
And especially be careful that you do not do this in a fracture, and when it is placed properly.
And then consider the patient every day and study that one for the next day's study, and guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens to any of those, then stop that one until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Fracture does not occur to the talus at all; but fractures occur in some of the bones of the foot; and those called also have few fractures, and do not occur to them alone but in the middle of the arrangement.
And if the bones of the foot have a fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted above themselves between them, then place the patient on their side with their affected foot on the prepared ground as if they were walking.
And then place your foot on that which is lifted from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage above, and place a small table under their belly with two ends placed on it.
And then place strength to that leg and its structure descending, so that you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes of which they are in need.
And as they pass three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, where you found the bones equalized, or they were broken or dislocated, and the operation in those is as follows with consents.
But if they say that they are broken, then restore those, and equalize them as they were and recommend to you in the restoration of those of the hand. And then place your hand along the length of the wound, and put a poultice on it; and then place this table under the foot, which you have prepared, and strengthen that wound with a proper bandage.
If that which is cut from the bones is two or three or more, then place your hand on each of those wounds, wrapping them in a cloth lion, strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and have one of the caps of the table in front of the belly of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have mentioned; and pause at all accidents with that which covers it.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella and the tibia of the man.
When the thigh bone is cut, then perform that incision in the lower belly, and place it on the side of the back a little, and keep it behind.
And then the midwife should hold the head of the child, and do it as if she were expecting; and then the woman should be gently struck, and her back should be raised little by little, until all that is gone into the part of the head that is expected and the broken bone returns.
And then place powder on her back, and when she wants to urinate, help her to do so easily and take the urine, and return it according to the method by which it was taken at the beginning, and then return to the first powder.
Do this for seven days or around those days, until it is restored.
And if you want, take an ox bladder and stretch it over the throat of the child with a catheter; and inflate the entire bladder into the head of the child, and blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated with the head, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled from the outside and remain for several days as recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bones of the human or female pelvis are fractured, then administer in the restoration and puncturing of that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
And that which is directed should not be concealed in these nearby fractures and that it does not occur, rather to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free movement; because that fracture signifies a you in the greater dispositions of the way of directing in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
In the fracture of the man when it is broken, take gauze of cotton, and put the fracture in that; and then place a covering of cloth over it, and be wrapped, and be left for three days or around those, and be healed.
Chapter 19.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are broken.
It is convenient for the one to whom the fracture occurs broken, and especially if the bone is very large like that of the thigh or of the assistant, or similar to that, which you should be and bicuspid teeth those soon if the conditions of bicuspidism are to you or testify so as we have said above.
If the pain continues, then cover your hand with a cloth and gently blow powdered sulfur on it, unless there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs carefully, then leave the restoration of it until the sixth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
But if the bone is broken and protrudes above the flesh, then cover your hand with a cloth and reduce it to its place and equalize it with your other hand for ease and less extension.
But if extension is not to your preparation and the equality of it with your other hand, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven or eight fingers, and the width of which is according to the size of the wound; and for this reason, it is necessary for the doctor who uses these three or four according to the amount needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
And it should be straight, and it should be in the correct position during surgery to avoid bending the instrument over the other.
And it should have a sharp tip that is marged in the other's sharp parts; and its underside should be broad and its top should go into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And it is called "volentz atelarem" in Greek, which is its name.
Because the end of it should be placed on the tip of the prominent bone.
And push that into a groove inside which the bone returns, and it should be equal to some balance.
And then force you to equal the ends of the fracture between them, and if the end of it broken is thin, and you do not take that with the instrument for good reason, then you should insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has power over that.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that which we have recommended, then insert that which is necessary for it from the scissors that we have said; or saw that which is a tooth in some way that is possible to you.
And then remove those that are in the bones of the spine and small scraps.
And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, you will know that the bones have not returned to their natural position; and therefore do this so that you greatly benefit the patient.
When your restoration of the bones is complete, and then submerge it in a strong sterile black cloth, especially if it is in summer, and do not place it on any wound or other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause further damage and corruption.
And then administer stitches at the time of your completion of the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound exposed until it is closed with forceps and bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound on the fracture, because such actions have been done by many doctors, and they cause damage to their patients, which is harmful. If the neck structure is loose, soft, and different from the structure of other fractures.
If the wound is large or bad, and you fear that the evil accidents we have mentioned might occur, and there is great pain in that place, then do not place your hand over it, but make that envelope of hard cloths in place of sticks and strong pressure on those.
And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, then remove the cloth that you placed over it, and administer poultices, using those that are of our custom to heal wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar to that.
And it is convenient for you to remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and cover that member in such a way that the poyredura flows from it to the parts behind it to facilitate healing.
If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated or does not close on its own, then know that this is a sign of smallpox for which you should inquire about the wound and examine it carefully. And from those stains, remove those that are separated and extracted, those that are not separated and put the member and cause acute pain, pierce those that are possible for you to do.
And if the wound becomes infected or putrefied, it is often due to another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then place on it one of those remedies that are suitable for it from the cure which is preceded by narration in its own chapter.
And of that in which you should place your finger: when the large ones are cut, raise it over the member that is there with the bones of the cushion and the helper and similar to those of the great members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction, because many evils can occur by that which causes death; having left that inside for twenty days or thirty; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20
Of the cure of a node that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Nodules occur at the site of healing from fracture, and more frequently near the joints, and is caused by the shape of the limb; and it often prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Then consider whether the node is recent and administers in those medicines that have stopped bleeding such as aloes, and enses, and mirabilis, and serpentaria, and acrasia, and similar to those; taking some or all of them, and confirming them with astringent, or album of honey, or astringent tincture, and place that over the node in a cloth, and bind it well over the node.
And if that stricture does not allow it to pass for several days; then remove it and apply another, until the node is reduced; or strengthen it on that plaster of descentment, which has the property of reducing everything that is inflamed in the limbs.
If the joint has become petrified and is causing constant pain, and it is necessary to separate it from that part of the body where it is most deeply embedded, and then incise the excess and eminent, or remove it with a sharp instrument before it becomes fully detached; and cure it within the time when it is healed.
Chapter 21.
When a fracture is restored and the limb becomes thin and fragile, it does not return to its original nature.
When a fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb becomes thin and fragile, it is not done for many reasons: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the cord of that part, made not according to its nature; or because of excessive strictness of the ligaments before the nutrient can reach the limb; or because of excessive embrocation; or because of superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because of weakness in the body of the patient and because of his debility.
And the treatment for that is to give the patient garlic to eat and make them drink the juice of it until their heart becomes stronger; and administer baths; and insert gauze and lettuce on it.
And place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continues to relieve the inflammation of the affected area until the nourishment comes and returns to its natural shape.
Chapter 22
Of the treatment of broken bones that have been restored incorrectly and prevented surgery on them because of this.
When an injury occurs to the limb that has already been restored, immediately remove the incorrectness of the bone and the swelling, and shape it like the limb, but if the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not accept the word of anyone who exists and says that the limb is newly broken.
But if it has already been done by foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land, and this operation is very reprehensible because it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
If the stiffness and swelling are recent, then it is customary to apply a poultice made of water with softening herbs such as althea leaves and rue, mellolot, and similar ones; or make an ointment with diallaquelon well prepared; or use a mucilage of rue root mixed with honey or oil of camphor, and apply it to that; or use soft fatty figures trampled with the palm of your hand, and similar to those of the medicines that are named emmanagogues.
And some remedies are dissolved in an excessive amount of the lightest oil, which is the most humid, and administered to move the limb at all parts in all hours.
If the twisting has already passed and is strong and converted into stone and requires treatment with iron, then it is customary to remove the pus under the skin and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off that which exceeds the swelling of the affected part with a fine saw, and administer facilitation in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is the disruption of one of its joints, which prevents movement, and distorts the shape of the limb, causing severe pain and injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when dislocation occurs, it is best to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes infected and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And to avoid this, it is not recommended to move or stretch the limb during infection, because movements and pain can cause muscle cramps.
When that happens, it is recommended to cover the patient's abdomen with a cloth, and wait until the abscess stops; then apply heat and oil to the limb, and reduce it as soon as possible.
And the limb should be treated with the oil that will bring memory back to its place.
And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder enter into the part that is placed behind.
Chapter twenty-four.
Of the cure of jaw dislocation.
If the lower jaws are dislocated and do not articulate; and the dislocation of them is made in one of two ways: either they are repositioned from their places by a small removal, and are slightly molded; or they are dislocated entirely and completed, before they are molded at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows out and which cannot hold that nor close his mouth, and the tongue of him is covered in his palate.
When the dislocation of it is small, then return it to its place in the greatest positions by itself.
When the dislocation is entire and completed, then cover it so that reduction of it is administered gradually, and not delayed at all.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor should insert their fingers into the mouth, one at a time, on the edge of the dislocation of the jaw, inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or that they insert both fingers simultaneously, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other two fingers on the cheeks, and equalize them; and command the patient to stop their jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
If the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are frequently dislocated, then administer evaporated water and oil, until a light reduction is made and do not delay the reduction of both jaws, as we have said.
And then, when they are equalized and the patient's mouth is closed and not molded, then place some woolen cloths on those parts, and make a paste of cera and oil, to facilitate the movement of the jaws.
And the patient's head should be between two pillows, so that it does not move to the front or left; and do not force any cause; having the same view, open his mouth with a spoon, when the pains are relieved and his jaw is unlocked, then open that which you want.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for food and drink and defecation, until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws at any time and they are not converted to their normal positions, then use heat and constant soda, and frequently apply a warm cloth to the patient's abdomen, and frequently vomit with pure bile.
And when you see that, know that it is fatal; and those who experience that die within a few days.
Chapter 25
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated from the attachment to the chest due to its continuous connection with it; and some ribs are dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then cover the area with your hand with strong pressure, so that it will return.
Then place a poultice and powders on that and strengthen it.
The extremity of that which is attached to the chest and is continuous with it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, cover it as we have said and as it is in your equipment.
Then place a poultice and powders on that, and compression, and command the patient to remain at rest until it is healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter 26
About the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the shoulder joint and then behind.
And the second is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder blade; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and sticking out behind the shoulder joint, and especially in those where the meat is thin, it is easily dislocated; but in those where there are thick flesh, it is more difficult to be stuck out.
And it often happens to many men that they are hit or struck by a blow, and the muscle of this is infected with an abscess, and it is swollen because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you should first examine this before you proceed with the treatment of it.
And it is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are separated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the undislocated muscle, because there are distinct differences between them; and you feel at the top of the concave part of the muscle where the cap of the muscle is like a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual place, or move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you must press or pull, and you should feel a distinct movement, and it should not be hidden.
And this dislocation is called recent reduction when it is fresh and the patient is young.
And the reduction of this is that the assistant raises the patient's arm above the dislocated part; and places their hand behind the tilt, and strengthens the joint in its usual place, and the assistant raises the patient's arm, and extends it again; and places it behind where it returns.
But if it does not return, and from the beginning of the dislocation, days pass, then the patient should be given a warm bath and administered an embrocation that softens and numbs, similar to if they have high fevers, and fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and supported under their body by a cushion made of wool that is evenly between elevation and stricture, and the doctor places their hand on the patient's calf, elevates the head of the muscle in virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it does not hang down, and another servant holds the patient's head, so that it does not hang down, because that is where it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert his muscle between the patient's thighs and elevate the patient's thighs to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the patient's hand from their lower abdomen. But if the patient is heavier, then hang up the other cause that is suspended, so that it returns to its place quickly, because the dislocation returns soon.
And it is reduced according to another method: and let there be a long stick shaped like the head of a mortar, not too thick or thin, and placed behind the patient; then let the patient's head rest on the end of the stick covered with lion cloth, and the patient stand along the length of the stick, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the parts of the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if the reduction of it is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and let you take a stick the length of which is between two fists, and the width of which is four fingers, and the thickness of which is adjusted according to this form:
And then place a lion cloth roundly on the head so that the stick does not slip the patient.
And then let the patient's head rest behind the stick, and extend the hand or arm over the stick through the parts behind, and let the stick be tied to the support and the arm and the end of the hand.
Then place the arm on a scale according to its height, and the hand should be extended to the parts behind, and the other one should be suspended from the other side, because the joint is soon affected.
And with the instrument of the patient, complete it according to each possible method, and then cover it with a woolen cloth of equal quantity; and place an ointment prepared from powdered myrrh and album of egg on all the muscle, as it is rolled up above, and then place a bandage of stricture decently behind the tingling. And the bandage should be rolled up over the ointment, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the collar of the patient, and let it be, and not be tired the hand of the patient for seven days.
And let the food of the patient be given in small amounts, until the member is comfortable, because it is more useful for the healing of him.
And let the food be given more frequently than seven or five and let it be exercised with a movement; and if it is stopped and not made soft, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to swelling caused by moisture that has accumulated in it or for another reason, then apply a pointed cautery three times, as indicated in the chapter on cautery.
If all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced due to some swelling, and it is not fixed, catheterized, or able to be raised to its parts above, then know that the nerves of that joint, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be healed in that place.
To reduce the dislocation of that joint, which is made by pushing and extending the chest and back parts, as it returns.
And the other bandage is applied to that joint, and it is cured within the time it is healed.
If the healing in that member is delayed and its movement is slow, then the patient uses moist compresses until that swelling is reduced and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw.
You know that the joint of the jaw is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated in all parts, especially at the part where the jaw meets the other jaw, and the dislocation is not corrected from behind the skin or behind the touch according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the jaw dislocated, it does not return to its place, this is your manifest indication that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And when you see the abscess, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible, because if you see the abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not cured in all cases; and especially when it is at the parts behind, which is worse than all other species of dislocation, and causes more pain, and more dangerous movements away from that jaw, which can lead to death.
When restoring the patient, when it is possible to reduce it, the hand of the patient should be extended by two people, and the arm of the patient should be expanded, and the surgeon's fingers should be on the back and over the patient, and he should push the joint towards the palm of his hands or the edge of his palm where it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the arm of the patient and his own arm, until it strikes the back and the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
And if two assistants are extending the arm, then have two assistants hold it in place so that it does not return to its original position.
And then rotate the arm from all parts, so that it is wrapped in a cloth folded longwise over the hand of the patient, or a bandage.
And when the surgeon touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return.
And then the reduction of the abdomen that is placed on that pad in which there is stypicity and execution of the album of honey, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a while.
And then it is loosened; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you loosen the ligament of it and leave it there.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the bandage and ligament, and leave it there for a while until it is extracted; and then loosen it.
But if it happens to the gravity in the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer humidity in bath and friction subtle, and compression, until it is removed; or pause over the moved joint, this is a greasy cloth; and then it is tied, and left there on the bone and the new skin. And then remove that, and put that in the bath; and when it is done, then you rub the joint with a cold friction, and then repeat over the moved joint, this is a rhomboid of movement, the first, second, and third. with a sponge, until it is clean.
And if you wish, place it on the wound of a wet and burnt cowhide and stretch it over that; and make some poultices, because that is wet and reduce it to its proper state.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
The shoulder of the chest is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of that dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is of the other joints, but rather be careful that there is speed in the reduction of it at the time when it is dislocated, because the joint may become inflamed or something happens to the pus in the inflammation.
And the reduction of that dislocation is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the imminence of the joint, and pushes it inside so that it returns to its place.
May it be considered if the palm is already placed on the belly of the patient, then place the patient's hand on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, then position the patient's hand intrinsically on the table, so that the doctor's hand is close to the joint.
And if it returns quickly, good; and if not, then apply this treatment to allow the abscess to drain and leave that; and do not repeat that, because otherwise, there will be no softening or healing of the joint before the days pass.
May it be considered that the joint is still tortuous; and if the patient does not notice any cause, but the hand is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then know that the nerves are trapped or trapped, and do not engage in this, but rather strengthen with a pointed cautery for the joint's cavity and forcefully apply that.
And when the abscess has returned, then place it over the dressing that we have recommended, and let it be drained and strengthened for several days; and afterwards, remove it and let it be drained and let the hand of the patient be exercised.
If the patient's movement is obstructed and there is some gravity in it, then apply a cooling tail and some friction with certain movements, until it is relieved.
Chapter 29.
About the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Some movements cause the mentioned dislocations in all parts.
And when one of those mentioned is dislocated at the back of the hand or on the belly, then press the dislocated part and push it towards the thumbs, until it returns.
And then support the head of the mentioned part, and suspend the one that holds the part where it is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend it and stretch it until it is equal to the other one on that day.
And when it is not yet straight, apply the second method to that, and do not stop pulling it on that day and exercising the movement, and apply the second one at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
If the patient's abdomen is dislocated and you tie that part to another, then perform the first surgical operation on it until it is healed.
And do the same when other parts are dislocated.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and several other vertebrae remain unattached from those locations, then there is no cure for it, as the patient will die.
And in such cases, the patient's excretion is forced against their will, and they cannot retain it; and other symptoms soften the muscles of that part or the ribs of that part or the shoulder blades of that part or one of those; or if one vertebra remains unattached from that location, then other symptoms are softened and other symptoms are made to remove those in four parts.
Then it is softened at the back parts and is called lumbar spine.
If the patient's condition is such that the prolapse has occurred due to pregnancy, then in that case, neither cure nor complete healing can be achieved for that.
In those cases where it occurs due to childbirth or due to percussion or similar to those mentioned by the ancients, regarding the methods of treatment for prolapse, which is most beneficial; however, I have already opened and exposed that from which the fewest exceptions can be made, due to its proximity to the understanding and explanation of the matter, which I have demonstrated with various instruments of that kind, and which I will show you.
And of those, there is no cure except for the one that occurs naturally in the back, which I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face over a flat surface as close to the ground as possible, and extended with a moistened instrument so that the chest of the patient does not remain exposed.
And then place a stick straight under them, leaning against the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the pit; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
And then wrap a blanket over the patient's head and leave the tiger-like claws firm; extend the end of the blanket to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and strengthen the other blanket over their legs, below their knees, and hold their belly; and then adjust all the blankets and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
And then the minister should extend the blanket to the part of the stick where it is placed, and not remain idle with the two sticks and the blankets in the places where they are placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the strong spine between the shoulder blades, or on a table, and adjusts the patient's feet under him until he returns.
If he does not return by this method, then take a table that is three arm spans long or wide, and place it against the wall where we have said that the patient should be located in between the extremity of the table. And then place the patient's head on the strong spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and stretches him until the spine is straightened and he returns to his location.
And if you want, open the back of the patient by turning it towards the mat; and you should be on the ground with the patient's head at the back of two sticks, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head at the back of another stick; and the length between each stick should be a palm, and it has been done in each stick by placing a thorn in the one where the turn returns, and each one should be stopped on the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a fourth staff in which it is placed, and let it be rotated in the two openings of the two staffs.
And at the end of it is an opening in which the staff is formed, its length being one palm and a finger, which is rotated; and in the other two staffs, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the cords that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the opening that is to be placed on his head, and the cords that you have tied in his thighs in the rotation that is to be placed on his feet.
And then place each rotation and have a servant who turns the rotation with his hand, and the doctor equalizes the sacrum as we have said.
And after the sacrum is returned and the area is equalized, then apply an abundant amount of dry earth on the bandage, and stop; and place a table over it with a width of three palms or around those, and its length is the quantity that took up the area of the gel, and on the side of the sacrum, it is.
And then apply a bandage that we have mentioned, and use the patient as a source of subtle nutrition until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing, then apply medicines that are moilifico and liniscan to the administration of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, the sheet of plum.
And sometimes some wounds occur in the back of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; and that bone which already immines for that reason, that it should not be done to that person with this medicine, which would make you die quickly.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the hip joint and the muscle joint do not only suffer from dislocation, but also from those things that happen to other joints with slight removal and concavity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the parts inside, or at the parts forward, or at the parts upward, or at the parts backward.
And it is mainly dislocated at the parts that are inside, and sometimes at the parts in front or the parts behind.
And when you adjust the bed of the healthy person for the sick one, it is longer and thinner than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee but must lean on it, and this is where the pus from the abscess may spread to the head of the mattress.
And the reason for the person who has suffered from this dislocation is that the accidents of that one are opposite to this accident.
And the reason for the person who has suffered from this dislocation in front is that the bed of the other side is stretched out too much, but it does not bend towards that one which causes pain in the knee, and if it is pierced to go, it cannot be placed under that one; and the urine of that one is retained, and the swelling of that one is abscess, and you must place the ambulance of that one on the thigh.
When the person who has suffered dislocation of the parts behind is unable to extend their elbow, nor can they bend the arm that bends them, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bending is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
The method of reducing these species of dislocation is that you consider, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been healed by having it close to you, then administer reduction of it according to its arrangement, but not entirely in that cure; therefore, do not make an attempt in that way.
In that of which the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and also to the right and left, because that force returns and does not require another cure.
If it does not return in this way, then you should prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part that is farthest away from the arm, or to their hands, or to the bandage that is placed over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister should extend the hand of that one above in such a way that it holds their hands behind the tips of their fingers; and then strongly hold the lion's mouth on the edge of the cushion, and another minister should clean the end of the bandage.
And if it is the extension of the limb or the part between the armpit to the scapula, or the part behind the shoulder blade.
And if it is the extension of all those in a procession while the patient is lying on his side and leaning forward.
This type of extension is special for all four.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; and otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to say what the cure is.
In the reduction of the patient's own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts below, make sure the patient is lying on his back; and place your hand on the ribs in that area where the head of the rib meets the location that was previously leaning forward; and extend the ligament from the armpit to the most distant part of the scapula.
And another assistant strongly grasps the patient's arms, and presses the large area of the patient's back and extends to the parts forward by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this particular treatment is the most effective cure for this member that has been reduced compared to other treatments.
However, if you are excused from following this treatment for some reason, then it is best to place the patient's feet together, firmly, above and below the ankles.
And let the length of each be equal to four fingers, and let the patient's cushion be extended more than the other by two fingers.
Then let the patient be suspended over the top of the bed, and in the middle; and let the length of it from the ground be equal to two spans.
Then command a strong young man to pull down the head of the cushion, and let another young man suspend it from the patient, and the other young man to strengthen the joint by pulling upwards, so that the joint returns to its original position at speed.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the part of the forearm, let the patient lie on their back as we have recommended in the previous chapter; and let the ligament be strengthened over the cushion of the patient properly and over their chest.
And then place two cushions under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushioned cushions to the middle of the bed, so that the patient is not dampened by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not stretched.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand over the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is likely that the cushion should be extended more, and according to this method described above on the bed; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the longitudinal patient, and then covers the other hand with that, and at that coverage pauses the extended part to the parts behind at the part of the denol.
And if the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended at the back parts and raised on the ground; it is recommended to place a hard cause under them, as if they were lying on two cushions; and they should be placed on their face and their limbs extended, as we have said, without causing pain.
And it is recommended to apply pressure with a hard table on the area where the joint is located.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed according to what has been recommended, and if the joint is not immediately returned to its place, and you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see that those cushions are equal and the patient extends his second cushion and expands that side, then you know that the member has been returned according to what has been recommended; and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend where the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under one side and another under the other.
Then, if you see those joints in their proper place, know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient get up.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply that, and extract it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again in the bath for each person for several days until they are comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated at the first joint, at the second joint, and at the third joint; and it is not dislocated at the fourth joint.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient upright, unless they are already extended on their back, then place yourself on top of them; press your face against the patient's face, and hold their foot between your feet; and then make sure to hold the patient's hand in your palms, and reinforce those fingers that are above the patient's hand on their wrist, and another minister extends their leg into place as the patient's hand returns to its position.
And the relief of the patient is that their bed will adhere to the cushion and lift them up off the ground.
And then apply that plaster to the bed and hold the cushion against it, and then tie those same bands for three or four days, and then remove them.
And do not use the patient's bed for any days until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the bandages that were mentioned in the previous cure for the hand.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes becomes re-located by slight movement, and sometimes it is dislocated in the opposite direction, and the dislocation of which is made at the front or at the back parts.
And the symptom of the dislocation of which is that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen due to the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of the dislocation of which is of great difficulty, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and should return as soon as possible.
When it is dislocated in the opposite direction, then one should make the patient lie on their back, and hold a strong and skilled person behind their back in the middle part of which.
And then you should place your right hand on the most raised part of the foot, and your left hand on the part farthest from the foot in the position of the calf.
And then bring the foot to your hand, and hold the left side with two fingers, and extend the left side; and push the chest of the foot against the right side of the bed.
And then make those two fingers as you have counted.
And then push the chest of the foot against the third finger on the bed, and you are at the elbow.
So if you return in one finger or two in this manner, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation, until it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing it at that place, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a pillow under their buttocks, and put a blanket between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not slip.
And then the assistant of the patient holds their thighs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant should be extended against the extension of their own part, and the pillow should be extended between the thighs of the patient, so that the body of the patient is not pulled away from its extension.
And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another servant hold the clean cloth at the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and you declare the patient's health from its reduction, then pause to apply plaster and tightly bandage that part of the foot to the leg.
And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over that part is not too tight and does not harm it.
And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for fourteen days. But if it is necessary to walk in that space, do not do so until the dislocation is completely dissolved and corrupted, and avoid anything that does not allow healing.
And if the abscess bursts, then carefully administer in its cavity what was described in our previous narrative, in another place for healing and relief, until it is completely healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the cure for the dislocation of those of the feet.
That which is dislocated should be moved as little as possible; and this is not difficult, but rather easier.
However, if the dislocation is in the joints of the back of the foot, then do so by placing the patient on their side, either on the ground or on a table, and remain there as if they were lying down.
And then you will stand by the patient's foot, and place their injured foot on what is near the joints, and gently press that towards where it returns, and see that it is as equal as possible and does not appear in the prominent position.
And then place a table under their foot that holds the entire foot, with two caps, and strengthen that with proper structure for three days; and then remove that and let them rest from walking for several days, until it is strong and can be assured.
Chapter 35.
Of the various types of dislocation that can occur due to pain or fracture or any other cause.
When any of those causes occurs, and you pierce yourself in the treatment of that and its restoration, many complications can lead to death.
And for that reason, do not assume that the treatment of that is known from long use, mercy and pity, late, not ardent or presumptuous; and that it uses in the beginning of medicines that ced apostemas cautz only, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but to that to which you hope salvation from perdition, am of the malady alleviation, and in which appears some hope. And then make an effort to do it as soon as possible in the beginning of the cause, giving that it becomes an abscess caut.
And then if the member returns as soon as they want, at that time administer a regimen that ced apostemas caut and heals the pain with that which is suitable for it from drying agents.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the bones of the spine that are separated, then perforate their skin, and do as we have said in the simple cases of that, in the places of those.
And guard and avoid the second of that instrument in the ways of fear according to what was preceded by my sermon; for that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own sight, as those will see in your time. Here ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may be blessed. Amen.
