Oh, sons, if you have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of its purpose, and for its explanations, and for its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed what I promised to you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of castration was prohibited in our region and time, until the science of it was greatly unknown, and its existence was hidden; and no one practiced it except a few small descriptions in the books of the ancients, which were mostly errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it was closed and its length and art were extended.
And it seems to me that I will live in the order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it.
In ancient times, the reason why a skilled surgeon did not immediately know how to use their hand in this art of medicine was because the science of anatomy was long forgotten, and it was necessary to relearn it through the knowledge of the joints and forms of the members, and their conjunction and separation; and to understand the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their connection; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the locations of their exit.
And as Hippocrates said that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
We have already mentioned that person in the introduction of this book; because those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will not avoid errors that cause people to die, as I have seen too many of them, because they are formed in this science and obtain knowledge from that science and its experiments.
I saw a doctor who was foolish and had incurred an abscess called carbuncle on the neck of a woman, and he incised some arteries of the neck so that great blood flowed into her body, which caused her to die among the most.
And another doctor saw that the dragon had swallowed a stone from a man who had died, and the stone was large, and it came to him and passed through his stomach, so that that man died on the third day.
And I had already called for someone to remove it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the position of the patient, I knew that he would die.
And another doctor took on the case of a duke from our land for surgery, and he was brought to a skilled blacksmith who was experienced in fractures; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he passed through the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and strong structures, and did not allow air to the wound.
And then he removed the splint according to his desires, and removed the bandage, and removed the dressing for several days and commanded that we remove the bandage; and at this point, the wound and the foot became infected, and it reached a dangerous point.
And I was called to him, and I prepared to remove the bandage, and then he felt relief from his pains.
However, the corruption was already confirmed in the limb, so I could not stop it, and I did not cease to walk with the patient until he recovered.
And I saw another doctor who pierced an abscess with cancer, and it became ulcerous in a few days, until the fire of his malice destroyed him.
The cause is that the cranium is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not come to him from all iron, but rather that the member which suffers from all should be held.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to perform the operation in two stages: one in which health is associated with it, and another in which it is performed in the most favorable positions.
And I have already existed in all places where this book is found, in which the operation is performed in which there is error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to guard that and lay aside that one, so that the people do not approach you to dishonor you.
And therefore take up your arms in care and protection of God, and your patients in success and stability.
And use the best method by the grace of God for their salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and keep your arms in that which causes you to fear, so that your perseverance in your faith and in your name will not be abandoned: because more remains to your glory, and further in the world and after to your sanctity.
It has been said in some of these situations: Do not treat a bad disease, because evil doctors will not be recognized.
And I have already devised this book according to three chapters.
The beginning of the division of the book, and first of the first section. The first chapter arranged in the form of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the materials of cautery, and of that which is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on wounds, and on sores, and on the extraction of splinters and similar objects from them, all chapters and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of twisting and similar injuries to them; chapter ordered by the head within the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those points of that cautery and of its needles, and in what condition it is prohibited to use cautery.
So say that the speech of the quality of the point of cautery and of its needle of it is long and prolix, and subtle for knowledge, and secretly hidden; and from there to speak many people of secrets, and of those they are disagreed, and to me a little of their speeches, I fear extension.
And so it is said that the pointed cautery brings comfort to the entire universal composition, which is called matter or its matter, except for two compositions, which are tail compositions of matter.
In the tail composition of matter, it is said that the pointed cautery is beneficial to it; others say the opposite, that the pointed cautery is not suitable for ailments that are caused by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is unsuitable for tail compositions of matter to be healed with heat.
And those who say the opposite, that by using the pointed cautery, it is beneficial in all tail compositions of matter that are found in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its moisture to the composition of fire, the body of a man is often injured.
And I say by the word of that one who has experimented with this at some times past.
But may not come over that one who has already been proven and practiced in the chapter of cautery by previous practice, and has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of their illnesses in their members, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the space of time of those.
In other body parts, do not fear for yourself, and especially in wet and humid diseases, where all doctors have agreed on those, and they do not disagree about the use of a pointed cautery in those.
Know, children, that the secret of healing by pointed cautery and fire is because fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and not the other members unless they are nearby and slightly harmed.
The action of the pointed cautery reaches those in the members who are nearby, and it often brings relief to the sick member and is often used.
The fire, due to its greatness and goodness of substance, does not do more than what is necessary, and we know this from experience and long study of the art over the truth of causes; and for this reason you should be excused from the length of this sermon. If it were not for this, your secret would have been hidden in this pause about the fire, and the quality of the operation of it in the body and its expulsion of diseases, which is a philosophical demonstration, would have been revealed to you.
And wisely, sons, know that they should be separated from the time in which it is most convenient to perform cauterization and pause at the best time of first daylight.
I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the time that is submerged in the juice of which the cauterizing instrument is made, and especially if it is for painful or necessary pains, quickly and strongly, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through the time.
And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, because that evil which is cured by cauterization is not reduced all at once, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not as it is said above, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the moisture, which are the causes of pain coming.
However, excessive cauterization above the medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lordship.
It is possible that the patient's illness returns in some hours of time, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and that which is obtained by him in his acquisition of foods and similar causes; but if the disease in which it is administered cauterization is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humidity, as with the tooth cautery for pain and similar causes, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but rather something else is done in small amounts.
And furthermore, common speech is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and correct speech is not to that which I understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that profits from medicine or another cause that approaches cauterization.
And the cause is contrary to that; and understanding that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is not but when administering the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and at the end of the cause they administer such cauterization, and it profits at that. And here it is customarily understood that the pointed cautery is the second tool of medicine, not the understanding of which the common people and many foolish doctors are ignorant.
And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron cautery, and they did not say otherwise except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the location of cautery does not hurt, since it is not absolutely straight, because you already have some that heats and has some that does not heat at all, and gold cautery is good and better than iron cautery; however, when you make cautery with fire, do not say so, because it is prepared according to the quantity that you want by the roughness of the gold, and because it receives the cold; and if you adjust it on the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
And because it is made with iron cautery, you must make it slightly and more properly in the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the second chapter of the cautery, and have ordered those between the feet, so that they may ask him what he wants from there.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers the moisture and cold that are the main causes of this accident, which is called gout, from the head to the parts of the joints and fingers fluent, and many of sleep, and pain in the teeth and jaw, and universally of all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, suddenness, apoplexy, and similarities in those diseases.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first command the patient to take laxative medicine to cleanse his head for three or four nights, according to the patient's condition and age.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and then do this action between your hands on a low stool, and place your hand over his chest.
And then place your thumb on the surface of the nose, between his nostrils. However, when the area you mentioned is reached, mark that spot and then remove the pointed cautery, which has the following shape:
And then place that on the spot well and gently, so that it does not press too tightly at once, and you rotate that.
And then slightly lift your hand and look at the spot, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, as much as the amount of gravel, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its place, bring your hand back to that iron, or another one of those, if it is cold, before it is seen from the bone what I have told you.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve that on the spot and leave it there for three days.
And then place a soft cloth on that spot and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the area with the quadruple medicine before it is healed.
And they say that when the plague is opened, as much pain gets to the arm, so it is better and more useful.
And they say that one should cauterize the neck through the bone, and hold the cautery until some part of the bone is stuck together.
And then remove that which is stuck to the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the back, before it penetrates the bone strongly enough to break the bone, and this is the way to make a small incision: And they estimate that from that place the fumes of the head escape.
And it should be kept open for a long time, and then cured before it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two kinds of cautery in all people, only in those who are secondarily afraid; and if you leave that one, I advise you, it is better to save the head when it is possible, because the head is developed by the solution of continuity of which there is evidence in other members, and more so when the head of the patient is naturally free.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that one and the other work, it saves health.
Chapter two.
Of the cautery of the head.
When there is constant and long pain in the whole head, and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use garlics, and hooks, and capipurges, and ointments, and guatz, and cadels, and gualinas, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a certain cauterizer that does not help at all, then consider this: if the head of the patient is naturally very strong; and not easily broken, then use another cauterizer. And then cauterize that on the top of their head with a certain cauterizer when the crown is broken. Cut the crown and expose the bone as much as we have found and cauterize that with a certain cauterizer in the part behind the head in the place called the fontanelle, — and that is the place where the cushion is placed. And let your hand rest on the bone, and do not expose it, because the patient will suffer great pain different from the pain of all other cautery heads of the head.
And I would say that this cautery is in the place, because it covers the part of the head that is cauteryed with the toes of the foot and the occipital region is a more subtle cautery than the one that cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Chapter third.
Of the ancient cauterying of the eyebrow.
When the pain in the part of the head is very intense, or if it extends to the temple, remove the medicines that are applied to the head and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the chapters on diseases; and in no case should this cauterization be done with an acute cautery or with iron.
But if you use a cautery that is burning, then take a hollow reed and scrape it and apply the ends of it to the parts where the other cautery heads are. And then approach the location of the pain with a curved blade inserted into the wound that is in its place behind the skin, until it is hidden.
And then apply pressure to the stopped area with a tight bandage, and leave it for three hours; and then remove the dressing and treat the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the affected area where the wound is located.
And then care for that one until it is healed.
And if you wish, do that with some burning medicines which I have written about in the other treatise on burning medicines.
The cauterization is done in this way: ignite with the following method:
and it is called a clover-like cautery, where the head of it is like a crocus flower in which there is some curvature, and at the middle of it is a small hollow.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, and remove your hand — so that the skin is not stuck to the area which has been left — and rotate the small iron at speed.
And if the amount of blood that is stuck due to the thickness of the cord is such that it covers the entire body, and lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck, so that no bleeding occurs.
Then apply a salted water dressing on that area and place it over the wound for three days; then apply a healing ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the knife according to the cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this manner.
Chapter Four
Of the cauterization of an ancient wound.
When you treat an ancient wound with the cure we mentioned in the previous chapter and the cure we mentioned in the divisions of illnesses, and if you do not improve the cure, and see that the illness does not respond to the first cauterization with medicine or the cauterization with fire, then wait until the cauterization is healed, because it means that there is a line of long bones underneath the pain area or where that is; and place your hand over it and push it until you reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is damaged by chewing, and that the muscle not be stuck and the nerve that causes it, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the guard and care of the flow of blood from the artery that is being punctured, where in the puncture of it there is fear, and more so for those who do not know what it is and are not studied or skilled; and leave the operation in it at the beginning.
And you will find the memory of the rule for the flow of blood from the artery according to its method, in its own location in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it at the middle location of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you apply the cautery that we have said in the chapter of stretching of the artery with a two-pronged cautery, and this cauterization is better and more suitable.
Chapter 5.
Of the cauterization of gout pains.
When there is pain in the big toe due to cold and it is cured by removing the causes or the other cure mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not return, then apply the cautery, and this is the one that has no point, of which this is the form:
Then approach the point to the heat of the cautery, and place it around the entire big toe as if it were rotated, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. With the cautery, carefully approach the edge of the big toe little by little until you have reached the place without harming the area.
And if the cautery of the point is in the entire big toe, and you have reached it, then quickly treat the places until they are healed.
Chapter 6.
Of the cauterization of torture.
Torture, which is cured and can only be treated by the specific means that come from flexion, as we have said in the sections of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the affected area due to dryness or spasms of the nerves.
When you treat that area of torture with jerras and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first from the golden needle, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your hand on the opposite side of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cauteri in the right side of the golden needle, a little above the corn on the cap, and in the temple another, the longest of which should be second to the length of the said point, and place your hand over the cauteri until the quantity of the majority of the species of the codex is burned.
And this is the form of the cauteri, and it is specific to the cutellari, the form of which is given in the table. May it be remembered that there is a certain remedy for this; and cover the affected area with a cloth to prevent excessive waste.
Then care for the affected area with the remedy until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the ancient cauterization of apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and is treated with the remedy we have mentioned, and the patient does not have fever, then cauterize that area with four cautery irons: over all the bones of the head; and with the cautery iron, on the temple, as we have said; and with the cautery iron in the groin. And the method of using the cautery is done as described above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is deeper; and then care for the affected area with the remedy as it progresses.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cauterization of memory loss caused by a blow.
Gave large and round pills to the patient at the beginning of the treatment.
And then remove the entire cap from the patient and place it on the area described in this treatise about plasters.
And then place some cold compresses, which are made of cautery. Do the same as the previous method that was mentioned.
And if those remedies are effective; and if not, then make three pointed cautery marks on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most inner part of the head to the most outer part of the head. And place the largest amount of the mentioned plaster between each cautery, and then care for the cautery as it is proceeding.
If you feel more pain and the patient is able to bear it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you feel greater pain, then make the cautery on both feet.
And care for that until it is healed; and let the cautery be made of olive oil according to the form given.
Chapter Nine
Of cautery of the perineum and softening of the whole body.
You have already processed in the softening of the head and that we have said; and then remove the patient's head, and then cauterize with that cautery at the middle location of the head, and cauterize over all the corners of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauteries on the spine of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's softening of the body of those and the tolerable patients and the illness is strong, then cauterize with that cautery over four cauteries on the spine of the back, and afterwards cauterize into where is a little bit of the neck of it, and raise the tieua hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this is cautery oil.
Chapter Ten
Of cautery of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized but that epilepsy is by fluctuation.
And so, at the beginning of the patient's illness, you should modify their brain with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerant to the exception of medications.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medications, then administer garlic and mustard to the servant who modifies them, giving them this for several days, with good nutrition.
Then shave the patient's head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of their head according to the previous method, and with another cautery at the back of their head, and over each hair on their head, cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with cautery as I have mentioned, having paralysis and softness of the body over the spines of the neck and the spines of the back.
And if the cauterization is done with oil as previously mentioned.
But if the patient is a child, then pause the cautery subtly according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cauterization of melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and become wet and thick, then cauterize those parts with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is wet, then give him to drink that which purifies his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
And then shave the head of the patient, and make a circular incision carefully on his head, and place a bandage in that location.
And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
And then apply the liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder. And heat that on the fire to warm up, which the patient says relieves his suffering when it is in him. And then apply that in the middle location of his head in the circle, and let it enter him before it is mixed.
And give that patient all the medicine in the week, or according to another regimen until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on the most affected part with a pointed cautery, but hold your hand with a cautery ready: this is a special cauterizing tool that moistens the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen part in wheat flour or in grayish-white flour.
Chapter XII.
Of the descent of water on the back.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of water on the back occurs through the senses that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give that patient the water that melts the head of him, and keep that from all moisture.
And make that patient sweat in a bath for several days.
And command that patient to shake their head, and make small points on the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and then make small points on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two backs, or on one latz if it is the beginning of water in one back.
Cut all the veins and tendons that are located behind the ankle; and place the cautery in that far location on the side of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when cauterizing; and if you see any bleeding from there, apply some medicine that is at your disposal.
And you should know the skill of extracting tendons and treating those abscesses and preventing blood flow.
And some cautery is applied to the neck behind two bones and between two other cautery.
Chapter 13.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the forehead are very old and through the veins and arteries that are in that location manifest of the cap and it is verified that this is superfluous and flexible, then cauterize that with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on beginning of water in the forehead, and with the cautery in the middle of the head and with two cautery in the neck behind two temples, and with two cautery in the neck behind two bones. If it is necessary to cauterize the vein on the side of the head above the temple with a small cautery, then do so in all length of the vein.
Chapter 14.
About the cauterization of the nose.
When you treat the patient with the remedy that we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three spoons of honey; then remove the cap from their head, and cauterize the vein with a small cautery or olive oil. And then cauterize the vein with a clove cautery or two small cauteries on both temples, just behind the hair.
And beware of the arch that you do not burn it.
And this is the shape of the clove cautery.
Chapter 15.
About the cauterization of the eyelids to soften them.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a small cautery or this crescent-shaped cautery; and this is its shape:
If you apply a small pointed cautery between the two eyebrows and extend it to both temples, it will relieve the pain. The length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the eyebrow.
Do not press your hand too hard on the cautery, but according to the thickness of the eyelid that is stuck together.
Chapter 16
Of the eyelid cautery when the eyelashes are converted to the parts and poke the eye.
When the eyelashes of the eyelid are converted to the parts and poke the eye, apply cautery in those places according to two methods, either by burning or by medical cautery.
If you apply cautery by fire, order the patient to look at those lashes that are like those that are cleaned, until they are extended and equal; and if he pushes that devil, then strengthen the eyelids of the eye with one bandage so that it is not deformed until the eyelashes have grown.
When they are born and circumcised, pause the patient's head on your thigh, and then place your hand over their eyelid, feeling for the second bone of the finger, which should be near the hair.
And then place a soft cloth or moist cotton on their eyelid.
And then remove the cauterizing tool that was used for this purpose.
And then cauterize the area that was felt, little by little, in spiral motions, until the surface of the skin is burned completely, appearing as a blister, all properly.
And when the healing of the wound is complete, the eyelid should be contracted and the eyelashes of the eye should be elevated to avoid the puncture of the eyelid.
And then raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place your hand over the cloth until the scab is formed. And then care for it until it is healed.
If the pain returns through the nerves for some reason and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cut with the cautery over that area as you had done previously.
If the nerves are inside the eyelid, then cauterize that area where it is lifted to its natural position and equalized, so that the nerves do not poke out.
If the cautery burns this area, command the patient to lift the nerves through which it is prolonged and equalized, and then make a shape of paper or cloth like a bandage of myrtle.
And then take some known and living worms, and if you do not know how to do that, and mix those causes with bread, and make a poultice of that so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that over the paper that was made there with the shape of a myrtle bandage, and place that over the affected area; and place the head of the patient in the upright position on a pillow, and the cap of the patient should be on his head.
And place the medicine on the patient's back and press it gently, so that the patient does not feel the sting of the medicine, which is like a burn from fire.
And if the sting continues, then remove the medicine and wipe the patient's back with a cloth; when the sting ceases, return the medicine and wash the affected area with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has been raised as it was during the operation, because it is now healed; and if not, return to the previous step of applying the medicine to the area where it did not sting and was not denigrated before being fully healed.
And then place the patient's head on a pillow until the phlegm of the inflammation is expelled, and then cure it with a poultice of linseed oil or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep constant vigilance during the operation that no medicine falls out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is any cause of hairs in the wound, then repeat the medicine on the area where the eyelid becomes soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
This is the method of midwifery.
And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and strength, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly.
Do not hide the right path to him who studies this art.
Chapter 17.
Of the cautery for a fistula that is in the lacrimal canal of the bone.
When you cure a fistula, do not confuse your treatment with what we have said in the divisions of diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: order the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too high nor too low.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in warm water or in a poultice of poppy seeds on the bone of your hand.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
the one that is hollow, like a hollow or pen nib of a quill, at one end of which the cautery is made.
If you see, it should enter into the other end. And if you want to come out with a probe.
But the one that is concave is better for the work of the toe.
And then press the opened abscess, and treat it with salt and dry it. And if it is not opened, then open it and remove the pus from there.
And then place your hand over the area where the cautery is burning hot, and hold the toe with a small towel from the wrist to the tip of the toe, so that your hand or the patient is not burned, and then remove the cautery from the gray matter and corrupt it.
And if at the beginning of the toe the cautery goes into the bone, it is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and let that be there for three days, and then place your hand over that area and apply a dry poultice until it is healed.
If they have passed several days without being healed, then pause the acute corrosive medicine until the bone is discovered and scraped according to what is appropriate in its capital.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula: place the cautery in the location of the fistula and make a small incision in that fissure, which is the shape of the fistula; then insert the amount of one uncia of lead into it; and with your hand, make a good retention, and do not let the patient be harmed by the lead, so that the lead does not reach the depth of that; and cover that with album of egg or water, where the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about the cauterization and the cure, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to administer a truss of nasal and reduce the fistula to the nose's body when it comes to its proper location.
Chapter 18.
On the Cautery of the Wound in the Foot.
Vesicles often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you cure those fissures with the remedy that we have mentioned in the divisions and do not expose your cure, then ignite the small cautery of this form that is as follows:
And place it according to the thinness of the spoon.
Then place your finger carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then heal it with wax until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the Cautery of Fistulas in the Mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth, an abscess forms and swells, and then bursts, and then becomes old, and then bleeds and is made into a fistula, and then you cure it without exposing your cure, then heat the cautery according to the quantity that is required for the fistula, and place that heated in the throat of the fistula, and then your hand inside until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and then make a small wound or two; and then heal it with the remedy that we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
And if the sin is excised and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the rotten bone according to what comes in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
On the cauterization of teeth and the softening of jaws.
When the jaws are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, treat those with medicines and do not trust, then place the patient's head on your thigh, and hold the cauterizer in the form that will come in shape, so that you do not touch the tongue with it. Then put a small piece of cloth over the tooth and insert it into the jaw, heating the cauterizer strongly until the patient feels the heat of the fire at the level of the tooth to be reached.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizer several times as you wish.
And then the patient holds their mouth open with salt water and hold it for an hour, and you can see that the decayed tooth is closed, the softened jaw is strengthened, and the moisture corrupted is dried up.
Chapter 21.
About the cauterization of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is ice or worms in it, and the medicine does not help, then cauterization can be done in two ways: with a cautery of cow's horn, or with fire.
With a cautery of cow's horn, you take the horn and fill it with iron in the shape of a bullet, then take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and put the cautery of cow's horn into it, and place it on the painful tooth quickly before it freezes.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, immerse wool or cloth in the cautery of cow's horn above, and place it on the painful tooth, and place another over that iron ignited until the iron reaches the top of the cavity of the tooth.
May the cauterization be done with a hot iron or fire, and if there is any resistance from the patient, and the heat of the fire does not reach the patient's mouth.
Then ignite the cauterizing iron in the shape that will come, and place that on the tooth, and your hand inside to prevent the iron from being broken; and do this several times so that the pain remains or on that day or on the next day.
And cover that because of the pressure of that cauterizing iron that the patient opens their mouth wide and hold it for an hour, and then remove it; this is the shape of the cauterizing iron.
And cauterize as much as you can extend your hand.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of hernias.
When hernias are of the flaccid type and are caused by humors, and they are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you want to help them to be digested slightly, then ignite the cauterizing iron in the shape that is this: having two extremities so that the smoke from the cauterizing iron can escape through the other extremity, and place that on the abscess a few times, and if necessary for that, until it reaches the front of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then apply the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days, then place it on the side infused with boiling water until it has been burned by the fire.
And then care for that wound and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cautery for the treatment of warts and the construction of a leech.
When humidity comes over the anal opening of the lung, and especially when it is more so with coldness, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then apply the cauterizer to the root of the tail in that place.
And be careful not to apply the cauterizer to the tail or burn the skin of the patient, but only a little.
And apply the other cautery to the joint of the neck in the lower spine of the patient. And the cautery for him should be sharp as before.
And then care for that which was previously inserted until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
Of the cauterization of a sick lung and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, the patient does not have fever or tumor, and it is an old illness, then cauterize that part with two cautery needles on the furcula in the locations of the leontz and buoyt; and another cautery needle in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and let the cautery be sharp as before.
And if you wish, your cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery called a puncta, the shape of which is described in the punctation of tinea.
And let your points enter those; and then care for that which was previously inserted until it is healed.
And now the cautery should have three prongs for cauterization, like this:
Chapter 25.
About the cautery of the nipple, which is a useful aid.
When the position of the aid is dislocated due to moist lubricants and not stopped in its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that usual position, and with a slight movement it can be moved as needed, as we have testified, therefore first reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the elbow which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above the left hand, if the joint is dislocated at the part of the nipple.
And then remove the cautery which has two ends; and this is the form of it:
And then cauterize the elbow as it penetrates from one side to the other; and the figure of the cauterization will be shown here with four cautery ends.
Some of these methods are adjusted according to this count and because they are the cautery.viii.
And then place your hand over the cautery for a while with warm salt, and then make the patient comfortable and not in pain for some time until they are comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and has been done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh or pointed cautery, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is moisture and humidity in the stomach that has not been removed from its composition and multiplied many times, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and do not confirm, then the patient should be laid on their back, and their arms extended, and then cauterize with three cautery: one cautery under the chest for the length of a clavilh cautery, and two cautery under the ribs of the cautery, forming a triangular figure; and stretch out those that are not adjusted to prevent them from being damaged.
And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the two tires of the carriage.
And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach in this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle in this form.
And if the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens it: and you should place your hand on the stomach point according to the quantity that you want to test, and then cauterize those points with this cautery; and then cure them with the remedy that is preceded before they are healed.
Chapter 27.
Of the cauterization of the foot.
When pain in the foot occurs due to cold or moisture or heavy wind before its normal composition is disturbed by excessive discharge, and it is cured with the remedy that we have said and not otherwise, then let the patient lie on their back, and place your hand on the foot, and test three cauteries in this form and this quantity on the foot below the ribs, where the human body lies.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the largest part of the aforementioned, and the cautery should be according to the length of the body straightened.
And do not understand the reason for the pointed cautery.
And if the amount of that which is attached to the quantity of the bottom of the codex is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then let him sit down, who has already extended his limbs, and raised his arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these pointed cautery with a pointed cautery, when there is your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the bottom of the codex be attached for all the body and reach into the intestines, where the codex is thin; and know that.
Chapter 28.
Of puncturing an abscess on the thigh with a pointed cautery.
When the swelling or abscess on the thigh is ended and you want to know if that abscess is in the meat of the thigh or in its membrane, then if it is in the meat of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
And if it is in the membrane of the thigh, then the pain is greatly increased and often fatigues doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then feel the location of the abscess and try to puncture it; and then ignite the cautery that is shaped like a needle, the form of which has been described in the other page. And burn it with that and cautery until all the sinew is coagulated, until it reaches the bone, until it penetrates the bone.
And then care for that by the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in which many bad outcomes have been known; rather, this experiment has been done on this operation, but it is better to leave it to those who know better.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of plantar warts.
The ancient cauterization method of the warts on the feet, according to this manner, is to take a long dry bark from aristology, a sharp pointed bark that can be found, and it should be of the largest size.
And then immerse that in oil and place it in the fire, and cauterize with a cauterizer in that location which is between the continuity of the scapula and the neck; and with two small cauterizers placed side by side, one declining slightly towards the part that was left by the beard, and two more cauterizers in that place where they decline between the fifth rib and the lumbar region, declining slightly towards the back; and another cauterizer on the chest; and three cauterizers on the parts of the back; and another cauterizer in that location which is between the two scapulas, and two more cauterizers on the sides of the chest, after the one that is between the two scapulas.
And do not cover your hand with the pointed cautery, but keep it in the open air of the work area.
And the ancient authorities say that the men who use pointed cautery-like irons similar to a ray and ignite them, then place them in the location between the ribs, until they reach the other apostema and it is removed, as we have said about the pustule of the finger.
In this perforation, do not be afraid of the pointed cautery, because it has often happened in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cauterization of the mouth.
When you cure the mouth of the patient, do not compare your cure with what we have said about the division, but instead cauterize it in three ways, all of which are corrective, one of which is to make three or four cautery marks along the length of the mouth according to the shape of the cautery of the finger, whose figure has been given.
And between each cautery, have the thickness of a pen or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same as the handle we mentioned in the foot cautery equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be on their side.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two tines, which we mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the suture that is at the end of the hamstring, which is causing the pain of the patient's left side.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the suture according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made according to the latitude of the body.
And then insert the two tines, light one, in that moment when those penetrate the suture of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points are made.
And if you see, cauterize with the cautery having three tines.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery so that it does not cause pain for too many days, as it is more common than other previous causes of cure.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Do not use a pointed cautery in hydrocele, but rather a proper one.
When you cure the hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cover that person with four cautery needles around the navel and one cautery on their stomach, and another cautery on their chest, and another cautery on their back, and two cautery needles between their ribs, and one cautery in the right side of their chest, and another cautery on their stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin.
And then leave the cautery in place so that it does not cause pain for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment near the pointed cautery that heals quickly so that they can be joined to each other, and served with quick aid for recovery.
The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the belly should be according to its previous form, and the one that is cauterized on the back should be according to its previous shape.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with hydrocele and filled with water sitrina, cautiously cauterize the feet on the back of the foot, in no contact with that which is between the ear and the ring, and raise your hand above the cauterizer and do not turn it; and then raise your hand, and do not return to that, because the water sitrina drains.
And the cauterizer should be made in this form: And then make two cauterizers on each thigh, and in each thigh make a cauterizer at the end of the cauterizer's edge. And the cautery should be as long as the cushion: and place one end of it under the patient's body, and the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water can run out of it.
And cure those causes which we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the cauterization of wounds in the abdomen.
When wounds in the abdomen are caused by cold and humidity that penetrate deeply, these are digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and intestines, and are cured with certain methods of treatment and not with confereys, and sometimes the sick suffer from a powerful cauterization, then cauterize it with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauteri of the circle and with four cauteries in the circular belt of the subtle abdomen, with the subtle clavilh cauteri; and with the cauteri on the alcatin over aloes, or with two cauteries.
If you see the abundant humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that over the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cautery devices over the stomach and near the groins, as this cures the condition greatly.
Chapter 34:
On the cauterization of ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in their natural state of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors that have infiltrated or corrupted by moisture, and they are cured with the method we mentioned in the division and do not differ from the correct cure, then cauterize with three cautery devices over the small of the back and a little triangular, and with another cautery device above the belly.
And if it is determined that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that over the stomach with a large cautery device as previously mentioned; and with one cautery device on the ribs, and with another cautery device on the sore of the patient with a clavilh cautery, and lay the cautery aside for some time, and then cure the patient before they are healed.
Chapter 35.
On the cauterization of tumors near their abscessions.
When you incise a tumor, then use a cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that lit cautery into the incised tumor, and immediately place your hand over the area until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus comes.
And do this once or twice, if the abscessions are too large, then cauterize each one after you have found them, and immediately apply a poultice made of what you have given to them from the ointment until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over something, it is better to do so in a quiet manner.
Chapter 36.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in their place, and the patient is frightened by this, then heal with a cautery.
When someone has an abscess in the natural cavity behind, and it is old and infected, remove the pus and corrupt humors from it, and then apply a subtle probe to the depth of the abscess, and know the quantity of its depth.
Then apply a cautery that resembles a ray. And then insert that lit cautery into this abscess, according to the quantity in which the probe entered.
And repeat that process with the cautery every few days or three, according to your necessity.
And be careful of burning nerves and veins; or if the abscess is near the bladder or intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the abscess is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And heal the place where it was healed.
And if the place is sealed, and the matter has been removed from it, and it has been there for a long time, then you will know that it is completely healed.
If the matters are not left in place, then know that they are penetrating into the bones and corrupting them, or that is one of those causes from which remembrance will come to their place.
Chapter thirty-seven.
On the cauterization of the sinuses.
When pain in the sinuses occurs due to cold or heavy congestion, and the patient's breath is impeded, then know that you should cauterize each sinus with a pointed cautery, using a needle for remembrance.
And if you cauterize too much, then do it a little less, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in relief.
Chapter thirty-eight.
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When the bladder is weakened and softened due to cold and moisture, so that the patient cannot hold the urine, then know that you should cauterize it in the upper part of the bladder, using a pointed cautery, and cauterize with another cautery in the middle and on the other side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the nails should be cut according to the process.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the mother.
When there is a bruise and wetness in the mother, and it is prohibited to press on her, and her menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and she experiences pain from their presence, then have that place cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries, and let the nails be cut.
Chapter 40.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the arm.
When moisture is infiltrated into the part of the arm, and it causes swelling at its location, and it is stretched over the other when they are compared to each other. And the location of the dislocation is often in the area where the pain is felt.
Then you should cauterize the patient with a pointed cautery in a similar way as before, as you have not yet felt enough to test the circle of the wound with its rotation, and so that the wound falls into the correct location of the circle.
And the cautery should have the same shape as the one used in stomach cauterization.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three pointed cauteries or an olive oil cautery.
And the cautery should be applied according to the thickness of the entire wound; and then care should be taken until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
Of cauterization of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the area where the vein is located, and its cause is drying and moisture, the patient should be treated with the remedy we have mentioned and not given, and this remedy is antiquated, then you should lacerate the patient with large humors from foul or artificial pills or similar; and then cauterize it.
And the handle of the cautery in that case has two types: a medical cautery with a burning tip, or a fire cautery.
And the second type of cautery is known as one that cauterizes that part of the leg with three triangular-shaped cautery tips, and it is done at a good depth. And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the tip, and if the cautery is olive or large.
Sometimes the cautery is placed on the opposite side of the leg to make it four cautery tips.
And if you want to, cauterize around the circle that precedes the form in the dislocation of the leg, and it should contain and burn the entire skin.
And this is the method of cautery in cases where pain is adherent to the leg and does not extend into the space.
And if it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery tips on the space over the location where the patient's pain is; and with one cautery on the spine for a few moments on the left side.
And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the skin.
And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading to the area of the feet, then cauterize this area with three or four or more points if necessary from that.
And if the patient complains that the pain is on the back of the leg, then cauterize this area with a pointed cautery.
And be careful during cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or great arteries, and that for this reason it causes harm to the patient.
And I have also seen others of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed is inflamed before the tumor is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the whole foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then apply that.
And if the pain is in two parts simultaneously, cauterize each one in this manner.
And the wise men say about the use of any cauterizing tool, like this one: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which should be the width of a palm; and its opening should be according to the thickness of a date pit or a small nut.
And let that circle have another third part; and the spaces between them should be equal to the thickness of a nut; and those circles should be inserted from two sides; and the length of those iron strips should be one nut or two nuts, and make them neatly arranged in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it glows and gives off sparks, and then let it be placed on the part of the patient, the patient lying on their back. And then cauterize that point with three burns in a row.
And then leave it for three days; apply ointment to that point and leave the wound covered for several days; and then care for that point until it is healed.
Fathers Albucasis: Oh sons, of this kind of cauteries we have not used much because of the fear of its danger to the patient, and because we have found some that are dangerous for the patient.
Of the burns that the patient suffers, and at once put it on the place of the patient.
Put the burns on the medicines that are adhesive so that you make two circles with an armula perforated in which thus the wound of the door of iron; its length in the naughtiness of their is two nuts or those.
And if the space between which the quantity of the greatness of the said; and its opened from below and above, and its contained between them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the part of the water that the patient is on the left side, and put your hand on the part of the water; and then take hot water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of which is like a small fire little by little, and you let it be for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — that those bites are like from fire — until the bite stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away all the water from the area around the wound with clean water.
And then leave it alone for three days and place your hand over that border where the black discharge of the inflammation remains, and leave it like that for several days, and then remove it; this is the best method.
And then care for it with ointment until it is healed.
If the pain spreads to the thigh or leg, place it in the position that contains water according to what is done in the water equally.
This is the method of water dressing, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and unextinguished charcoal from a broken piece of one, and place it in a new layer of the kind that the broken part has been perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
And place it in another layer of boiling water, and pour over that alkali and live charcoal with clean water the kind that takes those by a certain amount, and as soon as you understand that they are well compressed, leave the layer that remains from the boiling water on the broken part to the boiling layer.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, which is very strong acid, which is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, which operation is like fire.
And some medicines are cauterized with them, such as thyme and honey and other causes that are mixed together.
And Galen recorded from an ancient man the operation and cure of which was cured pain in the bladder and sciatica, and magnified that it should be of that, and said that there is no need for other cure, and that it is healed by a method such as recommendation, which is very strong and has already been of that.
And it should be of certain green herbs, and if it is not fresh, it should be taken from a fresh fig; and the mot should be crushed with a small amount of gray and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the chest, and tied.
And let it remain for a period of three hours or until the patient has an episode of diarrhea.
And then apply that to the bottom, and when the body of the patient is twisted, insert it into the ground, where the pain ceases and is healed.
And know that no one should use this cauterization for these remedies, but rather the evacuation of the body.
It is said that when the goat's wound is cauterized with a vein, it should be applied to its back; and this cauterization should be made in this manner: take wool and soak it in ancient oil, and place it between the patient's foot and the bed.
And then take dry goat's wound and apply it to the fire until it is burned into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it there until it is stretched out. And repeat that, and do not stop until the sensation of the bite reaches the whole body and the pain stops.
And this method of cautery is called the cow's horn cautery.
Chapter 42.
Of the cautery for two pains.
Sometimes joint pain occurs in the feet due to various causes, such as from impact or from excessive excretion, and from similar causes, due to the infiltration of wet and moist matter.
And cautery is not used in this single case, which is made for the outflow of wet and moist matter.
Therefore, before evacuating the patient's intestines, give them bitter and similar pills to those that are made on the feet where the pain is three lines wide, more than what is usually tried with a cautery, according to the tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of the pills.
And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four pointed cauteries according to this form:
Chapter 43.
Of cautery at the beginning of a fever.
Mots are said to this illness in the small children; and it is from the beginning of it that they occur in the children on their structure in the lower part of the leg, the elevation and movement.
And later on the posterior spine of the back and the neck of it that begins to overcome the other spines.
And when you see this and want to prevent it, then do so with that pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: that takes the cautery over all part of the spine equally.
And if you want, cautery in the circuit of the spine with the pointed cautery two lines or three. And those points are placed between them.
And then heal the place before it is healed by what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in a fever that is caused by spasm of the nerves.
Chapter 44.
Chapter 44. On the Cautery for Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And since gout is cured by the hand of the healer and not completely relieved from pain, then use the pointed cautery again.
And you should apply the pointed cautery near the joint of the foot with a little bit of heat.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to other joints or to other parts of the body, and it does not subside, then use three or four pointed cauteries on each knuckle with this pointed cautery.
And if you have other cautery tools that are necessary for this, then use them, but do not put too much pressure on your hand with the cautery before, only as much as is necessary for the size of the wound.
And if the pain reaches both sides of the body, then administer the cautery that we mentioned in its previous chapter.
And if the pain is only in the chest and is called pleurisy, then prick in the circle of the ribs as they revolve, prick in those two lines.
And if the pain remains in those places, then prick in the circle of the ribs over each rib and on the pinch of the hand.
And if the pain reaches close to the joints or muscles, then cauterize all the tendons of each part of the assistants.
And do not evacuate the patient from good care and reception of medicines, because if good care is given and the feces are evacuated, this cautery will heal, God willing.
Chapter 45
Of Cauterization of Wounds.
When the wound is in the joints and the intestines are protruding through the abdomen, and this begins to happen, then tell the patient to lie on their side and use a soft cushion so that the wound does not come out of their belly.
And then place the patient between your hands on their side, and command them to hold their breath until the hole is made or the intestines appear.
And then return that one to the position of the patient, and place the needle on the thigh bone, and hold it so that its end resembles a circle at the top of the thigh.
And then light the cautery with this shape:
until it is red and hot. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place your hand over the cautery with your right hand, and insert the needle into the tendon of the pentenilh at the midpoint; and repeat that other technique if you have not succeeded in the first attempt.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, as it could come out of the patient and cause great harm.
Know that when you have the needle, do not press on the bone, as it will not allow your operation to proceed.
And know that the needle for children should be thin according to their size and age.
Then care for the location of the cautery for three days, until the scar of the fire has healed.
And then care for the other wounds until they have healed.
The patient should lie on their back for 40 days before the wound is sealed and the pain subsides.
And make sure that the patient's nutrition is provided according to the duration of their treatment, which will help flatten their stomach, and prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort to heal.
And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer adequate medication, and keep that for another 40 days.
And be careful of hard work and replenishing food and drink, and of violent vomiting, because when using this healing regimen, the whole body will be cured.
And I direct the cure of the ruptures in the other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, and you want that they do not bleed, then cauterize the rupture with that same pointed cautery according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the coda should be applied as the clean part of it; and then cure that same thing, and it should not be adjusted.
And then the first ones said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular-shaped cautery, rather than with a pointed one.
And then a line is placed on the wider part of the rupture, and another line above it; and your hand is placed with a claw-shaped cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Chapter 46.
On the cauterization of twisting.
When a limb is injured by crushing or by impact and persists in that pain for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily cauterized with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery for each member should be according to its size, shape, and location of the injury, and the location of the twisting and pain.
If it is healed by the first cautery, it is good; otherwise, repeat the process on that member; because of the custom of those pains, they are often caused by the limb approaching the body, so you should try to reach them with that cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Some lepers were cauterized by cautery for great benefit, and if the type of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And thus when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is common and as that which we have said in the division and not this, and do not be afraid of the patient that the corruption comprehends all his body and all his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head: with one at the middle of the head, and with the second behind him, pointing the front to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the nape or back.
And finally your hand at the cautery a little inside where the bone has a small impression, and from there the scales are displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
If leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then first use those cauteries that we have mentioned in the chapter; and use a pointed cautery on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on both ears, and two on the spines of the neck, and two on the spines of the back, and one large one near the collarbone, and one on the shoulder, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the wrists, and one on each wrist, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
And be careful not to burn those nerves that are over the ankle.
And some wounds are cauterized with one cautery on the bones of the stomach and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the pharynx.
And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and helpful it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the others, so that the body of the patient is already stunned.
And you will know that the cautery points should be large or small according to the members and joints, as prescribed by the tools.
And you will take care of the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cautery for stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, poultices, and does not heal, then you should cauterize that numb member with cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
And if it is a small cautery, enter it into the opening of the tendon a little bit. And you will take care of that with the ointment until it is healed.
Sometimes the veins are cauterized to alleviate pain in the feet, ankles, and spine, and the swelling of the nerves that move that member, and the swelling remains.
Do not make any assumptions about that, but rather the one that is known in the anatomy of the members and the exit of all the nerves that move the entire body.
Chapter 49.
Of the cauterization of warts that are morphea.
When warts are present and do not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you cauterize them with a pointed cautery according to the quantity of the specific type of wart that remains white and changes in color, and the color of it changes.
And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the sap of columbine or with the sap of ironwort, each being a separate part and all are mixed together, and then place a cloth over it and leave it on the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
Of the cautery of the neck.
When cancer begins and one wishes to remove it, then cautery the tumor with a circular cautery around it as it is rotated.
And the wise say that it should be cauteryed with the back cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen such cases.
And it is better to cautery it around it as we have said, or with a mottled cautery.
Chapter 10.
Of the cautery of the abdomen.
When some abdominal distention is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fluids, or due to the patient's old age, being thin, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abdomen; then cautery it around it with a small-pointed cautery; and remove the fluid that delays its maturation.
If you want to make a puncture with that cautery, then hold it in this way: and place it at the middle point where it will penetrate the skin.
And if the cautery is placed too high, so that the arm of the patient is injured; and then care must be taken to heal it.
Chapter 52.
Of the cauterization of a corroded part.
A corroded part is a decay that moves in the limb, which corrodes it like fire eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that decay in the place where cauterization with fire is suffered, then hold cautery knives of various sizes, according to what is appropriate in the place where the decay is.
And then cauterize that part completely, until you remove all the decay and there is no cause left of it.
And then let it rest for three days, and place oil mixed with salt on the cauterized places until all the scars are completely healed and the entire decay is gone.
And then carefully care for those affected by flesh generating wounds.
If after three days the flesh grows healthy in the place where there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cauterization on that which remains in the corrupted places.
And apply some acute medical remedies, such as those in place of cauterization. However, the use of fire as a remedy is not always effective.
And I have already told you the cure for that with acute remedy in the division, and take that which will be needed from it.
Chapter 43.
Of cauterization of the clitoris and other similar parts.
Women often suffer from pain in the parts of the foot that are called the clitoris, which is a large cause of pain; and cauterization is done in these two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
However, cauterization by fire is to ignite the pointed cautery in the shape of a needle, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the clitoris of all parts, and should be thin and sharp.
And then place that heated object on the joint, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And let it stay there for three days until it begins to swell. And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and let it stay on the joint for an hour until the pain is gone from its roots.
And then clean the area with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
If it does not convert, and there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the joints and feet, then you should apply these cauteries with water, and you should take a syringe of iron or steel or pen needle, and place it over the joint; and then slowly inject a small amount of water into the syringe, and move your hand, and rotate the syringe around the joint, and press the edge of the syringe on the root of the joint, and find the water entering the root of the joint; and wait for the patient to feel a slight stinging sensation for an hour, and then remove the syringe, because the joint will be healed.
And they did that to those who were brought in, and then bring the other one in close to all of them who had it in their body.
And then care for those who have redness of the skin due to the juices that the flesh absorbs.
Chapter 40.
Of the cauterization of trembling.
When a person has trembling due to a cold or fever, or for another similar cause, then you should cautery them with four cauteries or with one cautery, between each spine on their back, place a cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive oil cauterizing instrument.
And the trembling of the patient subsides and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Chapter 50.
Of the cauterization of accidents to the body.
When in the body there are abscesses that form from thick, corrupted materials, then at the beginning, as soon as it appears, you should cautery it over the entire head of the pustule with a thin, smooth wooden stick, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long, sturdy needle; or with a lentecular cauterizing instrument.
And sometimes cauterization is applied to the beginning of their expulsion according to this method; and not everyone believes in it, and those who do, it disrupts the excess and heals from those.
But rather that this should be done before evacuation by phlebotomy.
Chapter 66.
On the cauterization of fluxes of blood due to accidental cuts by the arkeria.
Many women have fluxes of blood due to cuts by the arkeria that are caused by the plague, or due to the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and similarly, and it is difficult to retain that.
Therefore, when this happens to anyone, you should always place your hand on the opening of the arkeria, and place your hand over that, and then insert those women inside before it stops the flux of blood from that, and that it does not come out.
And then place some small and large olives on the fire by the number of words, and blow over those until they are slightly ignited.
And then take a small or large second point on the location and the area where the artery is broken, over that vein hurriedly as soon as it has been sewn and restricted that wound.
And if the wound is expelled from the opening of the artery when you sew and extend the cautery, then take another cautery constantly from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that it does not bring other harm to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery through the wound, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, there are four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities of it are burned and the wound is restricted, or it is tied with a thread or a bandage for strong structure, or it is placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened by a pillow or compression.
May the one who administers a proper restriction of the limb and a tight bandage or by positioning of causes that cause burns and similar ones, does not compare but rather endures it.
If that happens to anyone and is not the doctor present or medicine, then begin by placing a bandage on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great cost of the patient's body, and over the area where the sanguine part of the plague is, and over the armor the said does not remain; and from over the armor sprinkle with cold water of great coldness until it is congealed and swollen; and more covering in which there is a need for cauterization or medicine.
Of incisions and perforations and wounds and of bleeding and of plagues and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that cauterization with fire and medicine is appropriate for all kinds of illness, and their causes and occasions, and the instruments needed in those cases, and we have ordered the chapters of the substance of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter for that purpose, so that the one who seeks that which he has lost may be helped, regarding what he will ask.
And I will begin with that, child, so that you know that in this chapter it is about terrorizing what is in the first chapter of cauterization.
And in order for you to be in great caution, because in the operation which is in this chapter many evacuations are made, which are done with suction, which is the life of the patient, and aspersion of the vein or incision on the abscess or puncture of exit or purging of the plague or extraction of a tooth and similar things. And all of those are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most of them death.
And I warn you that this does not happen to you in which there is doubt, because some evacuations are done by hand of men who do so from illnesses. And you should go to the patient's bedside and examine them, and if they are close to death, and they suffer greatly from their illness, and the duration of their illness is long, and the illness is fearful, which means death.
And of those who give you advice and say that they are healthy, you should not expect them to be healthy, and their illness is dangerous.
Therefore do not trust anyone who comes to you in this way; and your caution should be greater than necessary, and your patience; and do not presume any cause without first having certain scientific evidence that confirms this to you, and to which successful succession brings praise.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases prognosis and indication of which is converted to health, because in that one you are helpful over acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and of glory.
Oh, children, God inspires in you His understanding and does not take away from you direction and protection, because that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter to be distinguished from the second chapter that precedes in the chapter of cautery, of the treatment of the head between the feet, so that you may be able to answer questions about it and have the necessary knowledge.
First chapter.
Of the treatment of water that is contained in the head of infants.
You should know that this disease is caused by the infant's age and when the newborn's head touches the child's head, it becomes contagious.
And some are caused by an unknown reason.
I have not seen this disease except in infants; and to all those whom I have seen with this condition, it has been my observation that they are left to die, and for this reason I have considered it to be an unworthy work in those cases.
And I have seen that an infant's head whose head was full of water, and the child's head was always like this until it could not be put over its own size because of the greatness of its head, and more than the humidity increased until it died.
And this moisture or is added between the cartilage and bone, or is added behind the bone over the hip.
If the operation in that case is where the moisture is between the cartilage and bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision at the middle of the chest, and the length of the incision should be two fingers wide so that the moisture can run out, and this is the shape of the drain:
And if the moisture is more increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions in this way:
And if the moisture is behind the bone, then you should open the joints of the head from all parts and let the water out when you understand that the neck is open to the parts behind and not that which is in your hand. So you should make an incision at the middle of the chest with three incisions in this way:
And then extract all the moisture from the incision; and apply dressings and feathers to the incisions; and apply olive oil into the fifth day, and remove the scab and cure the wound with remedies and ointments, and strengthen the head to equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is restored and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of pus, as some times it appears more in the occipital region, or in the back, or on the right side, or on the left; and then make the incision where the abscess and the collection of pus appear, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and allow blood to flow out, as this could lead to excessive loss of fluid in the patient.
Chapter II.
When an abscess or swelling appears on the thighs or chest, and it is not removed, and you do not trust in the healing of medicines, then this incision of those two arteries would be the cure for this condition.
And then cover when you want to incise those arteries that the patient has on his neck, and remove the cloth from the area where the arteries appear, and place a strong cloth on the back of the patient; and also consider where the vein is located; and the locations of each one on the locations where the earlobes are compressed, and they are hidden in some people.
And approach the arch of the foot with a probe, and insert each one into the space between each part of the bone, and that is how it enters through the bone, and that is according to the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the probe through the artery and cut it where it enters the parts above.
And the length of the incision should be two fingers wide, because when a vein is incised, the blood flows out in a pulsating manner, which stops frequently.
But if the arch does not appear at the surface, then measure from the ankle the amount of space for three fingers, and approach the probe to the bone and enter it into the bone.
And that amount of blood that comes out is one or two ounces, and more does not come out easily, and all of that is according to the amount that appears from the virtue of the patient and the retraction of the arch of the foot.
And then consider the cause of the pain, and if there is some reason for the callus, then incise it to prevent it from becoming an abscess carelessly.
And then apply strength to the wound with feathers and cloth from the bed, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter III.
About the extraction of the tumors that are in the temples.
When certain ancient and frequent diseases or injuries occur in the temples due to humoral imbalances and quality in the temple bones, or severe and similar to those, and it is treated with medical methods and this does not help, then we have shown in these maladies extraction of the tumors in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the method of operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his fingers; and understand the tumor that is apparent in the temple where it is shown by its side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to severity of the disease.
And if it is hidden, then apply pressure to the patient's neck with some cloth; and then wipe the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water caudal inside until the tumor appears clearly to you. And here is the shape of the tool that you should take: And then you should scratch the skin with a sharp tool until you reach the archery; and then get in the hole and extract the parts that are too high inside until you extract the one from the skin and discover the one from the tunics which is left there, from every part.
If the artery is thin, then wrap it with a piece of cloth at the end of the needle, and then cut off one part according to the length by which its extremities were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not cut, the blood will not come out from all of it.
And then empty the blood in drops.
And if the archery is large, then fold it in two places with strong double twine or with cords at length, and do not let it touch the putrefaction during the consolidation of the wound and let the blood flow out.
And then cut off the excess that is between two limbs; and do so in that hour or at another time.
If you wish, use the pointed cautery to make incisions into the bone of the cautery, where the external parts of it are located, and it will be in the place of that metessa work.
It is better to use the pointed cautery if the patient has a fever or a scalded condition; because the cautery is one of those causes that help to end moisture, and it is better in some cases.
And cover the extraction of the arteries that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on clean powder, and then apply appropriate dry medicines to stop the bleeding and heal the wound.
And if you are performing another procedure and find bleeding from the artery, then you should press that blood, or use the cautery, or whatever stops the bleeding, and press your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if you do not have any of those causes present, then place your hand over the location where the bleeding is coming from, and apply cold water with great intensity until the acuity subsides, and then press it as appropriate.
And if it is necessary to extract an arrow from the body, you should use this cauterizing tool with two points, as you have previously prepared the two locations where the arrow has entered, and pause when they meet the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the blood between them does not clot completely.
And this is the shape of the cauterizing tool:
And the sharpness of the two points should be exemplary. However, if the sharpness is less than two points, it is better, because if they are too sharp and approach each other too quickly, they may not cut the flesh at all.
Therefore, in those cases where there is some thickness, the heat of the fire should be applied to them and the flesh should be cut more easily.
And this work is better than any other work and more useful.
And the space between the two points should be equal to the thickness of the aforementioned object.
Chapter Four
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic gout in the joints.
When the acidic gout affects the body, and it is the head of the patient that is most affected, and there is no apparent cause for medical treatment, and the face of the patient becomes swollen and feels as if it is swollen like a snail's, and the joints of that person are softened and humidified in such a way that their hairs are already known, and their skins are scratched by the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedies for this operation were called "the scattered ones", and they named that treatment as "the scattered one".
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on his forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is less than two fingers: the first incision should be equally spaced from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second incision should be along the length of a little movement of the eyelashes that are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And watch out for the beginning of the arches that are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the lower jaw. And if the space of each beginning is equal to three digits, adjust it.
And if you have a dry sponge or cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
And then place the flat part of two sharp-edged tools between them, which is the shape of the incision of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second incision. Scrape away all the tissue that is between two incisions on the periosteum, which is above the bone, and then do this from the first incision towards the second incision. And then spread this flat tool and enter it into the first incision another time with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place your hand on the sharp side of the scalpel against the flesh attached to the tissue, and on the other side of the bone, and push it until it reaches the second incision, and cut away all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
While continuing to apply this method to the other side of the codex, then perform it in the groove between the two grooves.
And when an equal amount of blood has been drawn from the veins, express the veins of the feet that have been condensed.
And place your hand in each groove of the old man's foot, and place it on those calloused spots that are yellowish, greasy, and dry, and be careful not to cause an abscess.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and cure it with an ointment made from basilicon oil and rosewater and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
Of the cure of gout and its descending pains from the parts of the body mentioned in Chapter I.
When any vein is pierced and continues to be so, and the patient's eyes become weak and their vision becomes blurred, and their eyelids are ulcerated and they cannot open them, and in the beginning of the chapter there is sharp pain and subsequent exhaustion, then you should know that these accidents occur because the matter and gout do not come from other veins but from the veins of the parts mentioned in Chapter I.
The best cure for this is to command the patient to turn their face, and then make a small incision on the right side of the forehead, near the temple; and the incision should go through the bone; and extend your hand under the temples, which are swollen due to the bruising.
Dry out the entire wound with a dry cloth or torn cloth, and then stuff it between the two lips of the incision at the back or with the cloths. Then apply a poultice made of bran and oil to prevent it from turning into an abscess.
And when you remove that and see that the abscess has decreased, then make a poultice of bread crumbs and collyrium, and apply it to the affected area, as if you were taking flour and collyrium in equal parts and mixing them, and from this, a poultice should be made and administered to these wounds, as if it were native flesh.
Chapter 6
Of the treatment of that which catches in the armpits.
All the cause that catches in the armpits is one of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and wool, or it is a plant like cabbage or beans, or it is a cause of fluxive nature, such as water and vinegar and their similarities, or some animal.
And therefore when a stone catches in the armpit or another cause similar to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the armpit, and if the armpit is exposed to the sun, and if you see the stone, then distill some cause of violent oil or vinegar into that area, and administer the extraction of it, and make the person sneeze as a condition, and open the nostrils in preparation for the event of sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the armpit, and extend the armpit to the parts above, because these are often forgotten in these causes.
If it is not ready, then administer extraction with the instrument called the epicoticar subtle gesture, which has the following form:
And if it is ready, then use the gesture; otherwise, administer extraction with the instrument called the subtle double needle.
And if it is not ready for that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the ear canal and seal the area around the needle with cera and molten soft wax so that it is not pushed out but the needle. And then extract with the strong attraction of the tie, as many times as we have found.
But if it is not ready in this way, then take some warm or well-dressed cloth that has been used to take the soles of the feet, and place that at the end of the ray, and cover it decently with that placed. And then insert that into the ear canal and remove the earwax from the moisture.
And if all the causes that we have mentioned are not forgotten, then you should proceed to incise that part which caused the abscess or spasm.
The method of incising that part is to first secure the patient's arm with the cephalic vein and remove the second suture according to the method of its virtue, and then make a small incision in the palm of your hand and apply pressure on the parts above, and perform a small puncture in the location where the patient feels the most pain. And if the incision does not reach the bone, and the bone is found, then you can use appropriate instruments to remove that part; and then make the incision in that hour with speed, and cure that part before it is healed.
And if the cause is one of the gouty gravel that we believe and it is inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not obey your instructions, then you should take a thin spatula according to this form: and administer that abscession of that great wound which was cut in the ear.
and do not do that when you think that that wound has already been moistened by the steam of the ear, and pause it in some pessaries, and prop extract those from which there are oncis or gesti subtil, or ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, because the extraction of it is praised.
in the water that enters into the ear canal, which the patient uses for sneezing conditioned at the beginning, and fills the ear with old wax, and place a cloth over that ear in which the water is, and if it is removed by that, it is good; and if not, take many small pebbles according to the length of the said, and calf those in the fire for a short time, and the patient introduces one of those into the passage of his ear and strikes it with another stone on the pebble which is inside the ear. Therefore do not cease this method until all the water is boiled away.
Therefore do not cease this method until all the water is boiled away. And when all the water is boiled away, take a piece of paper or a splint, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it is completely burned.
And put another splint and do this many times until all the water is boiled away, and remove that which is under the name of the excessive stone.
However, in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small piece, as described above, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is a large piece that causes pain to the side of the abdomen, then administer the extraction of it with care and oncisions, and the cause of it is more likely than all other causes that are found in the ear.
However, in the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, when you treat that which we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and do not compare your treatment, then cover that you regulate the ear to the sunlight.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that small or sharp object, but if no cause appears, then take a narrow and wide needle of the following form: And introduce the thin end of the needle into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then apply strong pressure with that, and do so until all the worms are expelled.
But if they do not obey you, then open and close the circuit of the needle with the following wax: then administer distillations that have been used in the past for the treatment of worms, and look for that in the treatise on distillations.
And your emission is the one that you use to pour the medical oils into the ear with this instrument of which the following is its form: And make it of silver or copper, narrow, in which there is a small tube, and place it above.
And so it should be used as needed to place the catheter in its cavity here, where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then insert oil into the concavity of the ear, or some herb, or whatever liquid from these medicines in the catheter — and that is in the syringe —, and then gently press the ray above and express the hand over the area until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil dripping.
And that which is in the syringe should already be heated slightly by the fire. And remember that the liquid you will distill in the syringe should not be too cold, because the medicines of the syringe cannot withstand such cold.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of blindness in ears.
Some people are born without the perforation of their belly buttons, and this has also happened to some men, blindness in the flesh of the ear due to plague or because of some flesh in that area; and this blindness is sometimes made at the beginning of the ear canal which does not know the excrement, and sometimes in the parts in front.
And in the first case where the patient does not understand the treatment, it is in the most difficult positions for healing.
And in the case where you understand the treatment, place the patient's ear to your mouth and look at him. And if you see an abscess that is about to burst, open it with this thin spatula of the following form:
If the end of it in which the width is small has one sharp edge and the other not, and the spatula is two lion widths long so that it does not pierce the ear.
And if the abscess is caused by flesh that has grown in the ear or in the meatus of the ear, then use this thin needle and pierce it with great facility before all the flesh is out.
And if the abscess is in the front of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat it slightly, and place it in the meatus of the ear.
And if the patient has been lying in that position for a long time due to difficulty breathing, the pressure on them becomes too great; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
And place a cloth of the second quantity of the width of the wound that you have wrapped around the thigh; do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any medicine and insert it into the abscess, pulverize it over it, and use it; and if you see that the neck is already infected, then cover it with a cloth that you have wrapped in roasted olive oil, until the abscess is healed; and cure it within that time.
If there is a flow of pus, then submerge a cloth or towel in cold water and place it on the neck, and use the other cure that restricts the flow of pus, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter 8.
On the treatment of azoth, which occurs in the eyelids.
Azoth that sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes is wet, and some are dry.
Therefore, you should have those bandages or cotton, and remove those spacers from their eyes, and place your hands on the areas according to the following.
If there is pain from blood flow, then you should cauterize those eyes with a thin cautery.
The best cauterization is to remove the incisions and dry wet areas when there is still some cause of their eyes; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyes are burned and do not return.
Chapter 9.
Treatment of granulosis that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Wet areas sometimes occur in the eyelids of the eyes that resemble granulosis in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called.
And there is a collection of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is considered as follows: if the large one originates in that which appears from the eyelid and is smeared on all parts; and the cause of it is unknown.
Therefore, make an incision over that which appears from the eyelid, and scrape all parts to facilitate its escape, and then suspend it with a thread and cut off that one.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure that within which it is healed.
And if it is small, it will not cause harm to that which the ointment of it restores and encases.
And if the large one is declining to the parts beneath the eyelid, then wash the eyelid and suspend the large one with a thread, another that you indicate for incision, and press all parts, and if the eyelid by incision is lengthened, then it is never known in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salted water; and treat the area with the same thing that it contains so that it can be healed.
Chapter X.
About the care of the eyelid above the wound.
Excessive grey matter that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and more so in children, aggravates the wounds of those and causes their cataracts to increase; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on them.
And so you see those people talking all the time, and talking while they sleep; and their eyelids are wet, which have already been covered by inflammation, and the appearance of cataracts is in the eye; and when you press on the area with your fingers, you can feel the cataract inside them.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses his own head on the chin, and then place a cloth of lead and of the wound, and make it into a circle according to the amount that it contains all the parts, and then place that over that and press on the fingers of all so that cataract is added in the middle of the circle, and then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a needle in the slit, and the slit should not be larger than the slit that is made in flaubotomy.
In the first incision you make in the abdomen until you reach the arch of the ribs, where in the most displaced processes, the arch is found according to the form of a white ridge.
Then extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, which are called the parts of the fornix, and rotate them between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful not to adjust in the fissure so that the space does not reach the bone and the other.
If you do not see it at the beginning of the fissure, then adjust a small instrument in the fissure; and then extract that which we have said; and place cloths soaked in warm water and vinegar over them and press them over the area and wash those instruments.
And you should know that they sprinkle salt and press it in the cavity of the fissure so that whatever remains of that moisture is removed.
And then care for it until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a poultice made of certain herbs until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
On the methods of touching the wound.
When the eyelids of wounds are not adjusted by their natural hairs and are antiquated, then touch the wound and make methods to cure such injuries as frequent tears and softening of the eyelids and cloth until that cause of destruction of the wound which is called tactinir of the wound, and cure it in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine according to what is said in the chapter on cauterization; or by making an incision and suture; or by cannulas as I will describe.
And therefore cover that the head of the patient is covered with your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the wound to your left hand, and if it converts, it is good; otherwise, insert a needle in the part where the skin is closest to the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate through that part, and that is — on the edge of the eyelid where there are no hairs — near the hairs, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and convert it to the side.
Approach the part of the eyelid where the eyelashes are located and carefully insert a thin instrument into the lacrimal canal; then remove the foreign body and place it beside the eyelid, dabbing it with cotton or cloth, and then cover the eyelid with a tent-like shape.
However, it is important to note that the shape should be adjusted according to the degree of elevation of the eyelid, as this varies among men, and those who require a large incision in the eyelid should have it done according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then approach the thin instrument over the two lines that you have sewn, and begin from the lacrimal canal into the lacrimal minor. And if your incision is near the natural eyelashes, it should be as large as possible.
And then place the ointment in one of the two angles of the eyelid, and scrape off the entire area, and adjust the stitching with the two lips of thin wool or silk, and wipe away any excess, and if you wish to do this, do so, otherwise, do not worry about it.
And after three or four days, approach the wound stitches and care for that.
And if you wish, leave the wound stitches open, and care for that with a dry and tight bandage, as the eyelid needs sealing and attachment; however, closed stitches are better, and therefore I will not discuss the old methods of taping.
However, in their care, it is a good operation, and not due to fear.
And another method in taping, and that is to place a piece of silk or muslin over the eyelid, and then raise the eyelid with three fingers separated and gathered according to this form:
And if it is not possible to do that, then hold the fingers separately and gather them together according to this form: take a needle with thread in it, and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other needle into the lacrimal canal, and the second needle into the lower lacrimal canal, and adjust between the two needles the equal length, and then raise your hand with an equal elevation, raise the entire eyelid over the area where it should be placed as we have recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and heal it until it is healed.
If a pus-filled abscess occurs on your finger or your gum, cover that abscess with wax and apply the same ointment to it.
And some eyelids that are turned inside out can be covered with the same ointment that we mentioned for wounds, but stitches are more artificial in that case.
To bandage the legs is as follows: First, turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside according to what I have mentioned; then, using art, make two thin strips of cloth or paper that are as long as the eyelid and their width is slightly narrower than the width of the spatula. You have already incised at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then add each thin strip under the excess of the eyelid and tightly tie the strips of each section, leaving it for several days until the string decomposes and is rejected and rots inside if it does not cause any harm.
If it is too late, then break the bone at the joints, and then cure the wound until it is healed.
So when it is hardened, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make these kinds of cans according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
About raising the sharp hairs in the wound when the hair is hard.
When they are unnatural hairs, hard, sharp, and prickly, and the wounds, then perform the operation in such a way that you take a thin needle and place it on a soft, thin silk thread, and adjust the ends of it and the knots as gently as possible. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you make another thin thread next to it in a short time, and use the ends of that if you wish.
And then place the patient's head on your shoulder, and be close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, because it is a delicate and small operation.
And then insert the needle into the eyelid where it is necessary to make an incision, and make it penetrate into the eyeball quickly before it goes beyond the natural limit of the eye.
And then pull the eye out and insert it into the solution, and put one or two or three and not more.
And then pull your hand out and insert it into the solution, where the eye is not too far from the eyelid and the natural limit of the eye.
If it is not too far from the solution, then insert it into the parts that you have composed, until it is far enough from the true limit of the eye.
And then look at the eye from the side, because you are inserting it and the true limit of the eye, and shake it and clean it, and leave it closed for two or three days, until the eye adheres to its place and grows back healthy flesh.
And if the blanket is too short, then you adjust a longer blanket than the natural ones, and elevate that one, or let it lie flat until it is long enough to cover the space, and then elevate that one.
Chapter 13.
About the cure of a foreign body that is in the eyelid.
When it is in the eye and removing it, and the contraction of the eyelid when it is turned upwards, to the right or left side, due to a bad consolidation of the eyelid or a drying out or a cauterization, and this is called leporina, and whether it is natural or accidental, and it is made because of a bad consolidation of the eyelid or a drying out or a cauterization, or due to similar causes.
May the method of the operation be that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together before they are healed.
And do not use treatment that dries out the causes of which they are contracted, because if you do so, it will return worse than at any other time when they had no fire.
Use in that of causes that soften such as fenugreek, and apply the steam from the water in which they are soaked and sown, or use goose oil, which should be liquefied with some olive oil, and apply it to the affected area, and cure it.
The treasure of your treatment is that you puncture all the swellings that are not solidified according to the form in which fire has been used at the beginning.
And this operation, which we have said, is only a correction of the contracture that does not return the form of the area according to what fire has given.
Chapter 14.
Of the cure of contractures that are made in the eyelid.
This contracture that is made in the eyelid, which is not called a vertical contracture; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Accidental injuries are caused by blows or cuts or burns or other similar events.
The method of the operation is to take a needle with which you make double thread, and place it in the flesh, and make it pass from the lacrimal of the left eye into the lacrimal of the right eye, until the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh to the parts above the needle and hold it with the other hand, and insert it into the wide space. And if the figure of the eyelid returns to its original shape, it is good; otherwise, take the razor and place it on the broken part, and convert that eyelid, and make the two wounds on the side of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two wounds are made into two angles at the beginning, which you make to meet each other, and make the angle of the other one enter until they form a figure of their own.
And this Greek letter figure is the letter lambda.
And then remove the flesh from that part which is the length of the wound after it has been cut, which is called the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with flax thread; and then care for those with the mentioned softening medicines and hot compresses until they are healed.
And if it is necessary to use a stitch or suture or cauterization, then make sure that you cut the flat incision on the eyelids according to what is prescribed. And then separate the hot compress between two lips as they have said.
In the summary of the sermon on the cure of incisions when it is raised or lowered, that it should run in the operation, according to how it is prepared in the form of incisions, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the skilled surgeon always prepares instruments in each possible way that is possible for him to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best positions.
Chapter Fifteen
On the adherence of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in men who have their eyelid stuck under the eyebrow and prohibited from easy movement and their natural works, then you should insert the extraction of the ray behind the eyelid, and lift it up or extend it to the eyelid.
And then you should insert the adhesion with a thin needle, which is not sharp enough to cause injury, so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and remove the needle without leaving it in the eyelid.
And your incision should be made to easily remove that adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should apply saltwater to the eyelid, which you wash with; or distill in it some dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the swelling under it, place wool soaked in honey on the swelling, and use the third day's urine of a consolidating nature until he is healed.
Chapter XVI.
About the beginning of a nail and the flesh of the eyelids.
You should know that the nail is of two kinds, either nervous, which is similar to a hard, fine bone; or non-nervous, which is like white mucus, which when it comes into contact with the skin, often causes an abscess to form in it.
And the non-nervous ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually covers the sight and prevents light and movement of the swelling.
If the worker begins at the beginning of it, then place the patient's head in your lap, and raise the swellings of it, and lift the eyelid with your hand, and collect the nail from the abscess and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert it into the horn of a cow or a buffalo or a fish, or something similar, or strong iron, or double the tip of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the nail, and pierce it with the needle, and hold the nail; and extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the skin on the side of the nail which is the pupil. And then continue that with the needle into the back of the patient.
And then insert the needle into the lacrimal canaliculus, using thin forceps or small scissors, and cut the tissue of the lacrimal duct so that it does not become continuously leaking tears.
And also some of the nail is extended or held firmly, as we have said, and then scrape the skin on the side of the nail which is the shape of this:
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunic and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Approach the beginning of the foot with a small amount of salt or crushed herbs, and let it soak for several days; then care for that part which has been affected.
If the nail is not too sharp and you cannot insert the needle, or it does not stick in that place, then this type of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed as it was and recommended in the division.
If you want to incise that part, then you begin by opening the thigh of the patient and taking a thin, sharp lancet of fine sharpness according to this form: with its fineness. And if you see that that part is thinned and contracted and has been placed in that place, then let it soak for several days with your urine or with herbs made of rosemary or salt crushed into powder, and cover the wound with a bandage.
And then repeat the operation until all that is left of it has been removed, but if the opposite abscess is not in the wound, then let it alone and cure the abscess when it begins to heal.
And continue your operation until he is healed.
The blockage of the lacrimal canal, if noted inside the eye for great harm, should be pierced with an onion; and incise that part, and do not finish the incision so that it does not cause excessive tears to flow.
And then apply a drop of rose oil into the lacrimal canal until he is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the incision of a certain animal and of that which is born from meat adjusted inside the eye.
Sometimes meat is born inside the eyes of certain animals, and it is overlaid on the pupil, or approaching or extending over the eyelids and strongly pressing the eyelids to the parts deformed and it is assembled at the rose of a balustrade.
During the operation in which the patient's head is raised on the bed; and then open his eyes and collect all that meat with an onion or with a spoon; and then incise the meat at the beginning until it is finished by the incision, and guard yourself from the eye that you do not descend that which is your operation.
And if you have inserted an instrument that we recommended at the tip of the needle, or small forceps that collect abscess secretions as they approach this chapter.
Then, when your instrument is completely inserted and the entire area has been cleaned, fill the wound with salt water, or apply a powder of rosemary and similar to corrosive medicines, and place a sterile bandage over it until the abscess is securely closed.
If there is any cause for alarm and the wound is not healing properly, and you fear an abscess, then lance the wound and treat that abscess with something that drains it, and repeat this operation until it is healed, and similarly treat the surrounding flesh that was affected by this wound.
However, if your patient has all wound healing naturally or accidentally, use iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you are sure that this member can bear this operation.
Chapter 18.
Of collecting blood from the vein.
Blood vessels that are swollen and hardened over the vein and prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they develop the vein for a certain number of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the vein in which there is blood clotting is strong and not another disease that causes blood clotting, then you collect that clot.
And if you command the patient to hold their head still, and then suspend those veins with an elastic band or two according to your judgment; and that band should be of thin double thickness in this form:
or two bands gradually in a circle like this:
And then collect those veins with thin forceps, thinning them gradually, and wipe away the blood every now and then until they are clean from the vein and can be folded.
And be careful not to damage the vein at its extremities; and if your operation is in the morning, and you have a strong hand in your operation, then do not cut but those veins.
And when you have completed it, then distill some cold water or rose oil into the wound to reduce its inflammation and ease the pain that remains from the blow.
But if you cannot obtain any at that time, then apply all the remedies that alleviate its pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is reduced and the abscess is secured.
And then repeat the process until it is healed.
This is the form of forceps:
Chapter 19.
Of reducing hernias to their place.
When you treat hernias with a sharp cautery or medicine, do not insert it into the abscess, but cut open the abscess to drain all the fluid that is in it and the pus until the bone is exposed.
And when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackness in it, then use this instrument:
And if it is named an acute head, and made of iron, and the cap is rounded like a helmet that has been punctured by a puncture of lima or aliskalfati for subtle puncture (like in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone corruption, and slowly rotate it between your thumbs called, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is removed.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the location with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from infection for forty days, and it does not recur, does not become an abscess, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then you should reduce the crack to the shape of the nose, and in this way: and it is that you uncover the bone with a second sharp iron or medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then you take a tribe in this form:
The external part of the iron is triangular, and its length is extended into the end as if it were a needle.
And place that over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and hold your hand a little away from the bone, and then move your hand towards the tribe where it enters the bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were piercing through.
Therefore, restore the area with astringent medicines that you have seen before.
Since the flesh and the area are hardened, therefore the matter that was flowing to the joints returns to its place, so that is less painful for the patient.
Chapter 20.
On the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
When the bone is prominent and does not cause damage or reduction in the excretion, then loosen the patient, and then follow it, and place several incisions on the neck for good suction; and then place a liniment on the bone made of pitch, aloe, salt, and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster on the bone with powders.
And the method for cleaning the feet is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those cloths.
And then place one on top of the other according to the amount needed for the required purpose. And then apply strong pressure on those cloths with durable, tightly bound string; and repeat the suction of the wounds; and afterwards, remove the cloths and leave the wound straight during the day and night.
But if during the softening of the ligament it becomes too straight, then be careful that it is not too straight.
And then remove the ligament as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, good; and if not, then repeat the application of the ointment to the feet and the ligament and the cloths until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the beginning of the elevation of the uveal membrane.
When there is a rupture in the uveal membrane, and it elevates and protrudes out of the eyelids like a large lump, and it takes on the form of a person, and you want to incise it, then the operation is as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uvea from the part below to the part above, and place another needle in the part that is double the width of the lacrimal duct, and make that penetrate; and then remove the first needle according to its position; and incise the location of the double thickness and lift that part of the uvea around the needle, and press that strongly.
And then remove the needle and place it on the woollen cloth soaked in album of egg white and let it rest until the thread is dry.
And then cure the wound with that which comforts the one who is afflicted until the wound is healed.
And some compresses are made from the entire part of the cloth inside the wound, adjusted to a large circle, and then perforated with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, and drain the albuminous humidity, and then lower the wound and insert it immediately.
And then strengthen until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of cataracts.
This disease that is called cataracts is not other than a substance that is adjusted in the wound like descending water and is not that one.
The way to work on it is that the patient should sit over the prepared and adjusted chair, and then take the head in your hands from two parts and that one inside which you see the substance arriving at the parts behind, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and stop the light, and the disease will be seen as it is.
And if it does not go down, you will know that it is a fever.
If it does not prepare the descent to sanity, then let the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and gently place it on the conjunctiva and continue until the eyeball is expelled from its socket.
Then, when it is expelled, you will pour in the prepared water mixed with honey or water in which you have already made a fenugreek and honey mixture.
And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the fever that comes from the eye.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and what is suitable for breaking according to the speech declaring, then that second healing.
Then let it be known that you should let the patient sit between your hands on a chair and hold their head firmly.
And then place your hand near the eyelid of the sick person, if the sick person is right-handed, then place your hand on the right eyelid; or if the sick person is left-handed, then place your hand on the left eyelid.
And then take the right hand of the sick person if the sick person is left-handed; or take the left hand of the sick person if the sick person is right-handed.
And then place the end of your right hand near the crown of the head for the thickest part of the ray in the album of the eye on the outer side of the lower lacrimal duct, and then gently roll your hand over that.
And then penetrate into the eye and feel that your hand has reached the cause of the problem.
And cover the measurement of the hand palm at the beginning of the space that is between the pupil and the end of the black circle, which is the crown of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal tunica.
Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth nearby. If the water starts to descend, move the patient to that place, and place them on their side.
And then rest for a moment; if the water starts to descend, then you should pause at that other cloth before it gets wet.
And then when it is dry and not descending, you should remove the cloth with ease, and wipe the area of your hand little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear salt from gemstone in the water, and wash the wound with that; and then place a cotton or stopper soaked in rose oil and album of egg white on the wound.
And those who have been in our time have used that with egg white.
And if you do not obey your cloth to the instrument of the wound due to its hardness — which is one of the men from whom the wound is very hard — then cover that which you take, the spatula which is called the alberid of which this is the form:
And so pierce that joint at that point, and do not remove your hand from the wound, and see if you are not making a subtle error in the location.
And then perform the second subtle procedure as we have said.
And you should give the patient the complement of your work, that is, prepare them for a sleeping position that has been done well, and make sure they lie on their back in a dark room, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on that part of their body to make it straight and not bend their head to the right or left of all.
And let the bandage be according to their condition until the third day.
And then remove that from that dark room and extract the free fluid, and make the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage within the seventh day.
And do not cover that in the hour of the cures or soon after the infusion. Having covered that, you should remove it so that the water can flow more easily and not too strongly and violently.
If an abscess is caused by a cautery, then let it drain for seven days, and then apply a poultice to that area where the abscess was.
Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to prevent them from vomiting, which exists in the dark room.
And then gradually raise the patient's head and talk about their causes.
And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not excused from work for several days, and then you should be careful about the operation.
And we have learned from some of those who are in Arthur, and some say that they make fire in the Air Mountain by piercing the rock where water is found.
However, I have not seen any way to obtain water in our land that has been perfect, nor has any water been found in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of Air Mountain by which one can be above those who do not know those:
If the bones are broken or made of iron properly, and their external parts are like this subtle triangle, the sharp end is like that form.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there are different fleshy growths attached to it, due to some cause that is similar to a spike of a mule's foot, or a polyp; and this disease is called polypus, which is similar to that thing represented. And from there, the flesh is cancerous, the pale, of dark color; and from there, the flesh is not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths, not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should make the patient sweat between your hands and place it under the sunlight, and wipe the nose of it, and prick the affected area on those fleshy growths. And then extract that from the parts of the forehead, and then cut off what you have understood from those sharp spaces of the one part where you know that all the flesh has been stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the incision is possible, then you should remove that with one of the small tools to facilitate what was from it. If the lord has an abscess or a pus-filled wound, then pause at that place; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut and cauterize the area where the pus has been completely removed and all the cavities have been closed.
Then take out the pus from the nose and place it near the beginning of the wound with water or wine. If the nose is packed and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it is healed.
If the moisture does not enter after the wound has been closed, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that rises to the bones of the nose where it cannot be reached by an abscess.
Then after the wound has been closed, if there is any swelling on the part that is to be applied, and rub in the mouth with the amount of salt or medicine that is suitable for the patient, and between each application, pause and examine the patient and apply another end of the cloth in the nose to relieve the pain or for some other cause that is possible.
And when that is done, draw the patient's odorant close to where it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their glabella, as troops of children at school do, and it is the likely cause of this action.
And then place both of the patient's extramitties on their nose, one on top and the other underneath, and administer a salt of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do this until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt water, and do this for three days or more until the putrid matter completely disappears from the meat.
And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a plug of lead to prevent any harm until they are healed.
But if the cure does not work, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostril with which they are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
And do this with silver or wool, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small cup, and the meat in the same way.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like this with a straw, and the cannula of the instrument should be able to purge and be flat, open; at which end you hold it when you pierce in oil or that liquid you want from the sucs and the causes suckable.
Chapter 25
Of the pills in the external parts of the nose.
The pills should be placed in the external parts of the nose, and they are magnificent and effective in other days when it is necessary to look at their effect.
And for that reason, you should insert it at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it. Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
But if the insertion has not been made before it becomes magnificent, consider whether it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little pain, then do not touch that iron which is apostema crancos; for it was caused by the great malice of the one who inserted this abscess on that person.
And if the abscess is of lion touch and not of dark color, and it is possible to insert it in all that, then evacuate the patient and insert that sense of fear, and cure the area with that which dries and contracts before it becomes healed.
Chapter 26.
Of sutures of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by injury or similar.
You should know that when the solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little confidence is placed in that operation in those people.
Then cover, when the wound has any cause of those that you consider if it is fresh and bleeding, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
And if the lips of continuity are already separated, and each one is healthy, then cover that you excise each part of their skin within which it does not bleed. Then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healing dragon's blood and three-nine powder, and place a poultice of diaphanicon diafinicon or any other consolidating plaster on top of it, leave it for two days or three, and then remove that and replace the plaster and cure that within which the wounds have healed.
The method of stitching is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the stitching of the belly, or add the solution of continuity to the wound as you have made known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the inner thighs in the divided parts.
There are abscesses in the inner thighs of some men in the divided parts of their labia, similar to boils, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the labia and cut each of those hard parts, and then fill the abscess with a strong mixture until it is healed, and then wash the area with vinegar and treat it with what has stiptic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the beginning of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
A large abscess is present on the adjusted flesh in the gums, which the ancients called albulus, so you should suspend that with an onion or whatever you have to that with forceps and incise it from its base, and leave the pus to run out or the wound.
And place your hand on the wound, or apply some other stanching or drying powders.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily, and cauterize it, so that the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When sharp, hard, and sometimes black tartar is adjusted to the surface of the teeth, between the teeth and gums, and some stains are yellow or green, it indicates corruption through which the teeth become yellow.
And therefore, you should scrape the patient's hands and place your cap on their head, and remove the teeth in which those sharp and similar tartar are found, without any cause of damage, and that is how blackness and yellowness and other stains are caused.
If that is still the case, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the reasoning on those teeth on the next day and the second and third until it reaches the final statement in which you want it to be.
And you should know that teeth require various shapes of files and different figures according to what is prepared for your operation. So that you can see the shapes of files that are used to remove the part of the tooth from the gum and another file that is used to smooth between the teeth in different shapes, and these shapes of files should be prepared by you as soon as possible:
Chapter XXX
Of tooth extraction.
That you cure the tooth of its pain from beginning to end in all extraction of it, because there is no cause that should delay the movement of it when it is extracted, because the substance is sublimated within which is extraction of it.
May it be that when the patient is prepared to have that tooth extracted, you should first be certain what tooth is causing pain, because sometimes the movement of the tooth deceives the patient and makes them think it is a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of teeth.
Therefore, when you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know is, firstly cover that tooth with some space in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth from the gum of all parts, and then bring that to the teeth called wisdom teeth, or subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you have removed.
And then place a large log in the strong jaws for good communication or blockage, and place the patient's head between the two nails that you hold so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straightly in a way that it does not give more pain to the patient nor to you.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there beside all parts to facilitate and effort the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or worn, then cover that broken and tighten it with a thin wire at the end so that it is not broken in the hour of your construction upon that which you hold.
And you should work carefully with incision around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not tear it from there, and return over the patient for the main cause of his first pain.
And guard yourself that you do not do what unskilled barbers do in their practice and audacity for the eradication of them, which they do not administer what we have recommended; for these reasons, great evils come upon men with maladies, which are more difficult than those that have been cured, and all of their symptoms remain, or some of those, or that extracts from there with unskilled barbers have testified.
And the eradication of it is washed with water or vinegar and salt.
And if there is a flow of pus through an opening, as unskilled barbers do, then take some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if that does not match, cauterize it.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly with the fingers that are praised for their long, thin, and straight shape, so that they will not bend when performing tasks.
And if there are times when you need to use a thick handle, ensure that the long, thin, and straight forceps are not bent, but rather short ones.
And if you need to use Indian-descended straight forceps, place the teeth of those that fit into each other and use them to strongly construct, and sometimes they are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird, which is strong and has great construction.
Chapter 31.
On the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the lower jaw that are impacted.
When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted due to some cause, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is located for one day or two until that location becomes soft; then use analgesics or hold the handles of the forceps that are shaped like the beak of a ciconia bird or guanta, which is the form of the forceps:
The outer parts of their joints were cut away using a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey your command and this forceps or hold it, then you should cut over the bone and remove all the flesh and insert the instrument called the atali, which is a small saw with a shape like this:
And if it is short and thick, make a small one, but not too thick so that it is not square.
Therefore, if the bone is cut away, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular chisel in which there is some roughness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more delicate tip.
And you have already helped yourself with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the appropriate shape following: And you have other instruments that I will describe in the extraction of teeth; because it is well done with this instrument which resembles an onion large, and this is the shape:
From the angular or short end of the triangle, which is some swelling, and not too thin so that it is not triangular.
And other wise, the tools for teeth are similar to other instruments.
May the skilled and subtle in the art, seek for themselves according to what they mean by this operation and various diseases; because of the diseases to which the ancients did not say or pause a proper instrument, due to the different forms of various species.
May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if it is broken, then carefully apply that which is convenient for this instrument and for forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of teeth, and help you with how to handle this one:
And if it is in any swelling, little by little, and it is tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the entire bone is completely broken; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to this.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then prick that pustule and its black core, and cure it within so that it becomes healed.
Chapter thirty-two.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth compared to others.
When teeth are prominent and do not naturally fit in their own shape, especially when they extend beyond the others, and more so when they extend towards women, and especially when they extend towards virgins; therefore consider whether another tooth is close to it, and if there is no possibility of removing or extracting it, then remove that one. However, if it is not connected to another tooth, then use this instrument to cut it out; it resembles a pig's tusk, and should be made of Indian iron with an edge that is sharp.
And if you cut it out over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and it is not connected to another tooth.
And if a prominent tooth is exposed to the surface, then shave it with this instrument made of Indian iron;
And let the iron from India and the sharp edge be used alone; and let the pointed needles be made like the lima bean, which are made into needles, and the teeth of the needle should be shaved a little at a time in small days for convenience, so that there is no other tooth that is worn out and broken. And then draw lines along the linea alba, and shave it with a razor.
And if there is a tooth from which part of the tongue is wet and sticky, then you should scrape that into it so that the roughness of that part is stopped and covered, and it is filled in order to prevent the tongue from descending or the word from being corrupted.
Chapter .xxxiii.
On the restoration of worn out teeth with gold or silver.
When accidents happen to the teeth in front of the jawbone and removal by percussion or impact, and the patient cannot bear that which has happened, and you have treated it with hemostatic medicines, and your treatment has not been successful, then in order to prevent them from breaking in those that are strong with gold and not silver, because silver turns yellow and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
And if the bone is in such subtlety and roughness according to the amount that could enter between the teeth; and the form of the remedy is that you take the bone and double it between two healthy teeth, and then gradually increase the twists of the bone between two rotten teeth, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the remedy in the same place where you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and knowledge until it is not rotten.
And let your string be the one that strengthens the bone by holding the ends of the teeth so they do not escape.
And then remove the excess ends of the bone with forceps or tweezers, and add those to each place where you used them, and convert those and hide them between the healthy tooth and the rotten tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then remove that which is so strict like a Roman.
If it is dislocated or broken, then apply that or those joints in such a manner during the entire time.
This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth, as follows:
And when a tooth or two returns to its original place, and is recreated as we have recommended, and remains so.
Only good craftsmen and knowledgeable people can do this.
Some people are suitable for certain causes of cow bones, and they make them into the shape of a tooth, and place it in the location where the tooth is missing, and apply it as we have said, and remain so for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
About the beginning of the lingual nerve that enters the tongue and prevents speech.
This nerve that comes from the tongue, some people are born with it, and others have it accidentally and it has become solidified.
The operation involves opening the patient's mouth, exposing their tongue; then raising it, and inserting a needle along the length of the tongue until it is solved from the base.
However, if there is any difficulty or resistance, and this is due to the consolidation of plaque, then you should use an instrument and cut it along the length until it is dissolved and the resistance is removed.
Be careful not to make an incision in the flesh of the tongue, and cut here and there, so that it does not cause bleeding from the wound.
Then wash the traces of the incision with water, vinegar, or a damp cloth; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from moving, so that another layer does not form.
However, if there is bleeding from the wound, place your hand over the location of the bleeding; but if the blood flows, then apply a cautery to the location with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then approach those other causes that may be healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, due to certain wounds on the tongue, abscesses form that resemble a small swelling, which prevents the tongue from performing its natural function; and if it is not treated in time, it can cause great harm to the mouth.
And the operation in this case is to open the mouth of the patient and examine the abscess.
And if you see that the abscess has a black or dark color, and the patient does not feel any pain, then do not touch that part that is swollen.
And if it is whitish, in which there is moisture, then you should put the needle in it, and insert a thin, sharp instrument, and cut it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the wound with a piece of cloth, so that the pus does not spread.
And then return to your work before the patient has finished recovering, before they are washed with warm water and salt; and care for that one while you do the other treatment at the same time.
Chapter 36.
On the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and those that are located in the groin and other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, it is the glands that are similar to wool, which are deformed and called armpits, which when you cure them with what we have said in the division, do not heal, then you consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and little pain, then do not touch it with a needle.
And if it is of red color and the core is large, then do not touch it with a needle for fear of spreading the infection; let it mature inside, and later you will either incise it or let it burst on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the core of it is thin, then that one should be incised.
And the operation in him is that you consider, during your operation, if the abscess has completely healed or if it has decreased at all; and then make sure the patient is facing you, and hold his head still, and open his mouth, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of him, and the instrument is a noble one of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be thin like a knife.
Then when you press that tongue against the abscess and show it to him, and cut over that his gum, then take a needle and place that in the wound, and pull that as far as you can. Another thing that you pull from the tissues, and then cut it with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that you pull from the tissues, and then cut it with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is shaped like forceps, but the outer parts of which are bent, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, because they are sharp, and it should be made of iron and well-made.
If this instrument is not at your present, then insert this pointed spatula of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And once you have inserted one needle, insert the other according to this manly method of insertion, and then guard the patient from water that is too wet.
If there is a flow of blood, guard the patient from water that is too cold from decanting or from the milk of a goat or similar to those of the strengthening causes that are within the flow of the blood, and then cure it within the time that it is healed.
And sometimes these abscesses are located elsewhere in the body or other than those two golden ones, and then insert those according to what I have said in the insertion of two needles equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in the same location as before, which was turning black, of little pain, which had already closed the same location, and the woman was breathing very tightly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached the point of death if more time passed by a day or two.
And the abscess had become so large that it had pushed two ribs inside, protruding through two wounds.
So he carefully cut it open and placed it in one of the wounds, and pulled out that one, and then tied off a large portion of it, and then carefully incised the other wound where the other injury was, and then covered its mouth and held its tongue, and then carefully placed the wound in that abscess.
And then he carefully removed a large portion of it, and not much blood flowed from it but a little bit of pus. Therefore, he completely cleaned the wound of that woman, and then soon began to pour water on it, and then immediately applied medicine, so he did not cease to incise into that abscess for a long time, and another abscess formed in its place, which he incised until it was prolonged.
So he then applied a bandage and cauterized the wound of it, and then immediately applied a poultice; and then he walked around and did not know what God had done for that woman.
Chapter thirty-seven.
When a hernia is formed at its beginning.
When catarrh occurs in the hernia, and it is formed and lengthened, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part behind which is thick and round, and then it is called bubble.
When the disease is cured by the method we mentioned earlier, and you do not compare your treatment, and if you have already seen that the abscess has been removed from there and is thin, then you should incise the part that is rounded; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not at the center, then you should incise the beginning of it, where the patient feels pain.
And when you see that the second part is white and long, then you should examine the patient and take the tongue of it with an instrument that processes its shape and place the probe in the new one, and pull that down and incise it with one of two instruments which are called in the beginning of two needles.
And do not pierce that, but rather what is adjusted to the natural end of its addition, because if you pierce it more, you will cause it to speak.
And then, use what we have recommended for the incision of two girls, and cure that within which it is healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision of that, then use what is used in the cauterization of that, and the manner of the cautery in it is not other than sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient in your hand, and take the tongue of that with the instrument we have mentioned, and take the water which we have mentioned in the chapter on cauterization, and comfort that living cause, and do not press too hard or too subtly, and from there fill the hollow of the instrument which has this form:
And the extrusion of that should be in the cavity where the medicine is placed with the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument over the medicine, and the patient should lean on their side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of that enters through the intrinsic medicine, so that no other cause remains in the groove of that and that it does not descend from that.
And then place your hand on the medicine and express it onto the uvula for the span of an hour until that which is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine enters.
And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap that around the end of the needle, and immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the needle into the cloth until the cloth adheres to that needle, and do this as many times as you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it where it will dry and fall off in three days or four.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat that, and then clean the cauterization around the grape and around the needle in a circular manner with a border, and modify what is inside the circle of the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and cure it with fomentation, and give the patient garglings until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safer than others and longer lasting.
Some wounds are cured with a substance that is more subtle than cauterization and incision, which is cured by sublimation in this manner: take chamomile, sage, origanum, rue, scissored Arabic, camomilla, broyda, and similar herbs to those of the herbs, and adjust all these causes or some of them in a bowl, and immerse them in hot water and bulge; and the bowl should be well washed with decent lye, and there should be a trough above the bowl where an instrument made of copper according to this manner can be placed.
And insert the end into the patient's mouth before the steam reaches the uvula on the tongue, before the uvula becomes too obscured.
And repeat this procedure on those wounds before they dry, and keep in mind that you should not do this cure at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would be too adjusted to the abscess, and do not let you do this, but leave the declaration of the abscess of it carefully.
If you do not have this instrument present, then take a stick and place a piece of wet cotton at its end, in order to dampen the patient's mouth, as the cloth of the humidifier prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
About the extraction of thorns and other things that stick to the sole, and other causes.
Thorns or other objects stick to the sole of the foot or other causes.
Therefore, observe what you extract from those that are visible, above which the sight, so that you may use the tongue-like instrument to remove it, in order to determine what is in the sole.
And what is not visible and is hidden in the sole, observe that you make the patient vomit when the food is being digested in the stomach, as the attached cause is often expelled by vomiting; or that the patient swallowed a piece of bread or rice or a bone; or took a piece of sea sponge and soaked it very well in alcohol, and then placed it on the patient's tongue, as when the food is being digested in the place where thorns and other things are extracted, they are often expelled. And then take an eel and cook it with a little bit of salt, and cut it into pieces on a clean table and extract the bones; or take a pork and cook it with salt and extract the bones.
But if you do not forget those causes that we have mentioned, then use an instrument of the following form:
And it should be as wide as a small ring, and in the extraction of it there is a cavity that you insert into the patient's mouth to facilitate.
And the patient's head is raised upwards, and be careful that the touch of his jawbone from the neck, so that it does not engage with it and cause pain or damage to the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts on his hand.
But if the patient allows that instrument to be inserted into his mouth, because of his knowledge of the location of the cause and it is pushed downwards, and he pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the amount that is prepared at the time when it is forgotten.
Chapter thirty-nine.
Of the extraction of blood that is attached to the gallbladder.
When blood is treated as we have mentioned in the division of medicine and not as we have said, consider the following in the gallbladder of the patient during the sun, since you have understood the language of the instrument that you have recommended.
Therefore, if you see blood, extract it with a small needle or with a fine gentle instrument.
And if it is not possible to withdraw it, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and place your hand on the concavity of the cannula, holding an ignited iron, and do this until the blood is dead and has stopped flowing from the gallbladder, and keep the patient away from all water for the rest of the day.
And then take a full wet cloth and apply it to the mouth of the patient in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any cause be left in it and make the water boil for an hour, then another on their hand, where the blood is as if it were water.
If we have not forgotten the remedy we recommended earlier, then use camomile or asafoetida through the instrument we recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do that, in which way?
Another method of operation in the fumigation of that is to take an oven in which there are burning coals, and cover the oven with a cover through which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; and then remove the fumigation; and put the patient's mouth on the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the lungs, because the lungs are often affected.
And if not cured, then repeat the fumigation more frequently, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salted and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be abandoned.
And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodletting from the arm is treated when it is visible; it is similar to forceps sometimes, but with some curvature in it. which should be placed on the arm, and its end is similar to the beak of a heron, which grasps, in which it is scraped with a razor, so that when any cause is found, it does not leak.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the treatment and incision of abscesses.
Abscesses are special kinds of swellings, according to the memories of each one in this book.
And they are different in incision and incision of them according to the memories of each one, of which one is for the special kind of abscesses that pierce; and because of this, they understand about the moisture.
And the second method is for the places in which the disease occurs, because the abscess that occurs on the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttocks; and the abscess that occurs in the flesh is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is a judgment for the operation.
Moreover, some abscesses that are not punctured before their maturation may cause harm in those places or complications of them.
Other abscesses that are lanced when they are ripe but not mature according to their time, such as abscesses near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged within the area where that is located, and often the tissues or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the puncture until it is mature, it will harm the principal member; or it is near the anus, so lance this unripe one; and do not lance any that are not fully ripe, only those that are near the anus, so that it does not cause harm to the area and is prolonged to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or what is made in the term of the abscess that is not healed. When you know the time for the puncture of the abscess, it is mature.
And you know it is mature when the swelling of pain and the cessation of fever, and the decrease in redness and pulse, and the increase in the hardness of the abscess head, and the other symptoms.
And you know the puncture should be made in the location where the abscess is located, and where the pus comes from the source of healing.
And the puncture should be made quickly through the long bone of the body or the flesh, if the abscesses are in the parts of the legs or feet, and in the locations of the tendons of nerves, of the arches; and at the back, in all equal places where it does not reflect; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customary to delay the puncture of it until after digestion has been completed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that denant before, the duration of the pore of it and of its motion is prolonged, and very much the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
May one perforate boils according to the size of the flesh or bone, depending on the need, or according to what the member requires.
And in small boils, apply small perforations, and in large boils, make a large or deep incision according to the variety of their size.
And in other boils where the core is concave and indented, when it is cut, it is like a certain type of cancer that occurs in the armpits and groin.
And of those that have three sharp angles; and of those that are like the shape of a bull's horn, like the boils in the armpits.
And of those that are treated with round and crescent-shaped incisions, like those.
May the one who does not have any of those that are like shallow boils, apply a shallow incision, or just flatten it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not hesitate to lance it, so that all the pus does not come out at once; instead, remove a part of it, and the next day, remove a larger part, and continue this process gradually until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very weak, or a woman in labor, or a child, or an old person, or one who is already in a state of decrepitude, since the animal spirit becomes more vulnerable at the exit of the pus, and it is often life-threatening for the patient, and you operate on them.
Take great care in this chapter when performing incisions on these abscesses, so that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the pus from the abscess is sparse, or if it is a flat section; then administer the appropriate medications of oil or of honey; and if the abscess is large, and the incisions are deep, wait until they meet before proceeding.
If a part of the tendon is removed from the abscess or hollowed out where it is located, then cover it with a piece of cloth made of linen or felt, as when you have extracted teeth or roots, its moisture; and strengthen it with a third day; and then proceed to treat that and cure it with the same remedy that cures putrefying wounds until it is healed.
If you experience bleeding during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar in which a piece of linen is soaked, and place that over the location of the bleeding wounds.
If the bleeding persists, then cover it with a regimen and cure, and powder those that have been recommended in certain locations of this book and division.
If it is in the winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powdered vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those over the locations.
And if it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, then you should apply ground mustard or vinegar and oil, or vinegar and water, and all of this should be applied within the first day, as we have said, and then you should drain the abscess and clean that area and administer to him what is appropriate for his cure within the first day.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the method of distinction that I have already mentioned, there are different ways of curing each type of abscess specifically.
Chapter 41.
About the incision of abscesses that occur in the neck.
In the neck of the head, small abscesses, and especially those that contain tunics that are at their own level; and their species are their own.
And they are pointed, and from those that contain moisture similar to honey. And from those that contain moisture similar to salt and vinegar; and from those that are hard, like stones.
In the section of all, and in the extraction of those, one should not fear, as it does not create an obstacle to the extraction of those.
The operation in the section of those is that you use an instrument in the shape of which it approaches the area, which is called entromes, as long as you know that it contains.
If that which contains is moisture, then split that instrument along its length by section on the surface in this form:
And begin at the section of the line B up to the line G. Then, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because too many troops returned, if there is any cause from that.
And then submerge it in Egyptian mummy, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that liquid corrodes all that which has come from that layer.
And then repeat the procedure on the other side with Egyptian cotton, thoroughly and carefully if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with Egyptian cotton until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second one in this way: with a sharp incision in the shape of a cross, and then insert it between two lips of the incision and scrape all the parts of that tunic, and strive with your skill to extract the tunic that contains it.
But if your tool causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
Similarly, perform the same procedure on the abscess with incision and healing according to what we have told you; an incision over a pus-filled abscess is less painful, because it has little blood and little moisture.
Some people have such frequent abscesses on their heads that they are never dry; the cause is that you incised over an abscess on the head of an old woman and then squeezed the abscess like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be washed, and if anyone touched it, they would be afflicted with it.
In other abscesses on the head or in this chapter, this is not about this chapter, as with abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reasons for the hollows, but the section of all these should be a superficial section.
And pause the perforation of those from the lower part of them to prevent the sanies from flowing to the lower parts.
And apply that which is appropriate for that of healing.
Chapter 42.
About the section of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in the other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and some of which are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
The specific types of these scrofulous swellings are boils, some of which are hard, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you see in good position at the Touchment, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the codena, and is dry throughout, and is not attached to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not stuck, so that you incise it from above the surface of the part forward and backward along the line of .G. within the line of .B., and remove that from all parts, and extend two lips of the codena over the opening, or with cotton if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
It is even more important that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And if the space is not sharp, that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or an artery and prohibited from your operation, then pause in the place of the vinegar trissat or other powders that remain fluid of sane, and clean the place, and let that which is inside where it pauses the acuity of the abscess and the space becomes soft and begins to be pus-like. When the bone is removed.
Then return to your operation before you complete it.
And then examine the other parts of the body to see if there is any cause of the other small scrofula, so incise those and clean them.
And if it is in the root of the large vein, cover it immediately that you do not incise that scrofula from its root. Before covering, make sure it is very thick and let it fall through itself to avoid harm.
And then complete the wound with old goose fat, which you have already immersed in Egyptian oil, and care for that.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, cover it immediately that you adjust the two lips of the wound and cause a little pus so that there is no excess.
But if you see that there is excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, cover it immediately and then incise its root and apply suture and that which is called.
And in the case of scrophulous swellings that contain moisture, make a superficial puncture at this location where it appears to you to be maturing, and pause the puncture if it reaches the deepest part of the tissue, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture with a sharp instrument and similar to those, so that it corrodes what is left of the corruption. And when you see that the wound is already cleaned, then you cure that sharp instrument of flesh generated until it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the drying of the core of an accidental abscess in the groin.
The ancients used this method in the abscess, and I have not seen any man in our land who did that.
And this is the inscription of that speech.
In men who have curvature, the curve should be avoided in the extraction of the abscess, because it cannot be done well for that reason, since all the veins and major parts of the patient are there.
When there are abscesses in the mouth or throat or two boils, when the disease is not in the gums, cut off the section of the epiploon to prevent the loss that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do that, we cut off three or four small sections of the epiploon, depending on the thickness in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in the cartilage, and this location is appropriate for sectioning, which is private of flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are yellow.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to the side, and then cut the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is any cause from those.
And then cut the liver second, as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal through the flaccidity which is from that and for the opening of the wound.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Then, when the hour comes in which that puncture is feared, add two strips of the bandage of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh not decay until it is healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recommended is only that you see that if those apostemas have already been opened, the patient will die, and his breath is stopped, and they will incise the epiglottis so that he can breathe over the location of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, the wound should remain open until the poison of the disease is consumed; and that poison lasts for three days; and therefore, in this way, commander, you should leave the wound open until it is healed.
And that which I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant held a knife and inserted part of the cane of the lung, and she was called to heal it, and she atrophied the muscle as if it were the mugit of the dead, and discovered the wound and atrophied the scar which was on the wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that at that time there had been no incision of the vein or insertion of a guide, and the wind was from the wound, and it was cured by that fire.
And if the servant did not faint in the mouth, and then return to the better disposition of his conditions.
Now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the incision over the abscess that occurred in the groin, and it is called groin hernia.
This abscess named groin hernia is an abscess of the second color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural one there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, one of which is similar to large nodes, and the other way is abscess that is caused by the compression of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not assume that you can do it with a knife unless it is small. And you should examine that wound and investigate it, and if you find something similar to a grain, and it is not hanging from any of the veins, then insert that which is there with the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and bursa; and if not, then examine the entire area, and cure the wound with whatever you believe will heal it before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 45
On the separation of the species of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are several species that I have already mentioned all their species in the division.
And you should understand the difference between a node and an abscess when making a diagnosis.
Therefore, you should say that an abscess is heat and fever and severe pain until the boiling of the excess stops; and it is a putrefaction that ceases the fever, the pain, and the heat.
If there is no heat or fever or pain, and if that child is the one who is usually in the cradle.
And if the second color of the body is such that its beginning is like a cyst and is made thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are second to two species, one being fat and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I have said in the division.
Therefore, when you have reached the cure of that child, examine him and inquire about that instrument which is called an introducer, according to its form, which is as follows:
And it is useful for the investigation of abscesses and all nodes, and you should take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you will rotate its tips little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the cavity.
And then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the introducer and consider what is found in its traces.
If the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry superficial section as I have mentioned in the other abscesses.
If there is no moisture in the footprints of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
And apply a dry section in the shape of a cross according to this form: As you were taught, suspend that one with an incision, and exfoliate the codex from all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that one and remove that pus from the wound.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and then you should wait until that one does not remain for any reason.
If it remains for any reason, too much or too little, then the wound should be returned as best as possible.
And if you see that some small part of it remains, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that which is the seat of the abscess cautiously, and cure that from the other cure until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to remove a large stone, then use your hands to grasp that which contains it.
If the pulse is opposite or not, then use a probe to insert three threads that are made of silver and leave them in place for two days or three until the pain subsides and the inflammation decreases; then return to cutting away that which remains.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those that are in the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one being large, one being medium, and one being small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
It should be made of iron, smooth, with rounded ends, so that the instrument does not cause harm to the tissues.
And these are the forms of the punctures, and they are named albered, and one of them is called bridle.
And of three spices, one is large, mace and pepper.
The form of the great lake, its shape:
The form of the large mace, its shape:
The form of the small pepper, its shape:
It is convenient for those abscesses and exits and fistulas and boils that are between the bones and of other causes.
And they make needles, large lions, as with great golden needles that are sewn into the sutures, and are made of gold, or of silver, or of iron, and the best are when they are made of gold.
And they make the needles of black pitch, which are like those that for those are opened the fistulas in the cavity of which are reflections, which are reflected by their light on those reflections.
And of three spices, one is long, and the others are mace, and the others are short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
The form of the great experiment of the plague:
The form of the lesser experiment of the plague:
The form of the small experiment of the plague:
The forms of the bones are of special types, namely those that are simple, which have only one curve, and there are three types: large, medium, and small.
And they also have their own curves, and there are three types.
And of those that have two curves, there are three types.
And of those that have three curves, there are three types.
All of these are necessary in their place.
The form of a medium-sized simple bone, its shape:
The form of a large bone with two curves: Shape of a nail has two curved parts: The shape of a small nail has two curved parts:
The shape of a large nail has three curved parts:
The shape of a medium-sized nail has three curved parts:
And these are the forms of the surgical knives that are sharp and cut nodes and abscesses, and they come in three kinds, namely large, medium-sized, and small.
The shape of a large surgical knife:
The shape of a medium-sized surgical knife:
The shape of a small surgical knife:
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, but they are not made in such a way that they can be used to scrape away the beginning of a vein or nerve, and for these they are used to heal the patient and bring him peace through a small incision, which is necessary for the scraping away of the abscess.
These are the shapes of almonds, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
These are the shapes of eggs and their similarities to rays, which is made into alcohol.
And it is in the outer layer that the punctured spot is hidden and in that place, according to the parts you want, as you can see.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned punctures for the opening of abscesses and do not pierce the patients, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small. These are the shapes of those:
The shapes of those: which are cut off from the flow of the blood, and there are three kinds: large, medium, and small; the shapes of which are:
These are the shapes of eggs, round in some cases and thin.
And make sure that these types of breezes are strong and few, so that for those who need to expel blood quickly, they can do so with velocity, and later when you first begin, there is no medicine.
However, do not use these to abscess blood in every part of the body, and only use them in fleshy places, such as on the backs of the thighs, and on the chest, and on the breasts, and on the belly, and on the groin, and similar to those fleshy parts.
Some veins are made of these other tools, similar to lancets, in this form; through which the blood is expelled when it is done by phlebotomy, or you must begin from a vein or an artery.
And some veins are made round in this form:
Chapter 47.
Of the treatment of male breasts that are similar to those of women.
Some women inflate their breasts with air to enhance their appearance as they begin to lose their youthful fullness, and then deflate the inflated breasts, assemble the sagging breasts of women, and apply them far away.
And to those who apply that, cut those lunar-shaped amulets according to this shape, from the line of .B. to the line of .G., and then remove the entire scab, place the ointment on the wound, adjust the edges of the wound with a matching bandage, and cure that before it becomes healthy.
And if the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its own weight, as it often happens to women, then cut it into two parts, similar to lunar shapes, each containing the other at the tip of each, so that the longer line contains the shorter one according to this form of the line of .B. and the line of .G. Then remove the scab that is between the edges of the wound, eliminate the pus, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary for healing before it becomes healthy.
If you do not complete the initial incision as required by the patient's uneasiness and bleeding, then cover the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it to be eaten away by that which is like a leech, and then cure the area where it has been eaten away.
Chapter 48.
About the puncturing of abscesses that come from the breasts.
These abscesses that come from the breasts are of the species of scrofulous, hard ones, which contain a pus.
And of those that contain moisture, some are incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And as soon as all that is in the abscess is evacuated, then you close it with stitches and leave it until the next day.
And as soon as the wound is closed, it should be treated with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands under the armpits and the scrofulous ones is present, then you should lance them as we have described in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the plague is extended to an area that cannot be reached by a lancet, then administer the cautery according to what we have said in that case.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur by puncture or by vein.
When the puncture is broken, and the skin over it is consolidated, then abscesses and signs occur by which inflammation and abscess are known to be caused by artery or vein: because when the abscess is by puncture, it is longer attached to the front of the body; and that when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the area.
And that which is by vein is round like the belly.
And incision over this abscess is wrong, and especially in those that are near the armpits, and in the elbows, and in the back, and in many places of the body; and it is great, therefore be careful that its treatment is avoided, and that which is on the outside, or on the head, should be avoided.
Over the affected area, which is their own due to inflammation of the orifice of the archery, cut through the dry section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers and remove the archery, and remove the tunics within which it is discovered.
And then place the needle on that side and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the archery with a double fold in two places, — which causes you to have seen in extraction of two archeries that were in the temples.
And then push the area between two limbs apart by an inch and a half into which the swelling is completely within it, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within it until the limbs fall; and then cure that with suitable remedies to that until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to the section of the vein, then make sure you have your hand on that which is at your possible distance from the abscess and the cut, and then introduce the needle behind the area where you had your hand, and make it penetrate; and then double it in that thread until you remove the other side, and then tie the abscess with a string according to what I have told you in the thread of two parts of two extremities of the thread.
If you are afraid of puncturing the skin, then insert the needle at an angle to the entire abscess from the beginning of the needle, and strengthen the four threads in different places.
Then dry the abscess at the middle place of the patient before he lies down, so that when he lies down with that, you insert the excess of the bandage, and leave what is left from it.
And then place the cushion that you have soaked in wine and oil on him, and then administer the cure that is made with garlic and onions until he is healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to twisting of nerves.
Such as abscess in the arc and in the vein, and similarly abscess in the nerves when it occurs due to their impact or excessive work, and so on.
And it is made in the most painful places of the helpers or the heel, or in any place where there are many joints.
When the abscess is large and resembles the color of the other body, and it is in the upper part of the leg, and when it is pressed with force, the patient feels a similar shock as if struck by lightning.
And the abscess is not attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left untreated, and it spreads throughout the entire body and does not go towards the front or back.
Therefore, those who have it at the joints should not be pierced with iron, as it may cause contraction.
But those who have it on the head or forehead should use a needle. But if it is a small abscess, then use forceps and remove the one from the root.
And if it is large, then hang it with an umbilical cord, and scrape it, and remove it; and place the wound on a bandage, and cure it before it heals.
Chapter 51
About the rupture of an abscess that occurs in the mouth and also in the abdomen.
When the male genitalia are swollen in the bellies of those who have them and in other parts of their bodies, which are called fungal due to their similarity to mushrooms, with a subtle head and a large base; and their labia are already open, and they are from those who are small, and they are from those who are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his belly were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of smaller size.
And their labia were turned inside out and they were deformed, and moisture ran from it all the time.
Therefore, I inserted those and again in one foot, eighteen unciae, and the other, sixteen unciae.
And the operation at the insertion of theirs is that you consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the thigh is white, wet, of subtle size; then you insert it with a spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because swollen parts of it are expelled by drying; and if you find the dry, cauterize that.
If you see the patient is weak and afraid, first take a sharp knife; then later take a recent blood clot, strengthen that wound, the one we have mentioned; and leave it for two days.
Then adjust it in the structure of the blood clot; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the large wound in the thigh until it is completely removed and falls off on its own.
However, if the thigh is of great size, then there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in one that is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you incise the abdomen of the patient, and then cauterize that so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to incise the thigh that is dark in color, has little feeling, and is regularly shaped, as that is cancer.
And you will remember this for future reference.
Chapter 52
Of the cure of the abdominal area.
The abdominal area is affected by various causes; either by fissures of the navel which are on the stomach, and from there the intestine or hernia comes out according to what is mentioned in other ruptures; or by ulcers which flow with blood or with an artery according to what is called this, or by constricted ventosity in it.
If it is by fissure of the navel and by protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion's pain, and appears in different positions. And if it is by protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that one is towards that which we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and when you press that one with the fingers as indicated, it disappears, and then return; and very often it is towards that, and it is a magnificent sign that the intestine must be introduced and great labor.
If it is by moisture, then it is lion's pain and does not disappear when you press your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it cracked.
And if it is for abscess, then use these signs to locate the pus declining.
But if it is for meat, then use these signs to locate the abscess, which is large, hard, and fixed in place.
But if it is for swelling, then use these signs to locate the touch of it, which is like a lion.
And the operation in it is considered as follows: whether the prominence of the navel is due to abscess from artery, vein, or swelling; then it should be prohibited from treatment, because in that case there is fear and panic as you were taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from artery and vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or skin, then command the patient to hold their own hand, and be standing extended; and then use a probe in the entire circumference of the umbilicus, and command that it be held between your hands on the sieu dos, and then wrap the space lat around the circuit of the umbilicus over the location you have previously marked with the tent; and then extend the margin of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then apply a firm or gentle knot and the method of tying the ligature.
And then approach the abscess with a sponge extended over the skin and introduce the pointed instrument into that point and try to draw out the intestine; and if you have not done so before or do not protect it with the skin, then remove the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the skin, then take that needle and scrape off the excess of it.
But if it is against your arc or vein, then circle that point, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strong and introduce two needles around the abscess in the manner of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the place where the flesh extends and falls out; or scrape that which becomes thin and seeps, and then heal that which covers the mouth with water inside that it is healed.
If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and there is no pus or moisture in it, then cover it as we have said and remove the pus or the moisture that is in it, and then care for that wound with something that covers and heals it.
Chapter 43.
About the cure of the neck.
We have said, in the division, about the neck and how to cure it with medicine, and that it is necessary to be careful in its cure so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have said that the neck generates in the most and greatest care of its cure.
The ancients said that some neck wounds are in a place where it is possible to eradicate them, such as a wound on the neck that is in the mamillas or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stray all of that, and more so when they begin small.
But when it is old and large, do not cover it yourself, because I have not seen any other that can heal from that or has reached that.
And the operation is performed as we have said, by preceding and laying the patient down, and purging them of black bile for some time, and then stitching it up, if found to be manifest bleeding.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause any of the reasons for the operation. And then examine everything thoroughly until there is no cause for the operation. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it in that way, and express the places, and wipe off the blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is as clean as possible among the instruments.
But if you find resistance of heavy bleeding from the vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood flow is still going on, and then care for it with another method until it is healed.
Chapter 44
Of the cure of hydropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of hydropathy of water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with our medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is not just the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximated to the species of timpanists or the species of hypostasis, because that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this species of hydropathy timpanist with your medicines and do not compare your medication, then consider, because if the patient has already been weakened, or is another patient with another hydropathy, such as if it is in the throat or stomach and similar to those, then be careful not to treat it with iron, because there is fear about it.
But if you see the patient of great virtue, and it is not another disease but hydropathy only, and not in infants or the elderly, then the method of the operation for that is that you lift the patient between your hands, and give them water to the exact part of their belly with their hand, pushing the water to the part behind the navel, and then take a sponge according to this form:
Should be two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather should be in some shortness little by little, so that in the operation that one does not pass into the intestine, and that it does not tear that one.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, because it is customarily believed that you have the section along the abdomen for the amount of three fingers behind it, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a defect in the diaphragm, then your section should be on the left side of the umbilicus for three fingers.
And if the generation of that one is due to the left side, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not let your section be on the side on which you want to place the patient so that the excess does not flow to that place.
And then perforate with the instrument all the capsule, and enter into that section, and raise your hand between the capsule and the syphac, and you excise that one; and if the amount of one nail or approximately.
And then, approach and pierce the skin until it reaches the space where the water is located. Then, extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: And it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin iron, to which at the lowest part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is made at its tip incised according to the manner of a pen, as follows:
And at the upper part of it is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, then slightly above the instrument, and thus evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate from there too much, very often the patient dies from the resolution of their spirit animal, or accidents occur to them that are approaching death.
Do not evacuate from there according to the quantity of the water and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient regarding the benefit of their leg and their good.
And then remove the instrument, and release the liquid that causes this, which is usually held back by the cord that you recommended to cut in order to pierce that second one with that method.
And then repeat the process on the other side if the patient tolerates it, and remove a small amount of liquid each time, and do this for several days until the danger passes, and be careful not to let too much of the liquid out.
However, if you are worried about the patient and let out a large amount of liquid, then treat that area with a burial in sand and a poultice made of bread dough, and expose it to sunlight for a long time; and treat that area with desiccative medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize the stomach, and the muscle and the skin around it as soon as you have finished removing the liquid, following the method that I previously mentioned.
Chapter LV.
Of the treatment of children who are born without a natural opening for urine.
Some children are born from the womb of their mother with the head of their umbilical cord not pierced (or it is straight or it is not in its place).
Therefore, carefully pierce the umbilical cord as soon as it is born with a thin needle according to this form.
And then place a thin nail with a thick head on it and tie it for three days or fourteen days.
And when they want to urinate, remove it; and then return it.
And if you do not place the head, it is possible that the urine that passes over the area does not clean this wound.
And if the one who was tied is straight, it should be treated with a nail as we have said, for three days until it is healed.
And if the one who was tied is not in its place, it causes a fistula, which is because of those who are born and the umbilical cord is not in its place so that they cannot urinate to the parts below, until the umbilical cord raises the umbilical cord to the parts above; and it is not at birth, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady due to a lack of nutrition.
The method of operation in this case is that the patient should be placed on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards the left hand of the operator, and insert the point of the knife into the second incision, as if writing with a pen, or so that no part is torn, so that the edge of the knife resembles the edge of the knife and that the tissue falls into the second incision after the operation.
And be careful that in your operation for the flow of blood, four matters can go wrong with this; and pause at that point where you remove the pus, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66.
About the white substance that occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis and on the glans, and black and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Four matters can go wrong with this white substance in the penis and its prominence of flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is not malignant.
Non-malignant, cover it with a thin ointment and remove the one that completely covers that area; then place your hand over that part that is submerged in the Egyptian oil; and apply that, cure it with the ointment that is applied daily until it is healed.
And if the tumor is malignant, apply a red-colored ointment, then cover it with a cotton pad at the beginning and end of the tumor.
But if the tumor is on the prepuce of the penis of an uncircumcised man, and one part of the tumor is inside the prepuce and the other part is deformed, then cover it with the one that is inside at the beginning until it is consolidated; and now you cure that deformity, because when you cure it along with the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not become cancerous.
And if you have experienced accidents in the genitalia and in the black and curly prepuce, then cover everything that has already been damaged and is about to be corrupted or that has already been corrupted; and apply linen cloths over it with honey, which is beaten with wheat flour from millet, and with vinegar and cinnamon.
And then care for that wound until it heals.
However, if there is bleeding from the wound, then administer silver nitrate in this manner:
a silver nitrate cautery is placed at two positions together, and is applied to the bleeding area and the wound when it becomes corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is eroded and destroyed completely in an hour, then you should insert a bladder catheter into the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through that.
In the adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur unless the foreskin is known, and it is not required to be circumcised; and when adhesion occurs due to wound or abscess) then you should excise the blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely free.
And if it is difficult to remove those very carefully, then you should excise the spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and when the foreskin is thin, it is easily punctured by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp instrument, which is already moistened in water to prevent other bacteria from adhering.
And then apply a styptic agent until it is consolidated.
Chapter 57.
Of the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution of continuity as with other plagues: rather, it is our operation and our will, and it is particularly in children that it is necessary to assign the best operation and the most humane way to prevent loss of life.
Therefore, we say that the ancients did not practice circumcision in any of the free men, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment, which causes me to have at this time the majority of the artisans and barbers to use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and with a file; and they use thread and a needle.
And I have already done all these methods and never seen a better method for circumcision than with the bistoury, the ligature that is used in surgery like a nail, which moves the foreskin from above, where the foreskin is attached to two layers, and the layer underneath is pulled out, and if it is forced at another point and causes certain pain. And the circumcision that is done for the alpaca, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, is not secure at the end of the male member, because it often goes into the wound of it.
In the operation, a nail, if it is forced, will ruin your operation and make it worse. The foreskin of the child is short by nature, and if it is stretched in such a way that it does not need circumcision, I have seen that.
Moreover, the circumcision that is done with bistouries and ligatures and the nail, which I have experienced for myself, because the bistouries are of proportional length, so that the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore, as you press your hand on two sharps, and incisions are made at one time, it is a compression of the nail in the shape containing the foreskin of the penis from all parts, which does not make any mistake of all.
The first step in the operation is that you make the child comfortable, especially if it is one of those who understands only a little, and do not do anything else but lie him on his back, and let him rest until the next day.
Then do everything possible to make him understand that situation. Then make him understand that he is between your hands and do not let him see the forceps; hide them in your hand or behind his back, so that the child does not see those or any other instruments.
Then place your hand on his back and blow into the mouth, and pull out whatever is in his mouth, and modify that which is added to it from deafness.
The shape of the forceps for molding, this is the shape:
The outer ones are not sharp and the others are sharp, so that the handle of the clamp is not cut off, and the length of the two blades should be equal to the length of two handles.
The mistake in molding is that too much force is used to push the intrinsic lid entirely or partially out of its place.
Therefore, be careful when you extend that of your hour at the tip of your finger to the abscess in the area and that you insert it with equal depth.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then extract it with a hook and insert it there.
But if it has been there for three days and is swollen with pus behind the ear, then let that out carefully, excoriate that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful not to touch that area with your hand.
And then heal that area with the powders that we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is inserted too deeply and you cannot see it, then do not try to remove it.
But heal that area once it has become healthy.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Urine retention in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or a congealed substance, or by poison or flesh, and similarly to those of which we have spoken about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if that substance is not dissolved and is causing great pain to the patient, then make sure you administer extraction of it with an instrument called a siringua, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin lion's tongue, like a pen needle in its thinness. At the end of it, there is a thin silver needle that resembles a palm leaf and is similar to a small finger, at the tip of which there is a thin silver needle.
And the method of extracting urine from that person is to take a thin, long, and flexible silver needle and wrap it in wool or cotton for good adhesion; then insert the ends of the silver needle into the part below the siringua, and if there are any superfluous folds of the wool, do not introduce them into the canula with great force. Instead, introduce the end of the canula into the bladder gently.
And perform acupuncture on the patient over the affected area, and apply a warm cloth to their back and neck, using oil of olive and vinegar.
And then insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the base of the neck; and then bend the catheter over to the side of the abdomen; and then insert the catheter through that until it reaches the bladder, and then remove the catheter when the cause of the patient's illness has been reached, and not do this in reverse order, as it would cause harm.
And then gradually extend the cloth over the patient, as the urine soaks the cloth.
And then remove that and perform treatment for urine, using a catheter, do not cease doing this until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
About the catheterization of the bladder using a clamp and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or it is filled with pus in that area, or it is constricted by a hardness, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use the instrument called the clampcedra, and this is its form:
but if it is closed on the outside, it is closed. And in that case, there are three ways: two from one side, as often as possible.
In the beginning, there is a cavity, in which that which is contained is placed, and it should be as much as possible, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from that place, it should be drawn out, and when it is expelled, the liquid should be drawn out, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does in the battles of the sea.
Therefore, when you want to draw out fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the liquid, and draw that liquid which is contained in the compartments above, because the liquid is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the external catheter in the urethra according to what we have recommended in the circumcision; and then apply moisture with that water, which moisture penetrates into the bladder soon, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the catheter that is used when the bladder is catheterized, and this is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or laton, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then its canal is inserted into the urethra.
And then take the bladder in motion, and place it on the water that you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that water over the fire.
And then insert the external end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then place your hand on the bladder with the water that has already reached the bladder, so that the patient feels it.
If you do not see the bladder, then take a spoon of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire thickness; and then insert it strongly into those places, as it is turned; and then add the circle where it was also added, so that you can place it in that water that you want to use for catheterization, and observe and watch.
And then approach that one with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express urine from your hand into the bladder when moisture reaches it.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the kinds of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have discussed the stone in which lithotomy is performed, and section.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that remains in the bladder.
And I will describe it with an obvious and brief exposure.
Therefore, stones that form in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower abdomen, and it is treated with that.
And it is the salvation of children who have reached fourteen years old; and it is difficult to cure in the elderly. In the young, it may be due to that which is between those.
And of that from which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is few, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that, cover the beginning of that which they call christening the stone, which removes all the fissure that is in his intestines; for that fissure sometimes prevents the formation of the stone through investigation of it.
And then press the stone against his feet and be careful and gently push it down so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out of some fissures.
And then make that cushion between your hands prepared, and the hands of it should be placed on the patient's abdomen, so that the bladder is completely made to incline towards the parts below.
And then approach that and all of that deformed part.
If you feel a stone in the space, then first cut open that section of it.
And if you cannot cut all of it from the inside, then cover that part with oil and place your left hand on the patient's left side, if the patient is a child, or their right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their anus. And then approach that part which is inside the stone. And gradually insert it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that part and expel it from the deformed parts to the place where you made the incision.
And command the minister to press on the bladder with his left hand; and command another minister to extend his right hand over the deformed parts, and his left hand to remain behind the catheter, which is placed above the thighs, in the part where you made the incision.
And then insert the instrument with this shape: And split it in the place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and let the incision be over the stone and the part in the buttock, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision is wide and tight according to the quantity that the stone requires there, and not more, because if the stone is too large it will not fit into the incision.
And you should know that there is a stone with a sharp edge and margins, so the exit of it is made difficult by this.
And from that stone there is a lion-like glans, and it is round, and it is made of the same material and exit.
Therefore, if it is to that one with sharp edges and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not already removed, then carefully force or twist that one, or handle it decently with a tool of appropriate shape, the end of which should be like a file, and do not leave it behind; or you can insert something subtle and curved from behind.
If you cannot reach that one, then expand the wound slightly, and if you want to stop the flow of blood, cut away the strength of that one with a three-cornered piece of glass.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the stone into the mouth of the bladder, and then insert it inside; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are two or more.
And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you should insert that one with great care, because it causes the patient two main problems: either they cannot hold their urine continuously, or they become dependent on it, as the place is not completely solidified.
Instead of administering expulsion of that one before it is forgotten, or engineering in the break of that one with the forceps inside that extracts that one in pieces.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with powder of aloe and blood of dragon, and apply that one. Pause over that cloth soaked in oil or in oil and vinegar, or in water and vinegar, to prevent the pus from spreading.
Then place the patient on their back on the bed, and do not let them sit up until the third day.
When those fevers pass, rub the area with water and oil, and cure it with an anti-inflammatory and an anti-diarrheal before it is healed.
If in the fever an abscess is formed, adhesive and corrosive, and if there are similar symptoms as if the pus is in the bladder congealed, and if this is the case, then enter a catheter into the urethra and extract that pus, because it can cause the bladder to perforate and putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with vinegar and water and salt, and apply a poultice of all kinds, and apply what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And cover the entire duration of treatment, place medicines on the affected area and adjust them as needed.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the bladder, and it is fixed there, and urination is prohibited, then cure that with which you recommended that it reach the stage of disintegration; for too many troops have been used for this treatment and are accused of being drying out. And I have already extracted that, and it is that you take a needle made of iron, of which this is its shape:
of triangular extraction, sharp, fixed in the butt.
And then take a sieve and place it under the bladder to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the bladder, perforating it until the needle reaches that stone. And then rotate the needle in that small stone little by little, and you will break through it until you make the other side penetrate; for the urine is already released.
And then place your hand on that which is called the stone of the glans penis, where it is usually pierced, and through which urine is passed, and the patient is cured.
However, if this cure is not possible for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two fingers under the stone and two fingers on top of the stone. And then press on the stone in that glans penis between two grooves. And then remove it. And then remove the membrane and modify the sinew with a warm compress, which is made in the affected area.
It is not necessary to place two fingers under the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other finger above should not be placed, because when the finger is removed from the edge of the stone, the catheter returns to its place and takes the infection.
And for that, you need to lift the catheter when you place the finger above, either by raising it to the parts above or by returning it to its original position and taking the infection as we have said.
Chapter 61.
Of extracting stones from women's kidneys.
Stones in women's kidneys do not occur often.
However, if you see a stone in one of them, the cure is difficult and it is forbidden by too many hands.
One of their methods is to make the woman lie on her back.
And the second method is to find a woman who is very wise and knows if the doctor has cast a spell on her or not, whether she has had many husbands or not.
The third method is to find a woman who is very wise and knows this art, mainly the operation with fire.
And the fourth method is that the incision over the stone in women's kidneys is longer than the length of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
However, if you have to do that, then make sure you get a very wise woman who is not easily found.
If you do not have that one, then seek a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated married woman who knows how to perform this art, or a woman who has partaken in this art.
Then make that one do everything you command them to do, from the inquiry about the stone until the beginning; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover that which is said to be in her buttocks and remove the stone.
Then if you find that one, cover her with that which is said to be in her buttocks, and then command her to inscribe over it.
Then if she is not a virgin, command the married woman to insert that which is said to be in her buttocks into the cavity of the patient and inquire about the stone, placing her left hand on the bladder, and examine it well.
Then if you find that one, gradually uncover that which is said to be in the orifice of the bladder from the parts behind until it reaches the other at the bottom of the cavity.
And then approach the position of the neck of the devil and place the tip of the knife in any part that is at his stop and center the stone in that part, and the stone should not remain covered by the flesh after it.
And the section should be small at the beginning; and then insert the saw on that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the quantity that is known to be cut from that.
And you know that the types of stones are small: one of those is small and large, sharp and long, round and having ramps.
Therefore, you know how many types there are of those for what you mean about what you want.
And if you want to extract blood, adjust in the position of the vein triceps and that for an hour until it is abscised, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure you prepare your tools with those that are said in the extraction of stones in men, so that you will be helped by those in your operation.
If you want to expel phlegm and know that the expulsion of phlegm is from the arc that is embedded, then place powder on the area and strengthen those lumps and structure descending, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, because it would likely kill the patient. And treat the infection.
Therefore, when the intensity of phlegm decreases and the wound heals, then return to your operation until the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
Of incision on inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is not other than the accumulation of moisture in the white sheath that contains the testicles, which is called the scrotum.
And some of them are in the same sheath that nature has prepared in the part of the testicles, until it becomes another testicle; and this is the sheath of the testicle between the white sheath that we have said, and it is not other than a scrotum.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin area, as this matter accumulates in that area, and some cases occur due to trauma caused by a blow to the groin.
And this humidity has various colors, such as yellow, orange, red, black, or gray, and is the most common one.
And the symptoms by which one can recognize this water accumulation are: if it is in the white swelling that we have mentioned, then the abscess gradually changes its shape to resemble a hen's egg, and appears in the groin area, as the humidity affects all parts.
And if the humidity is in the thigh, then the abscess gradually changes its shape to resemble half of an egg, and it is estimated by some that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the groin and the white swelling, then it is felt as pressure.
And when you want to know the color of the humor in the abscess, you extract the color of the humor from the pus that is inside it; and if there is any residue in the wound, judge by that which is in the pus.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of this iron, first ask the patient if he is allergic to it, and sometimes examine the contents of his mouth.
And then lie him on his back on some reason, and place something underneath him to support his body.
And then place yourself on the left side of him, and ask the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to one of two lengths to the groin and the part of the belly.
And then take a thin knife and cut the groin of the thigh from the inside to the length between the two tendons.
And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be on the thighs, until it reaches the white bone that contains it.
Expel that one, observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure him; and your exorcism should be gentle and subtly scrutinized according to the amount possible.
Then approach the phial filled with water and pierce it widely, and extract all the water.
Then separate between two lips of the section am uncis, and extend the phial to the parts above; and do not touch the cord with the genitals contained, and insert the phial in that way that is possible for you. Then insert him into the whole or in the feet, and more subtly his latz, because if you do not scrutinize the insertion of him exquisitely, it is not secure that the water will not return.
But if the wound proceeds from that detachment of his cord in the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the phial, return and adjust the two lips of the cord of the genitals with a stitch, and care for him as with the other wounds until he is healed.
If the abdomen is corrupted by another illness, then cover the veins that are supporting the suspensor, extract the abdomen, and care for that which we have said about it.
If the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that those are hernias; therefore, insert that part which you have done on the other equally; and if it is to your sight that it is an operation, then do it.
And then you will clean the wound, and insert it into the sections of wool submerged in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have submerged in vinegar and oil, and expand it over two gentians and the mirror of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and tie those with a cloth that is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fold them with wool according to this form; and make the edges of the cloths that are pressed from cotton or damp wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the pants, and one of the edges is held by the buttocks inside the two, and the second is held at the part of the underwear, and two other edges on top of two cushions and two other edges on top of two buttocks, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural separation; and you should take a thin, pointed cautery and insert it into the groove of the ginitius, and ignite it according to what we have recommended before that the white cipher containing the water be discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then pierce that cipher, and ignite it inside until all the moisture is expelled.
And then stretch the cipher with your fingers, and excoriate with your fingers, and excoriate with a thin, pointed cautery ignited; and insert it according to what is possible inside that you eliminate everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and longer lasting than the operation of separation.
But if you encounter resistance to the abscess in the hour of separation or ignition, or flow of pus, then you should cure what resistance it causes to you for that, according to the treatment that is appropriate at that time.
If the patient is too weak, and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer a sedative as recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous.
Then make the patient lie on some elevated bed, approach the abscess in the lowest part of their stomach, and place the incision according to its length.
And make the incision wide enough to drain all the pus.
Then place your hand over the wound and hold it there, so that the pus continuously drains out. And care for them until the wound is healed.
But if the patient is unable to tolerate the drainage of the wound at that time, then do not make an incision except for a small one in the opening of the wound that causes irritation and prevents the exit of the pus, as follows; or adjust a small instrument in the pressure of the wound to remove the pus from the drops, the shape of which is preceded.
When the water returns, and it is expelled after several months or in the environment around it; and when it is expelled, then it should be punctured according to that manual method, where the patient has passed their days.
Chapter 63.
About incision over hernia flesh and its treatment.
Know that in the incision over this hernia there is a risk of perforation in the major structures; therefore, it is best to dismiss it and be saved by that method.
And you should remember the operation in that place and the species of abscesses.
Therefore, say that the abscesses do not occur in those parts where the muscles are connected and it is made due to various causes: either by excessive acute pain, which is found in the muscles, or by impact.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the part, and it is not black in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And if the abscess is heavily inflamed, its color is dark, and it does not feel hot to the touch.
Some wounds are made by the puncture of the acetabula, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of veins.
This is known as an abscess caused by the inflammation of the acetabula when it is felt with the finger and does not feel hot.
This is not an abscess caused by the inflammation of veins, as it does not have any known cause for compression with the finger.
And it is possible that this section and others are made on the body; you should insert the cord of the genetius, and then place the hook at the parts above, and extract that from the white bone, and remove the suspenders of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspenders as much as you remove all the parts of the hook.
Therefore, if the hook is already attached to those fleshy parts, then you should remove the hook and insert that.
If there is adhesion due to some cause of the intestine, or between those that are between the buttocks, then you should remove all that adhesion and incise it at the round beginning.
However, if the flesh is native in the place of the adhesion that is behind, then you should incise all that is there, and extract it as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with a piece of wool soaked in warm oil and vinegar; and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the treatment of hernia that is in the groin.
The groin is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bursa due to the softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear for that which precedes it.
However, they say that operation in that second one which does the first ones.
And it is said that one should place the patient on a raised bed; and then remove the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to their parts behind; and then take the cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs which are exposed to the view; and have another minister beside you, and extend them with great force.
And then insert the narrow blade across the section on the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then excoriate all parts where we have said in extraction of acorns, which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which is a sharp double point, and insert that into the first of the places where we have inserted the vit, and insert the other one on its end. And then insert those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added from the moist and corrupted flesh.
And then cure the wound with the same remedies as those used to treat other wounds in which you wish to generate healing by causing the vessels that do not carry blood from one of the two genitals, which is not harmful for that reason.
However, if it happens that all the veins are affected, then cover the testicles with a bandage or wrap them in a way that the testicles are crushed by the veins, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the veins, and that they are supported, or that they are crushed in a way that is not harmful for that reason.
Chapter 65.
Of the treatment of internal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that ends in the abdomen extended over the belly from the sides of the mirac of the belly, so that the intestines of that rupture can come out from any of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of excision of it, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, or because of a sudden movement, or because of loud noise, or because of the elevation of some heavy cause, or because of similar things.
The symptoms of gout, when caused by the extension of the uric acid, occur infrequently over a long period of time, and do not occur suddenly, and the abscess forms around the joint as the uric acid compresses the intestine.
The symptoms of gout when caused by the separation of the uric acid occur suddenly with severe pain; and the abscess appears to be different from the usual appearance, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of the patient's condition is the parts of the uric acid.
Sometimes the intestine is forced out through the opening in the skin, and this is called an inguinal hernia.
Sometimes the intestine is forced out due to pressure, and sometimes it enters the intestinal fistula, and this is held, and this is a great danger for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this disease, iron is used with fear, because it should be avoided entering the wound.
And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and follow its return, then place it on his neck between your hands, and lift his legs.
And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles entirely through the long; and place two ligatures on the second incision as needed to open the incision with those.
And if the incision is of such quantity that from that one should be able to see through it.
And then excoriate that white membrane which is placed under the cord of the testicles, until it is exposed on each part.
Then you enter your finger in that place which is the testicle, in that place which is between the white membrane, which is placed under the cord of the wound, and between the second membrane, and separate that adherence which is in the part behind the wound.
And then gently pull the testicles out of their sack, and place a white cloth under them on the left side, and raise the hood over them to the right side; and command the assistant to hold it in place while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind it when the solution is completed.
And then carefully examine the testicles to see if there is any cause of the hernia wrapped in the white cloth. If you find any cause, then place it on the patient's abdomen.
And then incise the area behind the pubic bone by section, which runs through healthy and unhealthy tissue as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer a wet cloth soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the cloth that we have recommended (and some white cloths are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the wound to prevent blood from flowing out, because those cloths sometimes fall off) and leave the cloth hanging until it falls off.
However, if the wound is delayed in healing, then apply warm water and place it on the wound after we have said to do so.
And then treat the wound with the other treatment of wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
On Hernia.
In this hernia, no one has been found who has been able to cure it with iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; which is that you tie the vessels close to the section above that area, and then dry them in the middle location near the abscess, until the vessels fall.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
On the dislocation that occurs in the ankles.
Some people experience a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and eminate the location.
And they do not give any cause for the hernias in the groin; and if they do, it is rare; and it returns in all hours.
If the time is prolonged, a small incision is made in the abdomen to allow the intestine to exit; and due to the extension of the intestine, which is common in the groin area as we have said, this causes the intestine to be stretched, and it becomes soft and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
The cure for this is with a pointed cautery as previously described.
Some wounds are cured with iron according to this method: and that the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then the area of the abscess swelling is cut open horizontally according to its size.
And then, with strong force, pull out the white intestine that is under the abscess.
And then take the rag and place it over the inflamed area of the abdomen, and press it on the belly button.
And then cover both inflamed areas on the end of the intestine with the rag, and sew one to the other.
And then remove the tip of the finger, and do not insert the needle completely, nor stretch the wound, nor any other cause that you know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that area for the cure of wounds, and when you insert the fields, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the needle contracts and does not adjust the height of the rupture.
And cauterization is better in this place, because it is more likely to be beneficial.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
The cord of the testicles is softened in some men by the fact that the tissues that are between them are softened, and the arrangement of it is changed.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is entrusted with the cure of this that he makes the patient lie on his side, and inserts the entire cord over the natural cord; and then adjusts two lips to the suture.
If you wish, use three or four stitches to mend the excess of the softened tendon and then apply a firm suture.
Then, insert into the stitches; and cure for the healing of the other wounds within which it is healed and remove the fields.
Chapter 69.
Of castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it seems to me that I should remember of it in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of it except for two reasons, one of which is so that it be known to the doctor when he is questioned about it, who knows the cure of those who have undergone it; and the other reason is that we may sometimes have the necessity of castration of other animals for our benefits, such as with horses, and cows, and pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: by traction, or by incision to section.
In that case where it is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to make an incision in the beast's neck through which the genitals of the patient hang down. Then take those parts into your hand inside where they are resolved and do not appear outside the touch.
In castration done by fissure and section, have the beast and take the cord of the testicles from the patient's right hand.
Then tie the suspensory ligaments and make an incision over each testicle where two testicles proceed.
Then make an incision on those parts that will be removed after the ejaculation. Do not leave any cause on those parts of the circumcision, but make a subtle circumcision over the glans.
This method of castration is better than the one done by attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires gout.
And then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the treatment of gout.
Gout in men can occur in two ways: one is that it appears where the spleen is located, between the two testicles, in a place where there are four small lumps.
And sometimes it occurs where the urine is located, between the two testicles.
And in women, it is a special case: and it is that the lump on the ovary above the uterus is similar to two testicles of a man, a little smaller than half of them, at the part where the penis of a man is located and two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: one for men and one for women. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted inside until the entrance of that one, and then treat those wounds with the treatment of other wounds.
In the second species of men, where urine is located in the coda of the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of lentil and meat, which are prominent causes of women's illnesses.
Lentils are often adjusted according to natural causes until it is ready and is cooked properly; some women are magnified in certain women as long as it is spread with them, just like in men, and perceive it during intercourse.
Therefore, you have the excess of lentils in your hand or in an ounce and incised.
And not in incision, especially in the front of the vagina, so that it does not cause bleeding from the wound.
And then cure that with the cure of the plagues until it is healed.
Meat that is not born is meat that was in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and often it is placed at the parts deformed according to the same way as the first ones (and therefore first called "bad offal"); therefore, you have to incise it like lentils, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the cure of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of a woman is not perforated, or is slightly narrow. And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by an illness that has preceded it, and that is made by flesh not well adjusted or by thin or thick phlegm.
And it is made in the palm of the hand, or in its sides, or in the most prominent part of the hand, or in the lowest part of the hand, and prevents lifting and grasping and bending, and very often prevents menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual blood, if the obstruction is apparent, then you should put it on the thighs called "dice" or on the back.
But if the obstruction is by thin phlegm, and it is directed to the two labia, then you should cover and disrupt that.
And place your hand over both of her labia minora, and then place your fingers on the indicated points of the majora to expand them.
And the woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently extend both of her labia with force until that delicate cord is broken and the hernia is pushed back in.
And then take wool and pour oil into it and place that on the location, and stitch the area with a needle to prevent the location from becoming consolidated.
However, if the hernia is large and thick, then you should stitch it with a wide or thick needle.
However, if the hernia is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and stitch it.
And then apply the medicines that stop bleeding from wounds with bites, such as acacia, and bleeding, and tannin, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide-bore canula to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated too soon.
And hold it for several days and administer some of its juice.
And then it should be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes certain accidents occur in the main nativity of other flesh, and then cover them according to this method. But if it is for abscess in the main part, to the abscess in the main part that is not made with any method.
Chapter 73.
About the cure of hemorrhoids and tail and red tapeworm that occurs in the belly of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated by the openings of veins within which blood flows continuously; and since hemorrhoids and their antidotes are made from them.
And I have already said in the division of those and their symptoms, and to say that those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, say that when the tumors and theirs are in the front of the greater, and do not appear to the touch, then do not make any cure with iron in those.
Those that are on the openings of the greater, over which sensation is felt, those that have been cured.
And cover that you place the woman in moisture and approach the thinnest iron or the sharp cloth, and insert those into the razor blades.
And then powder over those from the flow of one of the insertive powders, with a biting, like acacia and similar to those.
And then soak the feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
And if the flow of the sweat persists, then make that into a decoction of sage and of scraps of mint and of walnuts and of similar things.
And then take flour of bread and mix that with honey and vinegar, and make an ointment with that on the back of it.
If the bone is cut off, it is good; if not, make two incisions and perform an escarification on the mammillae.
Then take wool and apply it to the wound with honey, vinegar, or garlic water, and heal the area; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Then heal it until it is healed.
Chapter 74.
About the perforation of an accidental wound in the eye.
Special types of accidental abscesses in the eye, such as cranc and lapident abscess, ulcers, adhubelat, erpetromens, fistulas, emorroyas, raguarrias, thyl, and other abscesses. I have already mentioned these evils and the types of those and their symptoms, and their treatments in the division.
And you should know that in this treatise on abscess, the largest one that is found among the abscesses that are collocated in the breast, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done with a needle.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is sharp and accompanied by swelling and fever, and sometimes it increases and if it is catheterized over that sensation, then do not perform perforation of it, and cure that which helps to mature it within the time that the intensity of the accidents ceases.
And then consider whether you make the woman lie on a bed that has two mattresses; and she should lie on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the stomach that is closest to the venture, and her thighs should be expanded, and place your hand on her breasts behind her nipples, and apply what is convenient to that.
And then the midwife should follow the left side and administer the instrument that is inserted into the breast, the shape of which will be found in those causes that will be appropriate.
When you want to administer this instrument, hold it with the thumb of your left hand, and ensure that nothing from the instrument enters the main part of the woman, as this could harm the patient. However, if the instrument is larger than the thumb of your left hand, then place powder on the surface of your thumb to prevent the instrument from entering the main part of the woman.
And ensure that the thread that is on top of the instrument of the left hand is held by the assistant and rotated inside until it is inserted into the main part of the woman.
And when the exciter appears, touch it with your hand and clean it with salt and water, then wipe it with a cloth on the left side of the patient.
And when the pus is evacuated, place a cloth soaked in warm or cold oil in which there is some sterility; and place the bandage in the section of the main part of the woman.
And place your hand on the greater trochanter and above the femur, which was submerged in water in which malvas were built.
And it should be cured within two days after finding the one that is suitable for that entrance to be healed.
Some bandages are washed the greater and the wound in such a way that they are immersed in water and honey, and then in the water in which razor or longue of liri or aristologia is boiled, and then return to the wound.
And if the wound is deeply into the greater bandage, then it is prohibited to heal it with iron, having cure that one with that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives in what manner the embryos are best treated when they are not in a natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning of the figure of the fetus by smelling it, and when you see the woman expelling parts before and desiring to smell the air, and over it is removed by what is on her, and quickly the issue of the embryo, then know that this part is the second natural figure, and its issue over its own head, and the second is hanging or suspended from the belly.
Therefore, when you see those signs, it is recommended that the patient's belly be gently compressed so that the embryo does not come out too much, and when it moves slightly over its head, it is called the second sign, and it is said of those superfluities as a good manifestation.
Since that is another part of this, which is not natural and not usable, because when the embryo is outside its feet and the body of the patient is in front of its head and its legs are stretched out, or it is outside its head and its hand, or its foot, or its belly, and it is strongly converted on its neck, and similar to the unusable figures of the patient.
Therefore, it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
And you should show all the figures of those, and what meaning is in those so that it is significant for that and stands on that.
When it is done, it is outside its head because of natural thirst, and that is very strong on the woman and is made at that difficult part, and then the power of the patient is already weakened, then do that sign, or what the women had of it, and evaporate the pain of the patient with fenugreek and mild olive oil.
And then insert the sponge between her legs and tear that second one, or cut it with your finger until you reach that which is wet inside. Press the belly of the woman until she gives birth to the child.
But if she does not give birth, then cover the woman with a mixture of mustard seed and fenugreek powder.
And then command her, approach the cradle, that she be calm and do that which is necessary; and give her a mouthful of water and a noseful of water for an hour, until the child is born quickly.
And if the two arms of the child are born at the beginning, then cover them with a small cloth bit by bit. But if she does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then lower the chair to the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall from the shaking.
If the hands are not intact and the fetus is dead, then incise those and extract the remaining fetus or tie the umbilical cord to the patient's hand with a cloth and extract that as well, because that soul has been lost.
When the embryo has eyes on its feet, then cover those with something, and then turn the fetus small, and then make it equal to that, and then take one of its legs and extend those little by little.
When the eyes are inside the thighs, then command that one to speak, and make that one express itself in a condition, because that soul has been lost if God wills.
And if that one is not lost, then return the small fetus little by little until you reach that second natural figure, because that soul has been lost in the other eye.
And if it is prohibited to do all that we have recommended, then take some mucilage of althea and dissolved gum, and grind everything in the mortar for good mixing, and then apply that to the wound of the woman, the lowest part of her belly. And then make that cushion in hot water, until you achieve the hypochondriac points.
And when those parts behind are softened, then do to him the subfumigation of mint and pause that to him. And when the subfumigation lasts for an hour, then you make that steam over a hot stone, and after that, you do that steaming and remove the mouth of him, and lift from that, and press the lowest part of his belly with a firm compression, which makes him immediately sweat.
The entire length of the fetus hangs from one of its hands. It should be engineered in the reduction of the patient's abdomen, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make that happen.
And if it cannot be pushed out, then perform the jazzier on the light, and shake the cushions of the patient with great force, and gradually administer liniments that you have and recommend for muds.
And if the child has come out, then perform that serer on the china, and gradually study the reduction of the abdomen, and equalize the fetus according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to understand when it is pushed out.
When the child's head is expanded, its hands and the surface of its foot are at the two sides of its mother. That the midwife holds the child's hand and gradually turns it, and that it be gently.
And as it is and how much it is equal, then pause over the chest of the child with that which we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then command the child to gradually open its mouth, and when you have done that, place a spoon on a plate and command it to be inclined over the left side, and then command the child to be comfortable; and do that soothing condition. The outcome of the prepared fetus is on the side.
When the second finger of the mother is inserted into her vagina in this way, consider, and then you insert the second finger into the child's anus until it is emptied of moisture.
And if the child is suspended by its face and neck, then you insert your finger into the navel, so that it is not held and rots.
And then apply pressure to the parts that are most affected until the second that covers it, and send the woman to bring some bandages, and the servant who is outside should wait patiently until God wills.
The outcome of many twins or many offspring. Know that the bandages of twins or many offspring should not be too tight, and some are three or four, but that is strange and causes suffering; but it is a natural cause, and not a living one.
And count those, whether they are multiplied, one by one, and they are separated by the umbilical cord of each of those and some bandages are loosened as if it is a fetus that is naturally patient, and its position is supported by some bandages that are not unnatural.
And if they are difficult to remove from their position and reach that which we have said about unnatural figures, then cure those as we have recommended.
And if the wise woman makes something that causes ease and subtlety, and delay, and is engineered according to all figures according to what is prepared by the engineer for her benefit, leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Some women give birth to one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten, and it is already necessary for me to verify that a woman who has aborted six times, and another who has given birth to all of them, the cause of which is made by the glorious saints.
And all such knowledge that is in the science of the wise woman, which is very useful for that which resembles it, and therefore she applies herself to that which is useful.
Chapter 76.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you care for the dead fetus, use what we have said in the division of medicine and do not defile it, and you may safely use operation to remove it from her, then consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the accidents by which she is feared for loss.
When the woman is lying on her back, her head should be slightly raised, and her arms and legs should be elevated.
The nurse should hold the patient's arms or place them flat on the bed to prevent the patient from moving during the extraction of the fetus.
Then, you should moisten the mouth of the woman with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
Then, the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and she should insert her hand into the vagina, and she should feel for the umbilical cord in the fetus.
In such cases: then you consider whether the fetus is ready to breathe on its own, and if so, you should find the umbilical cord in the neck, chest, mouth, palate, under the chin, beard, breastbone, or other appropriate locations.
If the inflammation is on his feet, then in the plantar fascia, or in the middle of the ribs.
And have him hold his hand on the bent part of his arm, place your hand on the curvature of his arm in that place between the elbow and shoulder, and insert your hand with ease and feel the pain in any of those places we have mentioned until you reach the cause of the pain.
And then place and hold another hand in the position of his arm, or third if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not extended according to its straightness only.
And let your hand be at all parts, so that the pressure of his arm is relieved as it is done in teeth to remove it.
And let the extension be softened in that place between them; and if any part of it is held, then cover those mentioned hands with oil and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the foot is forgotten, then the joints are moved into a place that is more suitable; and make an incision so that the entire foot is exposed.
If the hand is twisted to the other side, and it is not possible to reduce it by its ligaments, then cover that area with a cloth; and remove it so that the entire area is exposed, and incise it or at the joint of the hand or in the cavity.
And make sure to do the same in the other hand and both feet.
If the head of the foot is large, or the ligaments are damaged in the ankle, or it is in the joint of the foot, and water is collected there, then insert spatulas between the said parts and cut the head and remove the water, or use an instrument called “alundat”, the shape of which will be found among the other instruments in the capital that is appropriate for this.
Similarly, if the foot is naturally large: and then make an incision at that part, or use an instrument called “alunda” as we have said; and remove the bones with forceps.
If the head is dislocated and pressed against the furcula, then it should be cut open to release the moisture that has accumulated in the chest.
If it is not complicated and the patient is not overweight, then you should insert the head as soon as possible according to your ability.
And if the left side of the abdomen is swollen or in hydrocysts, then pierce that which runs the moisture that is in it.
If the foot is above the feet, then the direction of the vein should be towards the mouth of the main vein.
If the abdomen and chest are pressed together, then remove that which has covered your hand with a cloth, and pierce the abdomen and chest to release that which is in those.
If the other members are still and the head returns, then insert your right hand; but if the mouth of the main vein is blocked, then insert your hand into the larynx, and surround that which is on the head, and pull that which is towards the mouth of the main vein, and after inserting one or two inches, pull it out.
If the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that affects the child, do not force it over him; before that, apply a moist, heavy fumigation. And apply ointments; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
If the fetus is on its side, try to turn it over if possible; and apply what we have said about the live fetus.
If that is not possible, then cut it off with scissors and extract it.
And make sure not to leave any remains of the second trimester.
And when you have completed all your work, apply what we have said about the treatment of abscesses that affected the mother.
And if blood flow occurs, apply cold compresses and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman in the belly of whom was a dead fetus, and another pregnancy started, and another dead fetus was found. It happened to the man for a long time that an abscess formed in his abdomen; and when fire was brought over it, he began to groan loudly.
And I was called to his care, and I treated him for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied some strong-adhesive plasters to him, and after several days, I removed one bone, and after a few more days, I removed another bone; and he was very surprised, as there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
So he continued to suffer from the wound, and he extracted more bones from him, which were already in existence in his abdomen, and had been there for a long time, causing him a small amount of pain.
And he did not deny that it was strange, but rather that in that place there was knowledge and help for that which the skilled physician uses to treat him.
Of the forms of instruments needed to extract the tooth.
The form of a lever is used to open the mouth:
This is the form of a pliers in which the jaws are clamped together, to which clasp there are two levers at both ends of two handles: But this lever should be more subtle than the clamp, and it should be made of wood or of bone:
And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the thickness of each end should be one finger thick; and the length of each is a palm and more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measuring rod, which are already fixed, whose length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two adjustments should be inserted in the mouth of the jaw so that they can be opened when you turn the two mentioned levers:
Another similar form of that very subtle and deceitful disease:
Should be made from a piece of wood or bone according to the likeness of forceps. But at the end of that two additions have, like sometimes, and the length of those additions is one span, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the largest, then you place your hand on the left side of the foot while the feet hang down, and insert that which is between the patient's thighs. And then raise your hand with the instrument like forceps equally according to the amount that you want of the approximation of the mouth of the largest until the midwife makes what you want.
The form of the chisel which the ancients said:
Form of the instrument with which is pushed the fetus:
Form of the forceps with which is held the large head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end, like sometimes, and some of them are made long like this, like sometimes, to which is attached at the end, like the scissors of a seamstress, which is cut and held. Form of administration for small doses:
Form of a single drop:
Form of a double drop:
Form of a saw with two ends, by which the head is amputated:
Form of two long saws:
All these instruments are exercised, and as more species of them are multiplied and prepared by the craftsmen, it becomes easier for them to perform their work and less necessary for men due to their quantity.
And you should not neglect the work of these instruments, whether it is inside or outside, as the need for them is not excuseable.
Of extraction of the second tooth:
When the second tooth is held, command the patient to hold their breath, then make a strong pressure on the condition, and place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if by force it does not come out, it is well.
And if not, then take an egg and pierce it on the cover, and place it in the herbs burning at the mouth of the pot, with salt and rough pepper and anet and camomile and Arabic and cassia lignea and sainturea. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the pot, and place it over the fire.
And then place a cannula of siphon in the mouth of the pot, and hold it inside until the vapor comes to the bottom of the pot.
And then do the stirring as we have said, and the second time it is quickly removed.
If this cure is not effective, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then enter it into the womb and rub it with the second time, and when it has found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the neck of the pot, then enter it the second time as we have recommended, and when it has found the second time, extract it little by little according to how the pot does not catch the attraction vehemently. Before performing the operation, make sure that the patient's arms are extended to the right and left for ease of movement.
If the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure of sucking and medication with herbs from the oil.
But if all the causes we have recommended are not followed, then remember that whatever is essential to the patient from the body to the mouth of the mother should be placed on the cushion of the woman, and then christen it with a solution of honey and tetrafarmacon; because that will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten.
But when it dissolves, lift the bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and that causes the patient to vomit; and then remember that sub-fumigations and appropriate measures should be given to it.
May ancient authors also spoke of sublimation of nitre and dried figs.
The form of the instrument by which the woman is sublimated must be for the retention of menstruation and the second.
It should be made of iron or copper.
And the narrow end should be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the sublimation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And keep that in which that sublimation is consumed and repeat another.
Of the cure of the child's unperforated anus.
When newborn children and their anuses are not perforated, which are already narrow and tightly closed. Then ask the midwife to pierce that narrow part; and if not, pierce that space sharply, and be careful not to touch the sphincter.
And place your hand over that wool soaked in vinegar and oil; and cure that opening where it is not open.
If you fear that he may be choking, then place a tube in his throat to help him breathe, and remove it when he wants to cough.
And if you have experienced choking of the anus due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then make sure that this consolidation is not cut, and then cure it with the remedy we have mentioned for the cure and the poultice.
Of the cure of fistulas that occur afterward.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the abdomen, which are often large and occur near the anus or in the space between the buttocks.
And if it is a fistula or pustule.
And if that swelling is ancient and comes from the moisture, a white or thin pus, and some of these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are recognized by the presence of worms, for their exit and for their windiness; and some patients use the patient's excrement, and it is often found in these worms.
And some of those fistulas are sometimes visible in the space penetrating into the bladder, and into the meat of the penis; and some penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the navel of the buttocks.
And in that which is known as a fistula penetrating into the anus and not penetrating, you insert your finger into the anus, and then gently probe the fistula with a soft or iron tool when it is not turgidity.
But if there is turgidity in that place, then gently probe with a soft or horsehair tool until you feel the tool or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all or do not proceed due to some cause of diarrhea, vomiting, or flatulence, as we have said, then know that it is not penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the penis, then the meaning of that is necessarily urine from that place and prohibition of that so that that place may be consolidated by medicine.
If the pain penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes severe pain in the circumference, it is then called a boil if there is no turgescence inside the bone, and severe pain in the circumference of the limb; and that from there it often spreads quickly; and that it does not work in that medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all, and the cure of those is difficult and depends on the skill of the surgeons upon which it is based.
If in that which is not penetrating and ancient, the cure is done by iron and is spread according to what I have advised you and what has been done before.
And if the patient grips your hands between his own and raises his legs into them, the cushions should be inclined towards the belly of the patient, and then insert a probe of lead, or of iron if there is turgescence in the fistula, until you know the location where the probe enters.
And if the patient has pain in their abdomen, then you should insert your finger into the belly.
And if you feel the same pain in your finger as when it enters deeply into the flesh, then you know for certain that this is penetrating; and then do not treat in that area, because it is not healing, as we have said.
However, they say that this is healing in some people who are sick with the dart.
And the medicine that is hoped to be very effective in this is that you ignite a thin cauterizer according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the abdomen; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all the flesh-like tissues that resemble a quill of a goose have been cauterized.
And then cure those wounds that are wrapped in a bandage until all the flesh-like tissues that have been cauterized have healed, and then cure those wounds with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, then it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
If the probe enters, and does not penetrate into the abdomen, which is in the buttocks, and between the probe and the abdomen is a velament, of flesh or of skin, and if the fistula is in that place, then dry the flesh from the beginning of the fistula, and you see if the probe dries inside the fistula, and if the drying reaches the location where the end of the probe is, and through the probe it is released and cautery.
And then clean those fistulas that are assembled like a pen quill and do not have any cause of those.
But if pus flows between you and your operation when you have those flesh, then milk that is and from the pus a more appropriate instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cauterizer with fire adjusts good doses: it adheres to those flesh adjusted, and abscission of the pus from the exsecacio of the humidities.
And then carefully remove the calves that are wrapped in bandages or caused by three twists in that place where the leg begins, and then carefully remove the wound that generates and solidifies hard meat.
And in these remedies, which have astringency and drainage; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
If the fistula has already penetrated into the anus and is extended from there to the surface of the rectum, then introduce the finger into the anus and examine that.
And if the tent is placed and enters between you and it is covered with skin or meat, and is directed towards penetration, then it is not an operation in that place but a second way of trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer it in that place in one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to dry out that so that you can possibly enter those and the cure provided, and do not process any for the reason that you do not incise the skin containing the bowel, and that an accident occurs on the patient's will and the evidence; and then cure that which we have said is very strong to heal; or lengthen that covering and cleanse that which dries out that into the anus, as we have said, or with the tent or another instrument of sharp extremity, and cleanse those fistulated flesh which are in the section inside where you can perform the crustation; and then force yourself to restore the whole wound section, and if the outlet below is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the anus, and is more painful for the patient. And in some ways, the fistula is finished according to this method: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the left side of the buttocks on the surface of the skin and on the edge of the buttocks, then take a perforated extremity, which is like an awl for preparing the wound in this form:
and insert it into that layer of fat or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates the edge of the buttocks near the anus, then you extract the fat from that area where you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the end of the fat and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the fat is inserted into the flesh, then cut those parts of the flesh which are between the two ends of the fat and which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and cured.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrated, then make them so in some way that is prepared by you, but not too deeply so as not to injure the ligament; and then insert something into that which is healed.
The shape of the spindle that is used to pierce the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so as not to injure what is not necessary, sometimes.
Stitching of edematous parts where there is inflammation at the beginning of those.
Edematous parts are of two kinds, either between the buttocks like charcoal, or those which are like grease. And of those, there are small and large ones, which cause inflammation from those immediately and are one, and their matters, and their back, and at the buttocks of those.
But those which have inflammation at the back of the buttocks are according to the amount of moisture, from which there is a yellowish discharge or a small amount of pus, and its color is according to the matter.
And the cure for that which is dipped in the intestine is that you command the patient to lie down and that they expire into the intestine while the bowels appear to you. Then you sit and support the patient's arms or whatever you have to hold them with, and then incise their ribs.
But if the arms are not held with those because of their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton cloth or a woolen blanket, and extract those with the scissors, and then incise those and powder some caustics on the incision, so that they are in place as a cauterizer; or cauterize them according to what is prescribed in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
And if the wound does not obey the exit, then crucify the patient with a cross in which there is a small mordicacy, and bathe them with that water which is in the belly and which obeys the exit more when the patient expires.
If the swollen parts deform the buttocks, the cause of this is usually fleas, and you should remove them with your nail, or with a pin, and scrape them off, and then cure them with the remedy we mentioned earlier when they are healed.
And the one who comes before should administer a second suture according to this method: take a thread wrapped around an awl and insert it into the swelling at the top parts, and make the awl penetrate the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the awl, and longitudinally; and strongly tie the swelling to the structure, and remove the thread and the awl.
And do this to all of them, and leave one undone so that the excess of the cure comes from that one.
And place a cloth soaked in rose oil or wax on the buttocks; and place that on the wound and command the patient to rest. And then leave that person inside the box; and when it is closed, care for them with herbs or other remedies until they are healed.
And if those remedies do not work in that medicine, then prick those wet areas with a needle or your nail, and place the scab from above on them, which prevents them from consolidating; and then care for those that have consolidated.
Then apply those wet areas with a stronger plaster than the first one, and care for those that have healed.
You know that almsamen, as it is called, is not red like a claviel, and is found throughout the body and mainly in the parts below the feet and the knees, and causes those painful swellings.
And then cut that which is inside the nail circle, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its place; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second as it is preceded in its chapter.
The wart is a small elevated, round, fistula on the surface of the skin, and it causes pain in the joints of children.
And its treatment is that you extend and cut it, or that you remove it with forceps or a needle. And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or sharp medicine.
The ant is a small, feathered or large, fistula on the surface of the skin, and when it bites there, it causes a similar bite as an ant, and it is made around the skin.
And its treatment is that you take a needle of pen or voltor, and it should be strong, and place the ant over the ant within the circle of the needle parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you cut it, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its place.
And if you wish, do this with a needle or iron in this manner:
The part above the needle should be thinned out, unbroken (not pierced), wrapped by someone who can remove any impurities and turn it around.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is written in the cautery of athyls in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are used to give cristeri (a type of medicine).
Some veguadas (a type of medicine) are made from silver or lead or melted or hammered; and some veguadas are made from those instruments that are small and large according to those that are administered, because the one that is administered in the cure of small children should be small; and from those of which the bellies are inflamed or painful, the cristeris of those should be small.
The form of large and few cristeri (medicines):
The tip of the needle above should be wide according to this manner; and at the distance where the bag is attached, it should be as thick as possible.
And the end of the patient's bed, which is inserted into the anus, should be soft (not removed) like a lion, to avoid sensitivity; and on one side of the bed, two troughs, and on the other side, one trough, and the widest trough should be according to the size of the rays and slightly larger than a small one.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or of lamb's wool are placed, and the lid of it is a palm.
And it should be pierced with a small tube as it is rotated; and if the space between the tubes is the largest of them all.
And insert those tubes firmly with a strong cord of strong silk, or around those; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be straight in the head of the crucifix between two distinct strong bands, and crucify each tube: But the quality of crucifying that is to fill the bag with the medicine, which should be scalded according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to be too cold or too hot.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their thighs raised, with a cushion or pillow under them; and a cloth soaked in olive oil, or album of hen's eggs, or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substance, should be inserted into the rectum to facilitate evacuation. The nurse should hold the basin and express the contents until everything is evacuated from the intestine into the bowl; then remove the bowl and the patient can lower their thighs to the side.
If the medicine does not work as expected, hold it in as much as possible; if you fall asleep while taking it for the whole night, it is better to take it in the morning.
However, if you clean the patient in the solutions of the belly and the evacuation of them, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are pus or abscesses in the rectum, then use a soft and thin bowel, from the bowels that infants are made of.
Of the treatment of plaques
It has already been said in the division of the treatment of plaques that this was appropriate for the free man, and thus the treatment of those who are sick and require medicine according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that the plaques are diverse according to what kind of plaque they are and where they occur on the body.
And the causes for which plaques are formed are similar to those of gout, or incision by a spade or a dagger, or percussion from a lance, a stick, a sword, or similar to those of gout.
May the plaques that occur in the parts of the body be similar to those that cat on the head, or neck, or chest, or stomach, or back, and similar to those of the limbs.
And thus, the treatment of some plaques is recommended because it follows that reason and rule for the other plaques.
And I will begin with the simple wounds of the head, for the memory of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, it is said that when a simple wound occurs in the head and is not a fracture, if it is from a stone or something similar, and has only been washed with water and is large and you fear for that patient due to the risk of abscess, then you should first apply leeches to the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and then extract the pus according to the amount of its virtue if no other cause prevents leeching, especially if the wound that exists from the wound is small.
And if the leeching is from the opposite side of the wound, then keep the patient away from repletion and vigorous activity and heavy foods.
But if there is any cause that prohibits the leeching, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or fish.
And place upon the wound, if an abscess occurs, apply a poultice made of olive oil mixed with rosemary or vinegar that is styptic.
However, if it is certain that an abscess has occurred recently and the air has not changed, then apply a powder that I will recommend to you.
And if the air has already changed, then apply a poultice made of herbs that are not yet healed.
However, if the wound is large or has sharp edges and the lips of it are not adjusted by stitches, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of such wounds.
However, if the wound has already exposed bone and pus, and it is not retained by stitches but only a small suspensory, then scrape away that and apply medicines to the wound and restore flesh in place of the codeina, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: such as caps and similar things, until it is healed.
If the bone in the cavity is rotten and does not stick to the bone, then you scrape off all that and wash it, and then cure it.
If in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow and is not cut by medicine, then you should look for the artery, and if you find it uncut, then scrape it with a spatula or tie it; and if it is necessary that what we have said does not work, then you cauterize where the pus is removed.
If these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light; however, you should powder them with this powder, which solidifies when it comes into contact with the air, which moves them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of unextinguished charcoal; mix all this into a fine powder, and then fill the wound with it, and compress it with good compression until it sticks to the wound, and coagulate it with the pus.
And then tightly press that above the powder and leave it there until it is not stuck, because it is not cured of it until the medicine enters and heals.
And some people do that alone with cauterization when you are not present and it is not from a dragon.
And this surgical operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to be placed on those and be tightened, and their recent wounds are covered with a clean cloth, which has not been altered by air.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer time, then this powder position is not used, but rather cure those with that which we have said, unless you place it on those wounds with a dressing of diastious or place it on those wounds with a paste of flour and water until they are completely healed; and then cure them with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs to the wound fracture in bone, and it is small, then you remove that with that which we have said.
And I will say the cure for the fractures of the head in this case is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, it is not different in medicine, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but rather to avoid cure of which causes strong stanching, as well as ziniar and zegi that is verdigris and similar to their four nozo to the nerves and contrazo aquel. And do not place anything over the plague of any cause of all flesh, because the substance of the nerves is flesh and the continuation of which is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured of false medicines, as it is caused by washing with warm water, some vapor infused in olive oil or not-olive oil, and thucia when washed with warm water and the others peyras minarantz according to this manner, and found humitz.
If the wound is large, then administer stitches or tie the lips of it, and then care for that area with powders until it is healed.
If the wound has depth or accidents in the lowest part, then puncture it in the most suitable place.
If the wound has an incised artery and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the ribs of the chest have been incised and the veins of the collarbone are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the edge of the chest and do not touch that; equalize it and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply a structure that is decent, and care for that area with ointments in which there is stiptic effect and excitation until it is healed.
If the wound has penetrated into the bone, then perforate it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, remove all of them that you can; and what is not visible to you, leave it alone until the wound heals, and it will be separated and the edges of it will be united.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle powder over it that was recommended to you. But if the wound has become a fistula, then cure it with the same thing that the memory of which will soon come to its own capital.
If it is a percussion of a lance or a knife, and sometimes you see the depth of it, then consider more if the wound has bleeding when the patient inhales; then you will know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent at its own place, then you should place powder on it during the first hour, and not strengthen that so that the wound does not remain in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that no one hurts the patient, but rather pause in that attractive place, and delay those days.
And if the mouth is not present, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound, so that the liquid from the humors can drain; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid in them can flow out.
If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasms, trembling of the heart, or stricture of the abdomen, and other signs are good for the wound, then know that the wound is healing; and then apply ointment to one side and another treatment until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is delayed, and it has been opened for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; treat it therefore by its own method.
And if the wound is caused by a cut or a thrust, and it is simple on the surface of the thigh or back, then treat it with water that is used before stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been an incision in the bone, and it is already cut through, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then insert the instruments that can reshape the plate, to facilitate their extraction.
And from the other plates in other members, the treatment in cure is the same as what we have said.
Of the plates of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
And disruption of small veins is difficult to treat by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so you should not wait to insert them at their proper place as soon as possible, because they are open and swell, making it difficult to treat.
And therefore the best disruption is that in which it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, as it is difficult in the two species called hernias.
You should know that the abdominal suture is performed in four ways, but two common methods are sufficient for sutures of other parts of the body.
And two other proper sutures connect to other parts of the body, but they are more proper for the abdominal suture.
I advise you to have each exposure and declaration.
Therefore, say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the intestine for that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then it is in one of the two methods: either by paravent of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to cold air.
And therefore when that is so, cover the wound with a cloth soaked in warm water alone, or with a poultice made of boiled barley, cumin, and spices, and apply it to the intestine before the inflammation is resolved.
Some people do this in which there is astringency, and it is better than water alone in resolving inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are mixed, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from much pain.
But if the instrument of the patient is not removed from this cure, then divide the disruption with a small sharp instrument that is not blunted by rust.
The first cure is best when it is proper that it not be dry, and not occupied by the need to dry and defecate.
Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
One part of it is sharp and pointed, and the other part is not sharp, and its tip is thin, but not as thin as a needle, with a slightly blunt edge in front.
And when the plague has increased and the intestine is pushed out, then return it to its original shape, in its proper place, if possible above water, because that is better.
When the disruption is widespread, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then make the patient lie on their stomach, and place your hand on their back as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then place your hand on their head and the other on their chest as high as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two sides of the belly, then place your hand and your attention quickly on the side where the pain is higher than the other.
And thus, administer this in the severe and mild cases.
And in the minor cases, place what is prepared on your hand, and make sure that the minister holds the disruption completely with their hand and adjusts the lips of it, and remove one stitch at a time until you find another cause.
And this is the common method of suturing: you take a needle, or count the number of needles according to the size of the wound; and lay it at the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle one, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that is below the skin of the parts that are inside, until you make it penetrate that part; and you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the silk, and make four knots.
Approach the double needle in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by aggregation, and then leave the largest one and put another needle in that, and then tie that with the same thread as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the wound is completely closed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarse and fine, because fine needles penetrate the flesh more easily; and large needles are difficult to insert into the tissue, therefore it is better that they be of medium thickness.
And do not let the needle be stuck in two ends of the wound intended for, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged for stitching so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then carefully insert the tips of the needles so that they do not pierce the patient's skin; and place cotton pads over the sutured parts, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is healed.
These types of stitches with needles are most suitable for small wounds, since in their suture there is usually one or two or several needles.
The second type of stitch is similar: and you administer the four ends, two from the catgut and two from the silk, in a row, with a needle that is thin and thick enough.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four ends, reduce the needle to the same part of the thread from which it started, so that the false knot on the wound does not rise again, so that the suture is the second type of stitch with a strong thread.
Pause between each suture the amount of the thick of the said injury.
And this stitch is for women.
And this stitch was used to sew the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was pierced by a knife, and was a rupture of the main vein of a palm, and was located around two palms from the intestine in the middle of the member; and then he reduced it so that the intestine had been pierced for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and he treated it and it was cured; and then he applied this ointment for a while, and he continued in his positions.
And other doctors had thought that it would not be healed; and because of a miracle, fire, which was in a place where the wound was not treated with any medicine, but only covered over the wound for two days and frequent bathing with honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two specific types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And if you begin with the suture of the neck, and insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
And as the needle penetrates into the neck and the other hand moves correctly and for the length of the entire body, and leave the end of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and make the other end of the needle penetrate from the front part to the back part on the other side of the body.
And as you have made that penetration, then make the other end of the needle penetrate in another direction in the same side of the body from the front part to the back part; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate in the other end of the partida dedintz to the partida deforo.
And make the needle penetrate in the other end of the cord at the point that makes that penetration in the cord at the end of the mirror which is in the part of the body where all that penetrates.
And then, from this position, lean towards the other side and place your hand at the end that is on the other side of the spine, and extract the needle from the codex, and return it to the codex and cover the end of the spine that is on the other side with a cloth; and extract the needle from the codex that is on the other side.
Do this several times, and do this several times, approaching another time before you cover all of what is deformed according to that example.
The advantage of this method of suturing is that you cover the wound with a piece of cloth that covers the skin, in order to keep the spine away from it for a while, and then cover it again after you have completed the other side.
The second special method of suturing, which is called Guillotine, and this is the same for both sides, and it should be recommended to you, is that you cover that second semilunar piece that doctors usually cover with another, in order to add all the parts together at the corresponding part of it, and apply the end of the other side to the end of the mirror on the other side, and this is done according to your recommendation.
When you place the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own part, and make it penetrate into that spot, and lay two ends of the thread; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from your part to the other end of the thread.
And then rotate those threads, and make each one penetrate from the other end of the thread into your part in two other ends of the mirror that are on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common one, and it is the suture of which previous remembrance was mentioned.
This is the speech of Guillia
And moreover, it is said that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so you should insert each one in these according to your own, and begin with the insertion of the needle that you are supposed to use, and make it penetrate into the other side according to the sutures of those that cover the hearts equally.
When the disruption occurs in the middle part of the abdomen, the suture of that area is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The judgment of medicine for plague is different from that of other diseases.
Because the cause is that when you obtain the plague recently, it is the same saint denying that the air alters it, and reduces the intestine and its contents, and does not treat it properly, then place something on that fleshy powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place something on that alcohol-soaked cloths which are with you until they become hard and stiff, and are consolidated and dry; and then cure that as is the cure of other diseases until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines with you, then place something on that garlic, vinegar, and honey, and change it twice a day, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple diseases when the plague is present.
If you are afraid that the plague might spread to the main members, then cover yourself with lion's wool dipped in oil of good quality, or with rose oil, and place it around the areas where the fleas live and leave them there.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, which is caused by this, then apply a black stiptic wound sealant, and more so if the perforation reaches the intestine and is made penetrating into its cavity.
And you should know that the pus from a large intestine is less dangerous for healing than the pus from small intestines.
It is difficult to heal the intestine called "gugu" because it does not receive healing from any plague that may be in it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, and its size, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the thing that comes from the plague is the thread, and you obtain it recently, reduce it according to your rightfulness, which reduces the intestines equally.
If the space has already been cleaned and it is now black or white, then place your finger on the spot where it becomes dark from the blood, so that the blood flows out through the veins and arteries in the cloth.
And then insert the other thread through that opening, and place two ends of the finger hanging from the part where it is separated from the cloth over the wound, so that the attraction of the wound is from the cavity of the cloth and the emission of the blood from the wound.
Remembrance of wounds that occur in the intestine.
When a disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, it is possible that it can be restored in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in their belly by percussion of an arrow and the wound was the part of the middle of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and they were able to manage and vent the intestine.
Then they continued the treatment of that wound which was not confirmed in its healing, but they stopped subtly after it became healthy and the location was consolidated.
And if you have not yet seen the location that has already solidified, then apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent further damage; and do not attempt any treatment for this injury, but rather let them rest in their bed, eating and drinking as usual, and then proceed with the necessary treatment.
And some experienced physicians have said that when a hernia occurs in the intestine, and it is small, then you should follow this method: first, take large needles; then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place one of those needles with the open mouth over the two lips of the hernia; when you put it on them and strengthen your mouth, cut off the cap of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another needle next to the first one, and do not stop making these stitches until you have made one after another according to the size of the entire hernia.
And then return that and the hernia to its place; and leave those needles in the intestine until the intestine is healed, and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the hernia is tied with a thin, sharp thread, which is made from animal intestine; and you should take hold of the end of this thread, which should be unsheathed, and tie the end of the hernia to the other end of the thread, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into the disruption.
This method of suturing is not other than the second way of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up, but only drained, and not healed from all sides.
For the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
You should know that every wound and abscess that becomes hidden and ancient, and is made into an ulcer, and is not consolidated and does not heal all the time and is not excised, in any member, generally it is called a fistula, and we call it an ancestral wound.
And secondly, a fistula is indeed a narrow, white, painless channel that has the same cavity as a painful ulcer; and to avoid naming it an abscess, it is called a fistula.
And in moist men, the one that causes pain; and if the humidity is not removed within a few hours, it will cause damage. And sometimes this humidity is moved, and it is thin, thick, and subtle.
Here are all those causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are made by surgical means.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among those that come to great veins, arteries, nerves, or the spleen, intestine, bladder, or some costal bone, or some of the spinal bones of the back, or some joint composed by the union of flesh and skin; and these are those that are closest to the principal member and similar to it.
And among those fistulas that follow this pattern are difficult-to-heal wounds, do not receive treatment, and require hard work and ignorance.
And if the depth of some fistulas does not reach those places that have been mentioned, and you expect and believe in their treatment, and you want to reach knowledge of them, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula follows correctly, and you can reach it with this.
If the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin probe, as the weight of the body can alleviate and straighten the twisting.
And if the fistula has very horrible symptoms, it is not possible to use the probe on it.
Then clean the orifices with their own humidity, as the moisture you use to clean one spreads to the others and causes them to decay.
And then carefully inquire, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long or short cavity of the fistula is filled with pus, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that is spread over all of your strength, your investigation, your examination of the patient, and the invention of the cause of the pain due to your compression of the hand on the affected area, and similar meanings and causes of accidents in the abscess.
And when you have established all these causes with certainty, then proceed to the cure: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint, or far from it, or of nerves, or of an artery, or of a vein, or of one of the places that I have already mentioned.
Then dry the fistula after it has been opened, and remove whatever is in that filter and rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifices of the flesh, or of the skin and similar, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the fistula is of long depth and is straight, then cut it as much as possible from the front, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply moistened bandages in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a knife.
And do that to it several times until the acute medicine corrodes all that is in the cavity of the fistula of the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be confirmed by you, then inquire about that and seal it after the second one that we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or principal member present as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and is in any corruption or blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is contained entirely; and cure that with what heals that flesh within which it is not healed.
And if it does not heal and there is no bandage present as it was before, then know that you have not reached the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you must expose it again and carefully make the reason of it and the cleaning of it with the strongest fortification tied, and then restore that.
And therefore if it is healed, well; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the depths far within the body, which has not been reached, and therefore you cannot enter into that except by laying open that.
And if the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it out, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
And if you have the strength to extract all of them, do so carefully without any cause that would harm your strength.
But if you encounter any resistance due to the presence of moisture, and there is no fear or mistake at the beginning, then carefully cut through those tissues or flesh that are present, and remove the bones.
But if you do not have the preparation of bones from the hour, then place a poultice on that area that will help to soften the wound around those bones of flesh and tissues, and keep the poultice from being consolidated, and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
Having said that, if you fear, place the wound under a bandage soaked in olive oil, or under a bandage soaked in Egyptian wine, or in any of the oils, because when those tissues are healed, and the bones are separated from their position, and the attraction is alleviated.
If there is a large bone like the bones of the couch or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the face of it, then rub that resin only behind where that blackness and corruption is, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you have someone who has experienced this in their thighs to assist you in your operation.
A young man around the age of thirty, who experienced pain in his groin, and from the parts that were swollen was due to the matter within the body where the matter reaches the groin, and it is a large abscess, and not an external cause.
And then the fire was extended to the thigh amidst the error of doctors until the abscess was healed, and afterwards from that matter, and the cure of the fire was paused until the bed was fistulated, and in the mottled places were made points which all got pus and the humidity of the wound.
And then all the care of doctors for about two years, and not in that savage place but in the art, until I was called.
And I saw the bed of that and the matter that was running from it those points into great wounds; and already the condition of that man was all stable and the color of it was yellowish.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those points and reached the tent to the bone.
And then I examined quickly those points and found that they reached all parts of the bed.
And then I showed and incised over one of those points where I described a part of the bone, and at once it was rotten and corrupted and decayed; and already a part of the bed had been corrupted where it had penetrated into the flesh.
And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
And then apply that which I had discovered and prepared from the corruption that I had removed and applied, which was already dissolved.
And then place your hand over the wound with consolidative medicine for a long time, and it does not consolidate.
And then apply and discover again on the bone secondarily, above the first discovery, and continue to remove corruption from the bone.
And then apply that which I had discovered from that corruption, and then apply it to cure it and restore it, but it does not restore.
And then apply it again and do not stop gradually and specifically, incising the bone little by little, until the restoration is completed around a palm of the bone, and that extracted was from its marrow, and then apply that to the medicine, and it consolidates better and heals.
And there is no need for repetition in the operation of that and its sectioning, but rather for the position of the patient's limb and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death, which occurs in all hours due to excessive evacuation of bad syncope.
And so, the cure is for complete healing, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position them in their own body and return their strength; and they are positioned in their positions and do not do anything against them in ambulation or harm in any cause.
And if the bone is in place of the body that has been fractured, then proceed with this method: and it is that you take the bandage and strength at the end of that fractured bone, and command whoever extends it; and place that woolen thread thicker than the first thread; and bring it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outside of it to draw the flesh to the parts left, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to suture so that the stitch does not hurt the flesh.
And place the table under the bone properly, because when you do that, it is not forbidden to sew without stitching the flesh that has been corrupted.
And if the bone fracture is in the hollow of the bone and does not appear on its surface, then another method should be used to set it.
And if the bone is not eminent and extends from one continuous part to another, and the fracture is at the middle or in a part of it, then you should remove all the flesh from all parts; place a cushion underneath, and set the first part where the fracture is continuous before setting the other part.
And if the setting of the bone is close to the location of the fracture, as we have said before.
And if the fracture is at a joint, insert a splint at that joint and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the fracture is at the connection of two joints, then it should not be set in a straight line but rather bent.
And if the fracture is in the palm of the hand or the sole of the foot, it is quite difficult; however, try to find out where the fracture appears to you, and remove that, and moisten it according to each possible position, and when it does not cause you any discomfort or pain, then straighten it as much as possible.
And know what are the sawblades that should be used to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and variability of those, and their hardness and rarity; so that you prepare all kinds of tool suitable for that operation.
And know that for that operation you need the specific tool; when you are great in study and long and experienced in the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of illnesses, then you already have it to measure that which is suitable for each tool for each disease.
And you will know the number of tools that you will use at the end of this chapter, the simple ones and those that you will process according to your prohibition, which you will experience on others. Saw shape:
Shape of another saw:
Shape of another large saw:
Form of a ray: The second part of this ray should be in the shape of a star-shaped cap, and its points should be in the shape of the stealthy point.
It is not advisable to use it only when the joint caps are corrupted or when the mouth is very wide open.
Form of a smaller razor:
Form of a broad razor:
Form of another well-made saw: make an arch of it with the best iron and the sharpness of the saw, and make the handle of it with good wood. Form of it:
Form of a razor with hollowness:
Form of another subtle razor:
Form of another curved-end razor:
Form of a small razor similar to a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a clamp, and it is displayed in various places on the bones:
Form of a ray that suits the ratio of the one that pierces the bones:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and serrations.
Of the ends of incisors and the sawing of bones.
The ends can be pressed either by intrinsic or extrinsic causes, or if you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not come, sometimes the corruption can lead to the member that is not affected by any cause, therefore cover that member within that area where the inflammation accompanies the corruption, so that the patient might escape from death or harm due to a greater defect of the member.
And the limb of that person who was affected, is that it becomes black inside before the fire has burned it, or if it becomes poured with the blackness inside before the wound enters that member and takes over the entire body; and thus you must begin to cut it from there.
And similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as from a scorpion or from viper or from a rattlesnake and the like.
And if the corruption or the pressure is at the end of that limb, then you must cut it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
And similarly, if it enters the body, then you must cut that of the root of the elbow, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes over the elbow of the arm.
And if that happens, then cut the arm through the cavity at the joint.
And if the corruption and the poison pass around the cavity, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, the quantity of virtue is limited.
And similarly, when decay has caused the foot to rot, then you insert it into one of the nails.
And if you take the sole of the foot, then you insert the entire foot. But if it can enter the knee, then you insert the leg into the joint of the knee.
And if decay has already reached the knee, then there is no other option but to let the patient die.
And the method of inserting or cutting the member is that you strengthen the tendon at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another tendon over the area; and extend the minister a tendon to the parts behind, and extend the minister another tendon on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two tendons a span wide inside so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And cover it with cloth from all parts so that it does not touch the area, and bring the patient's injury and abscess in order.
If the patient has a constant flow of blood while working, then you should cauterize the wound consistently, or place some restricting powders on it; and then return to your medical practice before it is completed.
And then place the injured limb in a suitable bandage, and treat it before it heals.
And I recommend that you treat this accident that happened to a man in his foot, which is the same accident that I and you recommended, which occurred due to excessive heat that was similar to a fire burn.
And that corruption occurred first in his big toe before it affected the entire foot.
And then that man prepared for the treatment to arrive at the limb with the intensity of its pain and burning, and the inscription on that foot entered into the joint, and it healed.
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the other foot of the main character.
And then it reached me, and I was able to reflect on that excess in relation to the main character's medicine, to the healing of the body; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to the other foot before it begins in the main character.
And he asked me to incise the abdomen of the patient, but I did not want to do so, fearing the repercussions of such an action, and more than that, I feared for the life of the patient, as the patient's virtue was unknown.
And since he was displeased with me, he returned to his own land and I received word that that man had prepared and incised the entire abdomen of the patient, and was cured.
And I have not narrated this story except to be helpful in this matter of this illness, and to provide meaning for the reason it was done and how it was done.
Of the treatment of abdominal pain and quality of clysters with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open as if it were a vessel, and the codex that is above it is covered with fine cloth, and corruption does not reach it, and it is not impressed into bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
If the space is prolonged before corruption occurs in any member, it is called a fistula and not a fistula.
The treatment for it is to insert that whole code into the wound, turning it as it is unwound, and more so when it is thinned and made with cloth, and make sure it does not stick to the wound due to its corruption.
If you hope that the code adheres and that that corruption has not been achieved due to subsequent consequences, and in the code there is a crack, then you treat it with ointment.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the breath that comes out of it has a strong odor, then apply that Egyptian ointment which is made of oil and vinegar and equal parts of honey, and adjust them in a vessel, and cover it with a cloth over the fire until the medicament boils and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take that water which is necessary and dissolve it with that honey; and apply that ointment to the sinus, and strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
And then extract that blood; and do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the wound remains uninfected.
Some wounds are cleaned with ashes water, when this medicament is not present; and you take the ash of wood, put it on the water; and then apply that to the wound and clean it until you confirm that the sinus has been removed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicament or ash water, then clean that wound with water and honey mixed in equal parts, and clean it with honey, because honey cleanses and washes, and it makes the sinus stick together, and especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wound.
And when you do this for some wounds and confirm that the sinus has been cleaned, then clean it with water that makes flesh in it.
And you take some yellow myrobalan and dissolve it in the rose-colored oil and vinegar, or you clean that wound with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties written about in the treatise of ointments.
And if the opening of the sinus is narrow and cannot receive the catheter of the injection, then gradually widen it with a small file until it is wide enough to be used.
Similarly, if the opening is widened, then apply a suture to it and leave enough space for the amount of the injection to enter.
And if the opening from which the arm is raised to the parts above is elevated, then dry that part in the lowest place where it is in order for the arm to pass through it. When the arm is pulled out of the sinus, the flesh will be engendered in that place.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then prepare the member with the preparation that allows the arm to be pulled out naturally and without any cause of the arm being held back.
The one that is over the opening of the sinus, which remains in place throughout the entire hour to prevent that which is adjusted on the side of the arm. And so you can know whether what comes from the side of the arm is more or less, or digested, or not digested.
And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And when your treatment is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has been poured over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or has begun to adhere, then you should remove it or tear it away on the third day, and when you remove the plague, then change the cloth and renew the tongue.
If the sinus approaches the space and adheres to it, do not despair of its attachment, because the healing of it will be appropriated, as in some people where generation of flesh in those places takes a long time, and in others where the opposite is done.
And if the sinus approaches for several days and is not ingested, you should know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the cause of prolonged suffering, then adjust the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are humid in their substance and in their effect, they are dried as with a diaphragm, when they are adjusted to remove excess addition of spice.
And the most important thing to cure it is to take a diaphragm and dissolve it in rosy oil, and place it on the wound as if it were its own substance, and comfort that cloth with it, and use it.
And it is similar in that action, when there is no sinus, diaphragm, when it is thick enough, and use it; or take myrrh and aloes and boil it, and strain it all and powder it over the wound when it is above the fire, and place a cloth on that and strengthen that over the sinus; and place that cloth on the myrrh which you have cooked enough, and strengthen it.
Some witches administer long aristocratic rice (and it is long rice) and lily of the valley, and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, shred and pound them over the flour that she has recommended; and use that.
And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in its root, and it has already been investigated in the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then you will treat it with fistulotomy, as described above.
For the cure of bent nails and toenails, and the addition of finger cuts and digit sectioning.
Bent nails are abscesses that do not come from the nail of the toe or foot, and often they occur in other such cases, and when it is prolonged and its cure is highly valued, it is either a deep abscess or it is corrupted, and often it penetrates into the bone before it rots the root of the nail, and often it corrupts all of it, and often its corruption reaches into the bone before it has a fetid odor, and it is made at the end of the said toe, and its color is made dark.
When you have that same tool that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then make sure to insert the entire excess that remains from the nail and then cauterize the area with that tool, which is helpful in such cases.
If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail have already joined the flesh to the parts of the wound, and the pungent and the lees begin to come out from there, then make sure to place a thin subtle cloth under the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, scrape that flesh with facility, and place over it what remains of the flesh of the medicines that were burned corrosively until it is all healed; and then cure that with a salve within which it is sanat.
If the corruption has already spread into the bone, then make sure to insert that bone and the extraneous parts, because there is no time when it can be healed if it is in the corrupted bone.
If you see the corruption and decay in the body, then insert that into one of the empty spaces according to its memory, and cure it before it is healed.
If the finger is broken or dislocated, and the pain is severe, then begin by applying a splint to the patient, and then dry the finger with a sponge soaked in a sharp solution of transverse incision above it, and be careful that the incision does not penetrate into the flesh that is left behind, as you will cause severe pain to the patient and unnecessary damage to the surrounding flesh; and then cure that location with what causes the least pain.
However, it is not found in the bones of most people, as it is entirely flesh, or it is in the bones, or it is in the fingers.
And most people are not born with it at the tip of the joint, or it is the origin of that in some other bones of the said. When one is born in a certain place where nuts of that kind are not bad, and another is born in strong joints, it is considered unfortunate.
And of those who are not fleshy, the section is lighter, and you should insert that devil's pitchfork at its width.
When one is born in the joint's root, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful of its abscess.
When one is born in the beginning of the nut, you should insert the flesh of that part roundly into the bone, and then use one of those saws that are suitable for that, and cure it within the time it becomes healthy.
When the consolidation that happens between their jaws or by birth of the man who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then you should cut that consolidation within the time it returns to its natural form.
And then place between their clothes an oily rag to prevent them from becoming consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it becomes consolidated according to what is suitable.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the wrist, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the shape of the limb.
At the beginning of the vice, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and the most common place for them is in the buttocks, especially in the buttocks of travelers, workers, and porters.
Therefore, you should administer a purgative of the body for black cholera some weeks before, and then draw blood from the patient from the great vein.
The cure for them is done in two ways: one is that it is cut and thrown away that black bile, and the other way is that the vein is raised and all the blood is extracted.
The section of the buttocks is done in this way: first, boil the buttock with a hot tail until the black bile is thick and has left the buttock, then strengthen the patient's buttock to the highest possible position on the bed, and then dry the vein in one or two or three wide sections, and then raise the black bile to the middle of the patient's back above the buttock and below the patient's body, and then let it out until the desired amount and frequency is reached, and the patient bears it well.
And then approach that one, and command them to avoid foods that generate black bile causing anger.
Repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that is not noticed by the patient.
The elevation of their legs should be done in this way: you who raise the patient's leg, if it is mottled with spots, and then place it in hot water and massage the leg with a snake-like tail until it becomes red and the veins are opened; or if that cannot be done at present, it should be exercised by strong exercise until the member is scalded.
And then remove the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back side of the thigh, or at the bottom of the thigh you should give it a twist, or at the bottom of the thigh you should pull it.
And then raise the cord with a pair of forceps and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears at the sense, and it is to be appreciated that when that one declines to black.
And so, when you have removed it, take that white thread and tie it again.
And then place your hand behind that raised and tilted part, and support it with the other hand holding the golden lion.
And then remove another section close to that section for three times, and then excoriate the thread from the part above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that and insert it into the back section of the tail, and then remove it and lift it inside where it is on the second section, and then remove it from the section above it.
And do that inside where it is extracted from the section that is most superior or farthest from all the sections, where everything is hidden; and then insert it.
And if you do not obey to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it there and remove it, or insert behind the thread and rotate your hand at every part where it is tilted. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes over the patient and causes harm.
And when the whole area has been scraped out, place your hand over the wound location covered with wool soaked in vinegar and oil, both rosy and not rosy, and cure that part until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has a tortuous shape that does not follow the rectitude we have said, then you should cut wherever there is tortuosity of it and in the locations of its envelopment, and suspend those ends within which you raise the whole.
And be careful that you do not incise the vein and do not wound that part, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your prudence in that.
The form of incision made to cut the vein:
It is not to be used where it is sharp-pointed or has a thin tip, because it would wound the vein; and it should have great flexibility like a lion's claw, for if it were too thin, it would incise the vein by its thinness; having both of these qualities as we have said.
Of vein extraction from the leg.
This vein originates in the buttocks, in low lands similar to Ategi in Arabic lands and in dry and arid lands of little humidity where there is no herb or greenery.
And it often originates in other parts of the body, not just the buttocks.
And its condition is putrefaction that comes from the wound, similar to poison that enters the body through snakes, worms, and other creatures generating between the wound and the flesh.
And the susceptibility of its occurrence is due to this vein that happens in the buttock, causing inflammation; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is removed from the location of that blister, which seems reasonable.
And then, when it appears at the end, you should wrap around it a piece of lead that is the weight of a drag, between one and two drachms, and tie that and leave the lead hanging from the buttock.
And so many times, because of some cause, parts of the body are affected, wrap that in a cloth and apply it to the affected area. And if the wound is prolonged, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that of the same kind until it is completely outside, because if you insert that, it will be turned inside out and enter the flesh and cause an abscess and pus to form in the area and ulcer.
So that it can be treated properly and extracted little by little, until it is completely removed from the back of it and does not leave any cause in the body.
And this vein is found in some people who are in their length of 20 palms and has reached me that it is 10 palms long.
And if it is inserted at the time of its treatment, then insert the ray into the wound and perforate that with a long needle through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has some wounds that cause pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes to it with sharp pains, and is issued from which orifice.
Therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This disease is not named in any land as the bovine sickness because of the many wounds that are under the skin and it is a small worm that is not between the sinew and the flesh, and it goes through all the body and devalues, and it is shown at the feeling of its own shape of member in member before that disrupts the sinew and comes out.
And its generation is by putrefaction of some humors that happen with the accident of worms and snakes and earthworms and ascaris in the belly.
And it is feared for the harm of it, because when it goes into the body and is elevated to the head, and reaches the brain, then very badly affects the brain, and that ends with many wounds.
When you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done without first examining its appearance and position relative to the sensation, and then strengthening what is above it and what is below it with a soft and strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is found in the flesh and not in the bone, then place a pointed cautery with hot fire over the area where it is located, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the bone, then strengthen the area above it with a strong bandage, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medications that evacuate bad humors, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of incision due to pain.
This disease is not named in our land as gout, and it is pain that occurs in various members, and it is transmitted from member to member.
And now I will tell you the second thing that I will tell you. A woman was called to a village, and it was discovered that she had a small inflammation in the vein of her arm, and after being there for an hour, it was seen that this inflammation was moving like worms in this way, more unnaturally than if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain went to that place and remained in the muscle, and after staying there for an hour.
And then it corrected itself in the other arm until it reached the other arm.
And then it corrected itself in me, as if it were moving throughout its entire body after I saw it; and it was too marvelous about the change of it and the speed of member to member. And I had already seen that thing in the muscles after that manner, but I had never seen anything that could cause pain to be mutated from member to member. I have not seen this anywhere among the bones here, as in the woman.
And I have not thought that it was this, but rather because the woman was of old age, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this appearance, there is that mutated warmth felt.
And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have humid bodies of constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, do not appear at the bone here as we have said, but rather strengthen him and loosen him, and dry him over that area where that mutated warmth is covered, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see this among the bones, then cure that with exclusion of the body and that which expels mutated warmth, and carminatives those with foul pills and serapi pills and similar ones.
From extraction of sage.
Sage is diversified according to the species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity, some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and they are solid; and from them there are three angles, and from those that have tongues; and from those that have stars.
When symptoms occur in the servant's body and pass through the bone, and are above the skull, which is above the brain, due to severe shock, scotoma, vertigo, pain in the neck, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of anger, and great swelling and destruction of the voice, and a white humid substance similar to pus appears at the wound site, and the flesh becomes similar to adhesion.
If you find yourself in such circumstances, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the thorn, unless it is necessary.
When the thorn is close to the heart, it is close to the right breast, and feels like a hard cause, not a soft one; and the movement of the thorn is similar to the movement of the arm, and comes from the black plague, and that freezing sensation in the extremities, and sweat, and shivering; and therefore you know that death is approaching.
When the thorn has pierced the lung almost entirely from the black buboes of the plague, and the veins that are near the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe heavily and ask for fresh air.
And if the thorn pierces the vein that is in the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and it causes great and sudden pain and a loud cry, and does not spare all the members of the muscles.
And if the sage is placed in the stomach, then the person often vomits undigested food.
And if the sage is placed in the abdomen and left there, then some undigested food, or cloth, or intestine that has been ruptured, and no hope of healing is expected from its removal.
And if the sage is placed in the bladder, and it disrupts urine flow, and causes some harm to the parts affected, and often causes great pain to the patient, then you should know that it is fatal.
The other members, such as the face, neck, shoulders, back, ribs, breastbone, and spine, and similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the sage does not pierce vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I will advise you of that which I have seen about these sages, so that you may know what to do for the cure of this disease.
When a sharp object pierces the eye of a person in the corner of the eye and is removed from the other side, after the gray matter of the eye, it heals without causing harm to the eye itself.
And another sharp object pierced the eye of a Jew in the gray matter of his eye, after the eyelid, and the object was already hidden and not achieved from that but a small end attached to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object among the sharp objects of the Turks, like a lion without eyes.
The Jew healed, and there was no harm to his eye from that incident.
And another sharp object pierced the chest of a Christian in his heart, and it was an Arabic object, and it was this one that had eyes; and then he inserted it between two fingers, and it was already submerged in his chest; and then he skillfully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
Guessed translation: And another surgeon was called to a man who had fallen on his abdomen, and it was thought that he would die from that; and since he had not moved for thirty days and nothing happened to him due to his condition, the surgeon inserted a tube into the wound and drained it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
Guessed translation: And later a man was found with a wound on his back, and the wound had become infected on him, and after seven days, the wound became red in the middle of the cushion.
Guessed translation: And a woman was found with a wound on her abdomen, and the infection had spread throughout her body, and she did not change her condition in any way, and the woman did not suffer from some of her natural functions.
Guessed translation: And another man was found with a wound on his face, and the infection had spread throughout his body, and he did not feel much pain, and similar symptoms to these.
When the spine of the man from the prince's court was dislocated in the middle of his neck and had already begun to decline towards the right side, the entire spine was hidden.
He was called for treatment of it within three days after the dislocation of the spine.
And then he again applied pressure to the spine; and then he inquired of that one with subtle touch, and did not feel anything; but he felt the point behind the right ear, and then suspected that that point was at the end of the spine.
And he applied heat to the place where the beneficial and digestive virtue was located, believing that this place would help him to find the location of the spine, so that it could be separated from that point.
And he did not find any significant accident in the place where the spine had reached that point; and he continued to apply heat to it for several days without any accident; and the swelling remained there for several days until a day when the spine returned to its own neck, and he told me this.
And then you place a dressing of sharp, corrosive medicine on the wound, and apply the tent, and again, hold the tip of the delicate needle, which adheres to the skin.
And then you adjust the dressing in the opening of the wound for that sharp medicine, which I can see from my position, and continue to apply it over a period of four months.
And when the wound has become larger, and it is possible to insert the forceps into it, continue to refine and engineer over it with fine tools, until one day you can hang the forceps from it, according to the shape of those in the end of the capital, and then extract it; and then restore the wound.
And according to doctors' judgment, the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound becomes consolidated, and the patient is cured completely, without any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extraction of some herbs for which you can apply that rule and meaning over that which I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narration nor are they comprehended by those who have the book.
And the craftsmen understand comparison by few words; and they understand what is present over what is absent; and in a new operation and new tool, you must descend from the external causes of the art when it happens.
And therefore, you should say that herbs are not extracted from the members in which they are fixed, but by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which it is inserted; or by the opposite of the other part.
And that which is extracted by the place where it is inserted, or the herb comes from in a fleshy place, and is attracted and extracted.
And if you do not obey the time at which it is catched, then wait for several days until the flesh that is around it rots, and be alleviated the attraction of it and its exit.
And if it is placed in the bone and does not obey your commands, leave it there for several days and apply that same cautery attractively and moisten it every day, and it will eventually be removed.
And if it does not obey your commands, after several days, carefully drill through the circumference of the bone in that part of the body, and insert a thin needle into that location where the bone is widened by the bone, and then extract it.
If the socket is already filled with the body, and is causing pain, then inquire about that tooth, and if you feel it, then use appropriate instruments to extract it.
And if you cannot extract it due to the narrowness of the socket and its length, and there are no nerves or veins involved, then make an incision on the gum until it is wide enough and possible to extract the tooth.
And if you have forceps that can be used, then remove the flesh in which it is stuck from all parts and make the necessary preparations; and apply these to the escape of the flesh through the fracture of the forceps and the twisting of those until it obeys.
And when you administer the extraction of the tooth in any place where it is, then use your hand with forceps to all parts until it obeys; and apply subtle techniques that the tooth is not broken and that it is made difficult for you to extract it and for its extraction.
If you cannot do it at that moment, then leave the parts that are in the circuit of the patient to heal for several days, and then repeat that which is usually done. If the patient has fever, then administer the medicine that we have said for cure in its chapter.
And guard your skill in the beginning of veins or nerves, or of cord, and administer medicine in every possible way to avoid the danger; and do this with ease, tranquility, delay, and firmness as if you were doing it yourself and according to your recommendation.
And therefore you should make the danger disappear because the patient is in the form according to which you should make the removal of the danger in it, which is more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
If the danger is caused by the other part, or if some part has previously affected another part, or if it causes glibness of the exterior of the danger because of the feeling of the part below the proposed code and sometimes that eminent; then you should separate from that; and the section should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take them; and then administer that, which is made lightly to ease.
If it is held in the bones, then twist the second contradiction before the sap begins to enter the bones, and enlarge it, and then remove it.
Or leave it for several days, and then insert it again before it comes out.
And if the sap is in that place, then push it against the bone.
If it has fallen and you want to administer an injection, then insert it into that place, if it is hard, puncture the concavity so that the hollow of it enters the coat of the sap and then push it against the bone.
If the sap is concave, then push it strongly into that place, because the sap is attracted by that place.
And if the sap is poisoned, then cut out all the flesh in which it is located, if it is possible, and then treat that place with what is appropriate.
And if the sap is in the chest, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close to where you touch that place, and if it is possible to cut above that place, then cut above that place and be careful not to damage a vein or nerve, and then remove it, and afterwards cover the wound if necessary, and treat that place until it is healed.
Shape of forceps that are used to grasp the bones:
With their sharp ends like a beak, which are made like a vice when placed on the bone to prevent it from being loosened.
And among them are made special, large, thin, and flexible ones, according to the amount of the bone's size and its thickness, and the width of the wound, and its construction.
Like a hammer to push the instrument into the bone and strike it.
Of vein puncture.
The veins of bloodletting, which are usually punctured for bloodletting, of which there are sixteen in the head, two pulsating veins that are called "alhasisain"; two herbs that are on both temples; and two veins that are in the two lacrimal ducts of two teeth that are called "aspicientz"; and the prepared vein at the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two veins that are at the collar; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and these are the veins that are called "algelic" —; and there are two veins that are below the tongue. When the veins that are cut in the arms are visible; one of them is cephalic, and it is called wild; the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that one to the people "vein of all the body", and basilica is the vein that is paused in the domestic latrine, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "vein of the belly"; and funis del bras, and it is paused over the fire, and it is the one in which it is cut, and it is the one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the inner ear and the smallest ear, and it is in both armpits.
And in the foot and the thigh there are three veins; one of them is that it is placed behind the curve of the wild latrine; the second is sophena, and its location is behind the thigh of the domestic latrine; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild latrine; and in the thigh there are other similar veins.
The swelling of the veins that approach the arteries is ancient and migrant, and it causes headaches and old ulcers in the bad head.
And the quality of sanding those is second that I recommend to you: it is that it should be rubbed on the patient's head, and it should be rubbed on the patient's head in the occipital region where the veins are ample with good friction; then strengthen the patient's neck with a band around which appear the two and their locations of not being close to the arteries; and if you feel the pain of those, here is a remedy.
Then you take the surgical needle, and it is the one that incises, and you introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the fleubotomi comes to the bone. And then raise your hand over the vein and the groove above and incise the vein at the incision. And the length of the incision should be the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and make it as deep as you want.
And then apply strong pressure on that area to make it heal.
And earlier in the beginning of the book, they mentioned those and their cauterization.
The veins and arteries that lead to the temples, which are mentioned in ancient and evil methods of phlebotomy, are often overfilled with acute and excessive fluids.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as follows: press on the patient's neck until you feel the veins appear, and then demonstrate their location to the assistant; and afterwards, you will perform it.
And then you lift the cotton above the vein at the parts indicated by the assistant, insert the phlebotomy needle, raise the vein, and incise it as you did in the other veins; and make the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then loosen the bandage of the patient, place the assistant's hand over the vein for an hour, and then apply pressure and strong pressure on that area to make it heal.
And if it is preceded by their memories, and of those who start, and they attach to the beginning of the book.
And the incision of the vein of the forehead is approached to the incision of the cephalic to the ancient diseases of the face and to the emigration and ulcers with bad odor.
And the quality of that incision is as I have recommended to you; it is that the patient should bend his neck with a curved instrument, which is called a fossor, and then take the instrument, which is called a fossor:
And place the point eminent at the top of the fossor on that vein and pierce it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; and then remove the perforation from the patient and bend it into that which is healed.
And some incisions are opened at the forehead, but do not let that incision be of acute extremity as with other incisions, before the extremity, and incise it according to the transverse, which is placed and very hard to cut through in the incision when it is subtle.
May the swelling of the two veins that are near the lacrimal ducts of both eyes due to scabies in the eyes and inflammation in the eyes, and facial diseases.
And the quality of the fleam is that the patient should bend his neck forward and lean on something, and then you should be standing over his head.
And if the fleam is done along the transverse axis a little above the fleam, where there is no flesh; and if the fleam is sharp, it will cut the end of it.
And then let the blood run until it is necessary for you, and place your hand over those parts, and stretch them with a newt, and then remove them.
May the fleam of the nasal vein be compared to acute fever and violent sweating, and facial diseases and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, and especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the fleam of that is that the patient should bend his neck forward and lean on something, and then take his nose with your left hand, and take the sharp fleam long and put it in the middle of the top of the nose along the straight line, where the vein does not appear from there, and where the blood begins to flow soon.
When you have finished massaging the patient's feet little by little and applying the appropriate remedy according to your need; and then apply that to an ulcer, which is usually restored.
The use of foot massage for the treatment of diseases such as arthritis, beginning with leprosy and various other illnesses and skin conditions, including herpes zoster.
And the quality of the foot massage for those is that the patient should lie on their back with a blanket; and the practitioner should be at the head of the patient, and the patient should be lying on a bed.
And then massage the vein along the leg with broad foot massage little by little; and extract from an ulcer according to a warm quantity or according to that which is necessary for that; and do the same for the other vein.
And then remove the blanket and stretch the two veins with a firm pressure so that the patient is not frightened, and leave them in place until the wound is healed.
And the use of the trocar for veins, especially in cases of small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, gum corruption, bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the trocar for those is that it is made by you, and strengthens the patient's mouth with a bend, and then rotate the lips of the patient and look at two veins of which one is on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the color of each of those, and that is more so in the circle of those small black veins; and then insert it into each from the beginning.
If there is doubt about those, and you do not know which of them is, then first you understand the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious of those.
And make the likeness of the two veins that are in the lips above.
It is customary to use the lingual fleubotomy of the cephalic vein at prescriptions that are located in the gullet, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth diseases.
The quality of performing fleubotomy on those is that it follows the patient between your hands, holding their tongue up, and looking at the veins from both sides, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then perform fleubotomy on each; and be careful that your hand does not touch those veins, as they are arteries.
And your veins that are fleubotomized in the code are the same as those in all men, and the fleubotomy of them is done in two ways, either they put a lemon or olive oil at subtility declining; or they cut the fleubotomi with a knife, and apply it to the wound, and this is the form of it:
If the thickness of the veins is as it should be, then open the concave veins that are full and proceed with the veins that contain thick clots.
And this fluoroscopy is of smaller size and more subtle endings, and it is suitable for fluoroscopy of thin veins that contain thin clots.
The main vein of the fluoroscopy is the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the clot from the patient's neck and collarbone, and from that which is attached to the chest and stomach.
And it is suitable for the fluoroscopist, when performing that fluoroscopy, to guard against that and have a slight fear in that, where there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the fluoroscopy, he will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not perform that fluoroscopy with a sharp point, before slicing as with the illness.
And if the basilica does not appear due to an obvious manifestation, then let that go and move to the other, or surround some of its branches; or use forceps in place of the hand, as it is manifest; and remove it with forceps as we have said.
But if you want to use the forceps for the metacarpal bone, then let the structure of the arm that you touch the location inside until you know the location of the wrists, and place your hand over it; and bring the arm and remove the vein with a concave blade using forceps as we have said; and be careful not to perforate any space of the location of the artery.
And when you see, with strength of the ligament, inflation in the location that you have placed your hand on, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the forceps as with the ear of an infant, and the blood is thin and red, then know that it is from the artery; and then cover and place your hand on that for a long time; and remove the forceps, and if the blood is abscinded, because it is abscinded, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And guard the patient from the cold of their feet, and be overly cautious of them and do not allow that for several days until they are healed.
If the abscess is not lanced, and sometimes when you must not present medicine to that, then insert the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is lanced; or take scissors and cut that, and take one thread and strengthen that over the location of the vein with stricture descent and the pulvils inside the other day.
And if the abscess is lanced, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which it was preceded by the remembrance of the location of the powders for the abscission of blood flow.
And the lancing of the blood from that is difficult in certain positions for the small location of the wound and the possibility of the vein of the arm.
If the vein is dark, the fleubotomy is very useful to extract the blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; for that which is composed of basilica and cephalica root, as we have said.
And approach the person who is most afraid during the phlebotomy of the patient, because they are close to a vein; and then adjust the puncture for the phlebotomy and avoid the vein, it will cause great pain to the patient, and it is difficult to heal them, and often they are not completely cured. And this vein appears when there is a sensation of pain; and if it is hidden from others and is subtle and not shown, then approach the phlebotomist with the one you used for the section of the arm, and avoid the vein with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
The drawback of the phlebotomy of the vein in the head is that it causes pain in the head and contributes to the patient's fainting spells.
And approach it in this way, if you want the phlebotomy to be done with an olive or a myrtle leaf; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, if the abscess is in a man who has not been lumbar punctured in the first attempt, then it should not be noted in that abscess.
The first of these is the one that you know that lumbar puncture is not administered except for the preservation of health and hope for it and caution against the occurrence of diseases, and that lumbar puncture should be done in one of the veins that are in the spine; they are: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that lumbar puncture should be done at the beginning of primaviera, after breakfast in primaviera and autumn, and in winter near dinner, when signs of replenishment appear.
And perform a bloodletting procedure, and the third day at the time when the first pain has passed for three hours.
When bloodletting is administered, when it is convenient and necessary for that person, at any time of day or night, in every hour and at all times.
And that no bloodletting be performed until the age of fourteen, and that women not be bled except in the fourth month up to the seventh, and the elderly who have passed sixty years should not be bled.
And if someone wants to be bled for any reason, let them first consult a doctor, and if there is a wound in the area where bloodletting is performed, hold it with a leech, so that the veins do not draw too much blood during bloodletting, which is pure, and does not harm the main members.
And those who are not bled should not be bled for drunkenness and gluttony, nor to escape from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor for hydrophobia, and more that bloodletting is feared in approaching colic passage and vomiting, and in abdominal pain, and in multiplying gout and work and exercise of meals or vigils, and for any cause that dissolves its virtue, whether corporeal or animal.
And then consider the elimination of humors that cause this condition, if the stool is hard, with food and drinks, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then proceed with the bath and if there is no cause that prevents it, or if it is exercised by some exercise to facilitate the elimination of the stool.
And then pause the feeding of the patient in his chest, around the hour of noon, as we have said.
And then perform the feeding of the patient in that day from all kinds of animals' sufferings, such as anguish, anger, fear, and all kinds of bodily accidents, such as labor and excessive pain, such as cuts and similar things to them.
And at his bedside, make present the causes in the form of herbs that usually men have an aromatic taste and smell and baths and similar things according to their quantity of possibility.
And follow the feeding on a cushion that is put under or the cushion of the patient who should be fed.
And then remove his arm, and scrape that area with your hand or three fingers; and then tightly wrap the cloth around it and bandage those wounds.
And if the structure is too tight, or the structure is too loose, or the structure is superfluous, then do not allow any fluid to flow from the wound; or if it is a swelling, then do not allow any blood to flow from the wound.
And then remove the structure, so that the person who should be bled has their hands placed flat between their legs, and their fingers spread out, so that the veins are inflated and declared to the senses.
And then the bleeder should take the bleeding cup and place it on the patient's arm, and place their finger over the vein, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set so that the vein is like a string fugitive from the bleeding, and of those that are full of blood and when the bleeder stops over that area, the bleeder should move away; and if the bleeder does not touch the vein, and if they do, that one is strict.
And therefore, in order to prevent the apothecary from being stopped and troubled in all these causes.
And then remove the apothecary, but if the vein is punctured in a wound, then it is; and if not, you repeat that other wound nearby that location for a short time, or over the inflammation, if the location is not infected.
And if the location is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because it would cause more pus to accumulate, nor would it enter into the wound.
And then repeat the apothecary if necessary.
And if the wound is small and heals slowly, and you fear that it will not heal completely, then you repeat the apothecary in that area again, and apply a little bandage to the wound, and do that inflammation until the location is infected, because the location becomes infected in some people with a small amount of bandage.
If that person has already had an abscess, do not touch it, as there may be some cause that does not allow you to; and instead, place a piece of cloth over that part of the wound, which would help the body to heal. It is better in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer oil to all phlebotomy, which veins drain the blood from the body and perform this procedure tying and binding when placed on that part of the wound, as it helps the wound to heal and rotate when it is large.
And if a large abscess forms in the location of phlebotomy, which is caused by bad wounds, and especially in that person who has not bled but only been treated with that remedy, or in the puncture of the vein, and then you cover it, and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, as it dissolves.
And then do that close to the incision of that vein or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in that place, do not do it; and if you want, place some cause of willow and of mint dissolved, or some cause of sugar of milk or of honey or a similar substance of it.
And move the swollen and elevated parts by incision of the great vein.
And then place your hand on that, and if you later apply softness to that compression, that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place some cause of that which we have said, because it will greatly flow from the vein.
And make an astringent in that which is stipative, so that the place is hardened, and then cure that with another cure within which it is healed.
And then do that outside of the vein to all people according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color which remains above the vein as it appears.
When the bone is black, let it lie undisturbed until it is rotten; similarly, if you see it large, let it lie undisturbed until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, let it lie undisturbed until its sharpness is dulled.
And apply to those who are tall and strong and have a need for bone extraction in a surgery, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomist be left-handed.
And in those who are thin, do the opposite of that, and apply that they be extracted in surgeries, and that the wound be straight.
And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy saves from blood flow and from injury to nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second-hand phlebotomy by latitude and length.
When dizziness occurs due to phlebotomy, and you want to cure it with a small amount of wine infused with milfoil or simple ox gall; extract it from the wound in three or four doses.
If there is complication of the complexion, then use the infusion for phlebotomy with a decoction of mallow or with a honey infusion aromatized with species such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or with an aromatized and fragrant honey.
If there is dizziness due to the immediate removal of blood from phlebotomy, and it is caused by the loss of a certain amount of blood, then use a small amount of water with meat broth and an aromatic honey; use the aromaticity with an appropriate herb, and let it lie on the patient's chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of dizziness for its relief.
And whoever wants to dislocate their arm and dissolve their second rib, use the same method for rapid evacuation, as the virtue of it is free, which evacuates the small intestine gradually, according to the amount of its virtue in consecutive days.
If whoever wants to dislocate their arm and break their second rib, and if their heart is strong, then do that for seven hours or nine of the first bleeding.
If whoever wants to pull their intestine in the opposite direction of the part where it descends, use that on the second or third day.
If that person in whom the intestine has already been cut and sharpened and causes a high fever, use that on the intestine in one method and pull it out in large quantities and amplify the perception before the syncope occurs, so that you have preserved all the conditions of bleeding; and place your hand over the foot of the intestine of the person, to prevent them from dying in a state of syncope, as many methods end up causing that when the bleeding specialist is ignorant and negligent.
When you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second stage of the blood, since the orifices of the vein have been closed and it has been difficult to release the blood, which you press with great force and bend it excessively, that is very bad.
Having entered the vein with a second-stage needle; or remain that which is coagulated in the orifices of the vein from the blood; or place over it tyrannical alfarach, or sagzenea, and press that with light pressure until the blood is out and stopped.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if you need to evacuate the blood again and there is no excuse, then you should sign that in another location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is punctured in the location of the fusca or basilica, when they are not discovered or hidden, because it is composed of those.
The quality of the patient's foot is that the patient inserts their hand into cold water until the fire cools and the vein appears clearly.
Then apply pressure on the area with the stricture, and use the footbath second, not horizontally or secondly along the length.
And make the opening wide and use your footbath on the joint of the hand, a little bit.
If the urine is prohibited, then you wash the hand in cold water and let the urine flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from washing the hand in cold water, and the same is placed on the body of the urine in cold water during the time of winter.
The footbath of this vein is safer than all other veins, because it has not been beaten or pinched.
The footbath of the little toe of the hand is similar to the cases of the foot.
And the quality of the venipuncture is that you strengthen your hand on the arm or on your hand, so that you have it in the elbow, while the vein is inflated and demonstrated at the same time; then insert the needle horizontally; and if you do not feel anything, then repeat.
And remember that you do not leave your hand on the needle, as it leaves the patient's nerves exposed to flesh.
Then repeat your hand in the elbow and let the blood flow into that, as if you do not repeat it in the elbow, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, and it is forbidden to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the amount of need, then place your hand on the vein and salt, so that it does not congeal constantly; similarly, cover what you do in all straight lines.
The amount of blood extracted from the needle on your right hand is equal to the amount of blood in the patient's body.
And do the same in the other foot, as you did in the first.
The juvenile of the saphenous vein in the foot is to the evils that are in the part behind the knee, as its evils of the greater, and retention of menstruation, and the evils of the ronches and ulcers of thighs and knees, and their similarities to the evils.
The quality of the foot is that the patient inserts his own foot in warm water and makes the friction over that area where the veins appear; and he ties it at the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein is to be kept apart from the said point, and from there its branches extend on the surface of the foot.
And then perform the foot massage on the widest branch behind the knee, which is better and more salty.
And if you perform the foot massage on the surface of the foot, then guard yourself from the nerves that are behind it on the surface of the foot, and place your foot massage over the area where you want to insert it, as if you wanted to puncture it.
And let the bleeder be present.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then wash the foot in warm water and let the pus flow out through that opening.
And if the bleeder makes a mistake in the first attempt, then wash the area with salt and do not be afraid of the malice, but protect your nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same for the other foot equally.
And of the sciatic vein, the location as we have said is behind the talus and in front of the posterior crest of the ilium.
And the pain from the bleeding of that vein is at the back of the thigh when it is pierced for drainage.
And the quality of that bleeding is that the patient enters into a state of shock, and quickly and forcefully pulls out the cushion from under the thigh on the outside of the posterior crest of the ilium, with a long, thin thread, so that it does not appear.
And when it appears, then use a boring instrument along each rib that is possible and according to the transverse line, which is better; or incise it from the beginning or separate it from the end, where the location of it is salt.
And this is often in men more common; and if you do not see it appear all at once, then use a boring instrument on some part of it, and that which appears on the back of the foot is called the auricular and annular.
And beware of the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow as you wish.
And then remove the structure and place your hand over the location of the boring, strengthening the location, which is usually healed.
Of the uses and qualities of using those.
Uses are of corn, or of earth, or of ivory.
And use is made in two ways: one of them is the scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is the use of scarification.
And this ventilation that is its scarification is done in two ways, either by heat or by fire.
And the locations where ventilation is administered during scarification and extraction of sand are fourteen parts of the body, one of which is where the ventilation is placed, and the last part is at the back of the head; and the middle one is two parts of the neck together; and ventilation behind the mandible below the mouth; and ventilation with a spoon; and ventilation with a lancet, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and ventilation with two tongs, and it is on two ribs; and ventilation with two needles; and ventilation with two cups.
And the ventilation does not extract the sand from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason it does not cure for those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor does it cover that the ventilation should be made with heat or fire in any malady made for compression between when the entire body is evacuated.
If necessary, it is recommended to administer this remedy throughout the entire hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of the month and at some point in time.
And therefore when it occurs in some cause of those, and especially if it is in the third or cheek of the face, then command a ventilation to be made rather than after two or three hours have passed.
And the advantage of ventilation of the nape is that when it confers gravity to the head and causes it to swell at the temples, but rather than that, it should be an evacuation of all the body.
And this ventilation is in the location of the phlebotomy of the cerebral.
And it is not appropriate to use that which is of complex breathing, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And therefore do not use that of the old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses that cause them to swell.
But rather than that, it is done with continuous breathing over it; and therefore it is appropriate to command the ventilator that he pause his hand a little away from the ventilation at the parts behind, in order to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
May the vinegar of alkali be used instead of phlebotomy of the femoral vein and the basilica: and for that cause, it confers asthma, and the constriction of the lungs, and the scission of the stomach, and coughing, and the replenishment.
And if the vinegar of alkali is applied too much, if it is left on for a long time, it causes weakness in the body and the stomach.
And the vinegar of alhagdahan confers the accidental pains in the head and the obtuse pain, and emaciation, and prophasis, and the pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And if you command the vinegar applicator that they do not press their hand during scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And the vinegar of the mouth confers alcohol in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar to those of the evils that are in the mouth, and it is in place of phlebotomy of the hawthorn that is in the upper lips.
May the ventilation that is made on the two spoons be compared to a cap, which is made for the purpose of retaining heat.
And the ventilation of the two parts taken from the forks is greatly beneficial for the opening of three veins, such as the basilica, fusca, and cephalic, which attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventilator that he does not proceed too much in incision, because the place is exposed to flesh, and leaves his nerves and arteries.
And there is a ventilator that is blown on the buttocks and compares to the emorrhoids of the buttocks and ulcers that have been left.
And cover that you command the ventilator to be a large ventilator, and of iron, because the place requires strong section; and it is necessary for the subtle blows to be opened and to be incised during the incision.
When the patient's bed is too low, it causes the spine to straighten, relieving old pains of the hips and back, and bladder; it provokes menstruation, and relieves constipation and abdominal pain; it is used in place of flebotomy for two sophenes, and hydrotherapy, and for two cavities.
However, this method weakens the whole body and causes syncope in some people.
And from the low bed, the patient is lifted to the level of the bed of two cavities.
The quality of the position of the bed is that it allows the patient to lie down at the beginning and rise slowly, and not prolong the position of the bed, but pause it frequently, and remain in it constantly, so that the humors come to the place by equal advent. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already reddened and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then you should shave and carefully cut the skin in small pieces, and then consider the arrangement of the body.
For that man who has thick flesh, cover the wound with a large bandage and do not change it, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to blow air and hold a cloth to facilitate the shaving.
And if the skin is too thick, then cover the wound with two bandages, because in the first bandage, the incision for the artery and its moisture is made. And in the second one, the examination of the thick skin is made during the extraction.
And if the skin is very dirty, then make a thorough shaving in the third bandage to get rid of it.
Finally, when we want to remove the skin piece by piece or a small one, we need a shaving.
And if we want to remove a large piece of skin, we need a large shaving; and if we know that the skin is thick, then cover the wound with a preliminary shaving.
And the term for incision in which is the depth of the groove so far.
If the person whose groove is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are narrow, then it is recommended that the locations of the windpipes be more smooth, wider, and more resolutely opened; if it is in the summer, use olive oil with aloe, or violent, or amellas dossas, or camomile; and if it is in the winter, then use olive oil with narcissus, or lily, or camamilla, or sanc, and similar.
And if the excess is thick and freezing, then use olive oil with amaranth, or olive oil with balsamita, or olive oil with aloe, or olive oil with anethi, and similar.
But if the windbreaker is of wide pores and thin flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit olive oil, and it is recommended that for these locations of windpipes, they be washed with warm water or freezing cold water of saltwater, or warm water of bordolaguas, and similar.
And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash their armpits with vinegar or a solution of myrtle and sumac, similar to those.
And if the patient's skin has thick excess, wash their armpits with vinegar of ancient, or water of sassafras, which is majorana, or decoction of anise, or camomile, and similar to those.
And cover that the armpit should be kept dry after washing; having covered it, it should be administered immediately after bathing for an hour or two, and cover it with the armpit.
What is that by which one should be guided to wash the armpits before bleeding?
And cover that if the person who will give the blood or the one who will bleed is angry and has a sharp and inflamed skin, then cover that he should take cooling causes, such as vinegar of milkweed, and vinegar of anise, and lime juice, and julep, and similar to those.
And place their food and meat with spoons, and cooked vegetables and similar dishes.
And of that which is cooked with rosewater and sugar, or with the juice of semolina, sumac, and some other fragrant spice between old and new; and that it should be recommended to use little wine and food, and place the dishes of soup, meat, fish, small birds, and pigeons.
And that on the day of the Epiphany and of the Physician's Day, the wine should be greater than the food.
And that it should be given in wine to some men at certain hours, such as alcohol, or medicaments of musk, ground musk, or alcelita for the Epiphany or for the Physician's Day, so that the main members are comforted and that the wound is subtilized; and not that they take that scalfatz.
May the wounds that are caused by scarification be placed on the legs, and above the feet, and above the knee, in the places of the joints, and the pixida of the wide, because these members do not suffer scarification over them.
And it is not sought for those but rather for the relief of joint pain, such as a loose bandage around the breast in case of swelling of the joint due to fluid in the joint of the knees; and they use that to dissolve the swelling from the member, such as a bandage on the belly and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and draws out the fluid and relieves the pain that is resolved by the swelling.
And it is placed on the ribs when they are injured or punctured, because of the strength of the bandage, it quickly heals the injury and eradicates the puncture from its location.
And similarly, when it is placed on the foot and ankle, it drains fluid from those areas.
And these bandages are administered with success only when they are applied with heat. Some bandages are administered with cold.
And some bandages are administered full of tepid water in the swellings of the ankle.
And that is why the bandage is full and large, it is only water or water in which herbs suitable for that purpose have been boiled.
The form of a ventouse administered by fire: the width of the opening of two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the amount of the pulp should be the greatest of one palm; and it should be on the side of the patient, in the place that is in the circuit, the greatest of him, the tube should be small according to the quantity that enters into it an needle.
It should be made of wax or citrus, with thick edges, lion-like, equal and rough so that it does not leave the member in its position on it.
And it should be at the side of the patient, a transverse bar of wax or iron, where the candle is placed against the fire.
And this ventouse should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the pouch smaller than that according to the diseases and the state of the one who uses it.
The ventouses of children and the weak are different from the ventouses of young people and large bodies.
The quality of applying this ventouse by fire on the member is that it extends the muscle by fire decently, with a small candle of wax, and place it on the side of the transverse bar in the middle position of the ventouse, so that the fire is lit around the part that was not burned to prevent the patient's body from being burned.
And then place your hand on the patient's body, and the cautery on the area we have mentioned, as soon as you hold the ventozas and do not open the cautery and let the steam escape from that area, then the wound will eventually dissolve.
And then apply the second medicine according to your method, and repeat that if necessary.
In a poultice that is administered in the case of pleurisy, use water, which does not have a transverse or diagonal line, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the body only.
And this is the form of it: And this poultice, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Bloodletting is not administered in most members, but in the members where it is not possible to position poultices, such as the gums and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found bloodsuckers that are in the dirty waters of poverty.
And then remove their dresses and place them in dirty water until they are famished, and do not let any cause remain in the belly of those; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with a fleam and with lancets; and then rub the patient's member until it becomes red; and then place your hand on them.
And when they are full and case.
And if it is possible to scratch the place with a lancet, it is better in the beginning.
And if not, then wash the place with warm water and a little vinegar; and then rub and extract.
And if the body of the patient is prolonged, then place the cage of bloodsuckers in the water, and let it soak; then you should put a cloth of freezing water on top of that until the soaking is absorbed.
And if the swelling is multiplied, then powder it with tristanite or vinegar and similar substances according to the causes of stiptics until the swelling is broken; or place the most mature beans that have been cooked on the spot, and let them be left there until the beans adhere to the spot, and then break the swelling.
And if necessary, perform transfusion of blood from suitable donors, when it is possible to change them.
And if blood transfusions are prohibited from suspension, then rub the spot with recent blood or insert a needle into the spots until it is no longer possible; and then place them, as those who have previously felt some blood immediately start to bleed.
And when you want them to stop, powder those spots with a small amount of tristanite aloe, salt, or ashes, and they will stop immediately.
And now begins the treatment of the third part: restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement of bones.
Oh, child, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and common people and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter of them.
For this reason, this method of the sciences in our land is kept secret; and I have not done so at any time; and I have not admitted to it, but rather because of the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of them.
And then direct your attention to experiments and studies throughout the length of your life.
And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which contains the greatest science and upon which I have conducted my longest experiment; therefore, I will reveal it to you others and deliver it from that occupation of elongation; and I will make it clear in the end of revelation; and I will show it in the end of declaration; and I will form it into several forms of the instruments that are administered in that, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two previous chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections on the fracture of bones, from those that are necessary to mention before we begin to remember the memories of broken and different limbs of each one. Therefore, let us say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which in the beginning is sufficient for the craftsmen and at that time on the truth of those; so it is you and others who know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when something happens to someone with fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is necessary to begin with the incision of the flank or opening of that, or whatever means, if no cause prevents, as with the weakening of virtue, or that which happened to them, or old age, or time of great heat, or great cold.
And then be content with speaking of certain herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit large meats and fill with foods and all food that fills the veins of pus, until you are sure of abscess caution, and if you do not fear effusion of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their first regular position, which is usually the one they were in before.
And so, as the broken bone begins to be restored, it is customary for the patient to be fed nutritious food that is heavy and difficult to digest, such as their food made from wheat flour, water, rice, peas, cow's milk, yogurt, fresh meat, and similar heavy and thick foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and more often.
And you should know that bones that break in men who are in the first stage of their life and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to continue and be consolidated according to their nature by the drying out of their members.
May nature adjust and anesthetize the affected bone, which is fractured in any part due to a similar cause such as gluttony, where it becomes swollen and strengthened, adhering to the surrounding tissues and bones, through which venom of strength and firmness enters, like fire at the beginning, until any cause does not prevent its work.
For this cause, it is necessary to place the food of the patient, which has gravity, viscosity, and heaviness, as we have said.
And you know that the types of fracture are different according to the variety of members, for example, the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the arm; and similarly, all other members are different from each other.
And I have remembered all the types of fracture, explained in its separate chapter.
Great variety of fracture in this case. There are various types of bone fractures in their cases; some are arc-shaped fractures, others are star-shaped fractures, and some are longitudinal fractures. Some fractures are due to the stage or asthenic constitution, and some are not. This is also the case when preparing to write, and there is a fracture with displacement in the head, and a small fissure fracture.
In every case, there is a proper pain management in the restoration of the bone after its distinct memory comes back in its places.
Great severity of bone fracture. For that reason, bone fracture is recognized by its deformity, and the feeling of pain when touching it, and its location when compared to the other side.
And therefore, if there is no deformity apparent in the location and it is not caused by touching the bone when it moves and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is a twist or small fissure, where you cannot reach it with your hand and compression of the whole; then place something on it from the medicines that you remember at that moment that suits the area; and keep it straight by a subtle restriction.
You should know that when the place is bent and does not split into two or another thing that does not occur in its entirety, as all parts of the patient are covered, then you should start from your own time to correct the previous that happened to the postema caution.
And if the postema caution has occurred, then leave it for several days until the postema ceases; and then equalize that second by whatever method you can of lifting and of pressure.
You should know that the restoration of it and the adjustment of it is lighter than the bone in which the injury occurred to the body.
And then use that second when the memory of it returns.
But if the bone is injured, then it is necessary to extend this member broken in two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or if your hand is small; or if two cords or one cord and the hand.
And place your position at the same location as the member, while the parts are extended from the member sixteen, then perforate those additions and return them to their places one by one as you can in their locations.
And be careful not to injure the patient with your operation or cause any harm; and perforate according to your strength that you apply one bone to another as a companion according to the best forms.
And cover that in that hour you touch your hand at the right place, and if you see any different cause here, correct it and equal it according to the amount of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors who move too much cause abscesses to occur or cause contractions in the member as we have seen through their excessive movements.
And the quality of the fracture of the limb depends on which one I recommend; because you know that broken limbs vary in their appearance and size and shape.
And for those that are small like the arm and the hand and similar to these, it is customary to cover them with very fine cloth.
But those that are large like the cushion or the chest, it is customary to cover them with a thick and durable bandage, because the lightness of the bandage connects the large member strongly and equally in all parts of the fracture, so that there is no macula.
And then, as you begin, your equalization of pressure, place the bandage appropriately for that fracture, over the location of that fracture with three or four bandages after the member has softened; and strengthen your hand a little on the bandage.
And then go to the most sunken part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your bandage does not focus on the location of the fracture. And then approach the broken area with a bandage, and gradually soften the structure little by little, until you reach a large part of the area.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other wound over the broken area, and gradually approach the bandages to the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place your hand between the bandages of the lion or cloth that is equal to the twisting of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place your hand on any part of it.
And then place your hand on the other bandage, and gently press on these sharp bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or abscess in the area; and afterwards place your hand on that which secretes the abscess and which removes the inflammation; and leave it for several days; and afterwards strengthen on that.
And if the cannula of the needle is made of iron, and well formed; or of wood; or of palm fronds; and let the width of each cannula be according to this form and figure:
However, make sure that the star that is placed on that fracture is thicker and longer than the other stars, and the length of the star should be according to how it is attached to the member in magnitude and proportion; and strengthen the stars with another bend according to your first structure; and apply the bandage below as we have said of structure, and make sure that your structure is according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the less strict the structure.
And make sure that the threads are thick and thin in subtlety, and they should be of silk; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some folded threads of cords of silk being pulled through the loops, and it is a great error when the structure is not equal.
It is not appropriate to use very thin needles, because you will not be able to pierce those that you want due to the stricture, and there should not be any gap between one needle and another of the same size.
And if the patient is pulled towards the stricture by the extremities of the stirrups, then place your hand between the toes and the ankle to prevent them from being harmed by that.
Some fractures are caused by impacts, and some occur in the spine, and you will find a remembrance of that in the second singularity of the capital.
And you should know that all limbs do not become straight on the first day after being broken; this is because the limb, when it is large, does not allow for any pause on the stirrups but rather approaches within 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety from the risk of abscess.
This is the method of plaster casts that the Ancients used to restore, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Hand cream like a remedy for restoring fractures, suitable for certain complexions and especially for women and children, which is applied to the area where there is no heat or moisture: and it is made from powdered flour, and the flour is mixed with the movement of the mold in the walls of the mill.
And if it is not like that, then grind the herb of wound, and place the compensation of the unspoken or subtle; and then use it.
Another remedy for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: recipe of asafetida, of lobelia, of acacia, of elder, and myrrh, which is made from milkweed root, of all one drachm. x; of mullen and aloe root one drachm five; alochil one drachm twenty; all their crushed and ground and mixed with water or with the herb of wound if the complexion of the patient is sensitive; and then use this remedy, which is of good composition and restores the broken bones more effectively, and confers strength to many men.
Another method of bandaging that helps with fractures and sprains: take equal parts of mallow, marshmallow root, and white oak bark, and equal parts of acacia and Armenian bole, 20 parts.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with a pestle, and their strainers, and their powders with water or egg white, and administer it.
Method of bandaging for joints and separated bones, and to relieve pain in those areas and in fissures and fractures: take a silk thread and soak it in a mixture of wine vinegar and oil, and place it on the affected area.
This remedy does not have the virtue of restoration, but it is useful for treating abscesses and expelling pain properly.
Another method of bandaging that restores broken bones: take willow bark and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together and make a paste from them.
Method of bandaging for promoting healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve the chronic infection of an abscess: take powdered aloe, camomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of egg shells, and all the ingredients, grind them together and make a paste with water, if the member is not open.
If it is bled, then apply a moist colloidal or wet gauze and use it from there.
Another way of making a more effective plaster for the recovery of the limb: take the roots of mallow, linden, balm, melilot, majorana, violet flowers, camomile, and all of them chopped; all of this is mixed with a wet or dry or honeyed sugar, according to the quality of the limb and its color.
Ypocras should not be applied freely on the limb, but a wax cake made of wax and oil should be placed on it, not any other cause; and it is recommended that it be changed between coarseness and fineness.
Gualia is seen that it should be placed on the limb, for its recovery and the causes in which drying is small in heat, like milk, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: take mallow, of cease, of unpeeled skins or pennyroyal, and of aloe, and of salt, all equal parts; three times the amount of honey, and beeswax, and make it into a plaster.
The amount should be adjusted according to the type of wound and location, considering whether it causes pain or inflammation, or if the bone is not broken, and if it is not infected, then you should not leave it for many days. And if pain, inflammation, or swelling occurs at the location, then you should apply or remove it at that time, and leave the plaster on it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge lion humid, and submerge it in warm water, and wring out that pain and the pain is calmed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then place a cloth soaked in hot wine and olive oil or rose oil on it, and leave it on for a night until you are sure of abscess cautery, and that inflammation of the member has subsided, and that pain from it is relieved.
And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small, not too tight bandage for your first constraint, and carefully work on that which is healing.
And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents have already disappeared from everywhere, and if you need to apply bandages and constraints, then you should do so equally as you did at the beginning.
And if no harm has occurred to the member from those which we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and some days all of this is left until twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, before the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust in the increase of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by his remembrance.
If you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extensive than it should be, then know that the nourishment should not reach that place; therefore, apply a cool, smooth liniment to that area for the entire duration of the treatment; and this should be done for three days in total; and gradually loosen the restriction, and for this operation, the nourishment reaches the member, and it is healed more effectively.
If that which the foolish restorers of the broken member do not restore to its original state when it is not healed, according to the correct method, and if they restore it according to its tortuosity, that is also incorrect according to their operation, and there is great fear that if that is done, it will increase the ancient evils in their free works and harm them.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are varied, and their shapes are different, and their causes are distinct, because some fractures are caused by percussion of space, and the percussion penetrates all the bone into the marrow, which is behind the bone, just as it does in the staff, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a certain part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass the incision through the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the severity of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contracted or atrophied; and the cause of it is percussion with a pole or stone, and similarly.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the peritoneum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two fractures is great or small.
And of the fracture that is bent in the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for that reason this special fracture is called hairline.
And this fracture is made by impact or percussion of stone, and similarly, which makes some bone plate enter into the fractures, and it is made in the concave place where such accidents occur to the ribs when they are struck and the fragment enters into the fractures.
And this is more commonly made in the bodies of human beings, such as their ribs and skulls.
And all these special types of fractures are stable, as if separated by stitches. And you will find the removal of everything in its place.
And you will recognize all these special types of fractures by detection on those and by investigation of their attempts and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And a special type of fracture is recognized by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is cleaned, and it is applied to the attempt, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider the initial symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that mean manifestly by fever, such as vomiting from colera, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscesses of the mouth, and sincopi, and acute fever, and inflammation of the joints and pain in those, and similar to their symptoms in the major dispositions, they are not healed.
And if you see that the symptoms do not correspond to health, then you should begin the treatment of it.
When this cause occurs, if it comes to you in the beginning as it is usually found and it is in the days of winter, then study the position of the bone during the day number fourteen, completely arranged.
And if it is in the days of summer, then study the position of the bone during the seventh day, having that which is left of the pancreas be corrupted, and that accidents occur as we have previously mentioned.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas, covering the brain, and is small and atrophied, then study the incised part, divided and atrophied, according to what I will recommend to you.
And if you raise the head of the patient, and discover over the bone according to custom and your possible method according to the figure of the wound, and that it is lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you stop at that place and wait for it to be over, and fill the place with linen cloths infused in wine and olive oil, and make a dressing on the wound until the abscess is sedated, and be sure of flow of pus; and then begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first way is that you insert the bone with a straight instrument like this: And then administer another instrument, narrower than the first one.
And then use the wider instrument again.
And you should have different sizes of instruments, some wider than others, and some narrower than the others, and their tips should be sharp or made of iron or steel.
And use them to facilitate percussion on the instrument so that you do not hit the head and cause damage.
And if the bone is hard and tough, then pierce it in its circumference, where you will insert the instruments called "non-penetrating trepans".
And these are not called anything else but those that do not penetrate the end of the bone where you will place them, so that the trepan has a rounded extremity or margin on that which is left after removing the sharp edge like a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the density of the bone.
It is advisable to take a large number of these needles that are suitable for each bone, entering into all the tests of the brain where the end is sharp, the quantity in length and brevity should be according to the quantity of sharpness of this test.
This is the form of three kinds of needles: The quality of piercing through the circle of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and revolve it around its tips until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then move the needle to another location, and pause where the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then insert the most subtle forceps that you can over that in case of fracture, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the disturbance of those that will appear at that, as delicate scissors and forceps.
And make sure you guard all the precautions that the forceps does not touch any cause of the brain.
And thus, when you have circled the bone perforation, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and then extracted, it is similar to a scalpel, but rather more sharp and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that which you have with the instruments; and apply it to the wound with lint and find the ones we have mentioned.
The other method of operation is very long and frightening; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most severe and most obvious, before you have placed the end of this slow and light scalpel, which has the following shape:
And it is that the lens-shaped fragment does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is in two parts forward in length, as often; because the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incising into it.
Approach the incision site with a small sharp knife and make an incision into the bone, allowing you to rotate it as needed, and be sure not to puncture the skin in any way, even if the doctor is very skilled and knowledgeable; certainly, if he is asleep.
If there is any cause for anxiety about the skin around the bone, make an incision at the end of the knife that is lens-shaped, and remove it easily, as it is removed from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the skin, and whatever is cut or stopped from the bone is the face of it, and it is rough and has subtle edges, then you should remove that roughness and remove those edges with fine razors for which you have prepared a number, of various quantities so that you can administer them in all places as conveniently as possible, and the most suitable of them second, in which you lost your operation that bone was broken and the figure of it.
And you should administer in your ratio the medicine that you use to thin the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, and do not cease to do so until you reach administering the thinnest and most subtle of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and thin fractures, you should administer treatment according to that which you lost for the rectification of it.
And if it is not caused by all those that have been studied in that art. And you should refer to that which we have shown in great fractures.
And if the bandage is removed when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second amount of the wound, and submerge it in rosy oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and submerge it in wine and rosy oil, and place it over the first cloth, and do this as lightly as possible without causing pain to the patient.
Let that person rest from this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess being safe; and then remove it and administer medicines that increase moisture, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of escharotic, aristologia, and similar ones.
And if you make these medicines into powder that is ground on the surface, as they are dry; and generally, administer all of this medicine of property of which it is that removes and does not bite.
And guard yourself second that the wound in your cure is not infected; and it is not in the surface of saliva or other; nor do you allow to add virulence in it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and harms the patient.
And apply it on the head's temple, as from there the bone is formed and more when it is pressed during the cure of it, and it is black on the surface of it; and therefore consider that if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic all over.
If no other medical treatment is available and the one used is effective, then take a piece of honey and four pieces of clove oil, place them on a cloth, and place this over the wound; and care for it with the appropriate healing methods until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
About the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two pieces equally, but rather one piece is more rounded and has some bone, while the other part is cartilaginous and does not break easily and only changes in shape and size.
If one of the two pieces is broken, then introduce the broken piece back into the nose and align it with the fracture using the other piece, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this with your hands to facilitate the operation and be careful not to cause any harm to the patient during the procedure.
And if the fracture is in the uppermost part of the nose, and it does not permit to see through that area, then cover it with a small round piece.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the same thing.
And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, approach the seventh or eighth day and apply the healing ointment to the wound.
And then insert a piece of cloth into the tip of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill up to such an extent that they block the nostril.
And tell the ancient healers that the splints should be wrapped in bread and changed daily, but I have not seen this; instead, cover the cloth with a piece of compressed charcoal powder to help the bone heal and strengthen the cartilage.
And some bandages should be inserted into the nose, in place of a sponge, instead of being wrapped in a cloth of lion's mane; and if the fracture of the nose is very violent and the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, then do so, and if you want to make splints.
And if another bandage causes an abscess, apply a plaster to the nose with wax or with a solution of honey and rose oil, or with diachylon.
But if no abscess occurs, then cover the wound with a plaster made of starch and powdered ivy leaves and egg white; and place it on the lion's mane cloth, and do not let the nose come into contact with any cause.
But if the bones of the nose are broken or fractured, then cover them with a plaster and remove those with instruments that are appropriate for those; and cover the wound, and treat it with something that heals and consolidates, and with a suitable plaster.
If there is bleeding from the nose, then apply pressure with cloths and administer tampons of lead into it until it is completely stopped.
Chapter 4.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, look to see if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely separated into two pieces, but curved to the parts inside, then it is not displaced.
And therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side; and similarly, if the fracture is on the right jaw, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the right side; and push against that softness of the fracture from inside with your other hand on the deformed part of the bone; and gradually equalize both sides.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two pieces, then apply traction to both parts in a straight line until it is possible to equalize them.
And if there is a dislocation of teeth that leads to their displacement, then use those that are hoped to remain intact; such as gold, silver, or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled cloth, and place them on the large sheet that has been properly made, or a weight of equal length to the jaw; and hang it above the second one according to what you have prepared for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and find tranquility, and place a drink of lion's saliva on their lips.
And if you suspect that the body has been altered in some way, then remove it on the third day; and correct what has been altered from it and apply that with powder of millstone, egg album, or cisami flour, before you have removed the bandage from it, and place a lion's skin on the application.
And then with this annex and adjust the application on it, and if the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it until it is healed and strong; for this fracture is usually healed in three months.
And if another complication occurs with an abscess, then administer the same medicine that we have mentioned for other complications in its treatment until it is healed, and let that abscess remain.
And if the fracture is severely displaced, then consider whether the separated bone is short or long, and if it is short, then use a device that is suitable for removing those from instruments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then use a forceps according to the amount of your need.
And when you have reattached those separated parts, and if those do not remain, then widen the openings of the wound if they are not already wide; otherwise, place one of the suitable dressings on it and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the wishbone when it is broken.
The wishbone is broken at the part where it connects to the shoulder blade, and that fracture is made in one of three ways.
When the bone is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts that do not match; and it is easier to restore it; or if there are fragments in the wound, and it is difficult to restore it; or if the fracture is complicated.
In that case, the operation in which the fracture is complicated, you should have two assistants, so that one holds the broken furcula and follows it, and the other stretches the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with the ribs, before it is made in the shape of a second rib, and not in the elevation or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then cover it with cloth or wool, and its size according to the amount of your need; extend and elevate the broken furcula and tie the cloth to your hand until the fracture is aligned in the shape of a second rib.
And if you cannot tie the end of the furcula to the parts forward, so that it reaches the pronator, then cover the patient with a pillow on their neck, and place a larger cushion over the muscle.
And the assistant pushes the muscle of the patient to the parts that were inside when the bone of the furcula was raised and placed on top of it, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it with those called tendons.
If you feel pain in the furcula and its muscles, then cover that area and remove those pains for ease.
And if it is held in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed under the furcula the instrument that serves the chisel; and this instrument is a hammer or a hammer of which this is the shape of it:
And it is similar to a mallet of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the weakness of it.
And its length should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it has two ends, and one end should be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter of the bone is wide, and it is certain of abscess formation, then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the size of the wound's opening.
And if an abscess forms, then pour in some cloth soaked in warm water and rose oil, and place it on the affected area.
And even if the splint above the broken bone is not maggot-infested; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you replace the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the fracture.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm on the side of that one, so that the fracture of the clavicle at the elevation of the muscle is elevated; or the arm of the patient is placed on the shoulder of that one.
And do not change the bandage unless there is an abscess or pus in the place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of that at this, and adjust it to the fracture and restore it until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some changes are made in men of that time.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a broken shoulder joint.
A splint is broken in the wrong place and not at the fracture site, but on its edges.
Therefore, when the splint is broken at the wrong place - and it is broken in the right place - and it is not known except by touching, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the splint and reduce it to its natural shape in any way possible.
Then place a layer of powdered egg white and lemon juice on the fracture site; then place a layer of doubled cloth on it; and then place a thin layer of table salt according to the amount of the broken splint or more.
If the layer is concave at any point of the splint, then level that concavity with lemon juice, and then place the layer evenly.
Then apply pressure above with blood-letting to prevent the swelling of the layer until it is not removed from its place.
And consider the bandage on each day; and all the time that it is softened, tie another bandage and strengthen it and equalize the pressure if it remains in its place.
And place the patient on their left side.
The spoon is restored in 10 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and make sure that it is not from the bones of which its beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone and place it behind the chain, then you cut it on it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio de apostema caut if something happens here.
Chapter 7.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in the middle of its location and that part remains unchanged; but the ends of it are somewhat attached and comminuted.
When the patient's leg is broken, it bends towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, cough, vomiting, and fever; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
The restoration of the broken bone is that the patient should be placed on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulder blades; and then the muscles are pressed on the bone, and the ribs of the patient are adjusted to the position of two straight lines, and the operation is performed according to all possible and appropriate methods until the figure of the bone returns as it was.
Then place a poultice and bandage over the broken bone, and place a soft cloth or a piece of calico over it to cover it; and then carefully apply it to the broken bone so that it is not painful; and when the swelling subsides, strengthen it with a suitable support; and consider the swelling at all times, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
And if it is necessary to remove the bandage or compress that was previously applied, causing pain, swelling, abscess, or other issues in that area, then you should remove and discard it, and apply a new ointment to treat the issue. If necessary, reduce the pressure of the bandage, and adjust it until the patient is healed.
Chapter 8.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are punctured.
You should know that fractures of the ribs do not occur in the larger, stronger parts, but only at their ends, where they meet the lungs, and these parts are cartilaginous. And if the patient is not conscious due to the pain, you should perform the examination without their knowledge or consent.
And the restoration should be done in such a way that it matches the fracture as much as possible, and then covered with a bandage, and then apply an ointment and splint to support the broken bone, if necessary.
And if the rib fracture is declining towards the internal parts, the patient experiences severe pain and puncturing, similar to the puncturing experienced by someone who has cried out, and because of this, the bones are covered with a bandage; and they experience difficulty in handling, coughing, and vomiting, and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients had methods for treating such great pain.
And they said: cover the patient's belly with warm and moist cloths to generate inflammation and moisture, so that the belly is swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the external parts.
But we do not do this because it is not a cause of pus formation that could lead to abscess, unless it has already occurred; and if it has already occurred, then we help with that.
And they said: place the patient on their back and bring them close to a strong fire; this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the fire will draw excessive heat to the wound due to its weakness.
And they say to the patient: cover that place with wool that has been submerged in hot oil, and place powder between their ribs until it is full, which is as heavy as when you wrap a second layer; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy from food and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly constricted and has not suffered from it, and the bones push the bandage against the puncture, then cover the patient, and discover the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which contains the cipher, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the torn lips of the wound, if it is large, with suture, and treat that with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess is formed, then you should cover it and insert powder in hot oil and place it over the wound, and treat the patient with that which covers the abscess.
And let him lie on his left side while he is sleeping until he is healed.
Chapter 9.
On the restoration of fractures of the sacrum and coccyx.
Some fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and they are often accompanied by their attachment, and similarly to the sacrum of the back. And when such an accident occurs to anyone and you want to know whether they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot move them or extend them or strengthen them and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in such cases the prognosis is mortal.
And if they feel pain in them when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similarities in the sacrum of the neck and want to know whether they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
If you notice that it has already softened, then apply those things that are usually applied to the muscles, and when it is on its back, it becomes relaxed and unable to urinate, and some patients turn over onto their backs and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less dangerous.
The treatment of it is to apply a poultice made of bread soaked in rose oil or mustard plaster, or some other medicinal herbs; place it on the affected area for several days until the abscess is sedated.
And later apply one of the comforting and existing plasters, and strengthen it on that area; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the side where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the tissue of the bone is affected or some other cause that has already been separated from it, then apply pressure on the wound and remove that bone; and then adjust the edges of the wound, using sutures if necessary; and then care for that area with some healing ointment until it is healed.
If the back of the thigh bone is fractured, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and balance the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible for equality; and place a poultice and bandage on it, if necessary, and strengthen it.
And if you feel shattered bones in it, then treat that, and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is preceded by it until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the wide.
The bones of the ribs are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and are inserted in length and decline to the parts inside; and the patient feels pain in that place and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it so that it is over the fracture, which is its figure.
If the fracture is only in the end of it, then you equal it to the second one that you have at hand for equality, and enter as much as it is necessary to be assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that already declines to the parts behind, then you make the patient lie on their belly until they are prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have equalized that one, place your hand on the plaster, and place your other hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the star.
And equal the hollowness with that which placed that one inside of which that fracture has the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their side or on their back.
But if there is an abscess, then you stop the extension of it and the restoration until that one is sedated, and place your hand on that which is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that one with a cover.
If there are fractures or dislocations in the bones, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the humerus.
This is the part that is between the ribs and the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you hold it like this:
And if it is attached to two ends of two bands, and then suspended from the raised place.
And the patient should lie on a bed; and then remove the broken arm over the splint that reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over it, or the nurse extends it to the parts that are behind; and then the doctor should put something in between the fracture as soon as possible until the fracture returns as it was before.
And the other handmaid should place the patient on their back and support their head with a cloth; and then command two ministers that one of them holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the pillow behind the patient; and each of them extends their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place your strength on the fracture with the cloth and on the other cloth, and each of the two ministers extends their part.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that half of the cloth over the wound and the other behind the fracture on the side.
And similarly, if the fracture is on the side, then cover that cloth over that place and on that side.
Equalize that with ease and effort, and when it is applied according to how it covers and is applied properly, then apply strength to it if there is no pus caution.
If an abscess occurs, leave the restriction in place until the seventh day, and place your hand on the wound to prevent it from reopening until the abscess heals, and then you should strengthen that area.
The method of strengthening that area is to apply a plaster on the fracture, and then cover it with a clean cloth; and then place your arm over the support, and place your hand on their muscle.
And then cover the cloth and strengthen the arm over the support to prevent it from becoming weak, unless there is some cause for the broken bone.
And then use splints.
And then place the splint that is closest and strongest to the others; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the thickness of the splints added together, three times the width of each piece.
And then strengthen over the splints with the restriction that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And ensure that your structure over the location of the fracture is straight. And if the fracture is more elongated, the structure should be smaller.
And if you see the position of the splints and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its usual position, then do so.
And if you fear abscess, then leave the structure and the splints in place as we have said for day seven.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent it from happening in the location or inflammation; or eating is prohibited to come to the member because of the disposition of superfluous structure; and therefore adjust everything as we have said.
But if you are sure that no cause of this will happen, then do not remove the ligature for three days or more.
And the patient's head should be on their back, and their hands should be over their stomach.
And place your hand on the helper full of wool equally, and consider in all hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not melted or dissolved, or that the ligament is softened, therefore adjust everything according to your skill.
And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is started to be strong; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth.
It is customary for the helper and the servant of the patient to be strong for 14 days; and afterwards cover that food with a cloth, and administer it washed and medicated with those remedies that rectify that one.
And if the fracture is not united, then do not remove that bandage and those splints within one day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of a broken arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called two bones; one is small, and that is the one that secures the wrist, and the other is large and that is the one that is placed behind the small one from the wrist upwards.
And if the larger bone or the smaller one is broken alone, or both are broken at once.
When the small intestine is cut above, its restoration is difficult, and its healing is even more difficult.
When the large intestine is cut below the fracture of the patient, its healing is bad, and its recovery is difficult.
And even worse when two bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is cut above the small intestine, it is advisable for the doctor to facilitate its healing by applying a small extension as soon as possible.
But if the large intestine is that which is cut, then it is necessary to apply a more forceful extension.
And if both intestines are cut at the same time, then it is necessary to apply a stronger extraction.
And it is necessary to place the patient's hand on the extraction and the extension of the intestine on a cushion, with the fingers above, not like all the others, and the ear should be lower than the others, and the patient should lie on a pillow that has been placed.
And place a cushion under their back or head, so that the patient does not tire.
Then the assistant extends their arm on the side farthest from the patient's hand or head, and another assistant extends their arm similarly above.
Then the doctor adjusts the bone as best as possible according to its figure.
And if there are thorns in the surface of the bone, then you should carefully remove all of them from their location with your skill.
And if there appears to be a separate thorn that pierces the skin and is not within your hope for its restoration, then you should do something on it and place it according to the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is widespread, you have already done something similar to that, and therefore take care of that treatment.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should apply a cloth made of olive oil and white wax, and it should be thin yet strong, and place it over the subtle structure within which the abscess is to be covered; and then remove the cloth and apply a prepared plaster made of powdered myrrh and clay, and place it on the fracture.
And you know that the number of the ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your bandage over the location of the fracture as strongly and vigorously as possible, and when more of the bandage is above the fracture or below it, place the bandage a little softer than it was previously mentioned in the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, and not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strengthened just enough to move between being thin and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb nearby those days. And if something happens that requires correction, such as the one that happened to the member, and then make sure that you immerse the member in water before it stops that problem.
And do not keep the member pressed until it recovers, and then return the bandage.
And if the contraction has already been softened and the bone has already regained its shape and appearance like those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
And consider if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gradually loosen that one a little and allow it to heal for several days until the nourishment can reach it, and then strengthen it.
However, if the patient has not experienced any of those causes that we have mentioned, then do not allow it to be discharged within 20 days or around those days.
And have the hand of the patient suspended over them by their skill of moving it, and make that one sleep on their side.
And you will know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is well-healed in 28 days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the conditions and the dispositions of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the broken pinch of the hand and those.
You should know that the joint of the hand and the knuckles of those are often fractured, but this does not happen to them unless there is a strong impact.
And when the hand is fractured or injured, the patient should lie down and keep their hands at the same level, and place your hand over the extended one.
And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns them with good alignment.
And then place a bandage and hold it, if there is no pus carefully; and place this above according to the size of the wound, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
But if the splint is in the parts of the belly of the palm, and then make something similar to a bandage, and command the patient to hold that on their palm splint; then it should be strongly bound with the cloth long.
And if the patient's chest is covered with cloth in which they are lying, so that the chest can be applied to the palm; and strengthen the second one that covers.
If the fracture is at the front parts, then place your hand over the other cloth on the part that is underneath, so that the hand can be opened and straightened; and then place the bandage, as if it is rolled up with the hands between the said arm bones.
And if the fracture occurs in one of the said joints, then if it is said to be broken, then cover it as soon as possible and strengthen it with the palm and if desired, place a small straight bandage so that the fracture can be elevated and not become deformed.
And if the fracture is in the other said joints, such as in the wrist, or in the elbow, or in the ear, or in the ring finger, then it should be covered and tied with the said bandage that was used for that; or all of them should be tied continuously, and this is better; or place over that small bandage, as we have said in the wrist.
And consider, in your restoration, and approach that, the arrangement of an abscess cautery and oppose — against the surgical operation — against that which covers when something happens to one of those, according to what is related about it.
Chapter 14.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared to the sensation after it is converted to the part where it is most painful.
And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the bandage is applied over the fracture and another bandage under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
And the assistant extends the bandage to its part according to its quality, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is planned to the thigh's joint, then the bandage should be placed on the knee to the part of the femur, so that the extension can be in its place, and the other bandage under the fracture.
And if the fracture is towards the knee, then make the bandage prepared for the knee, and extend it to the parts nearby.
And if the doctor is able to place the bones in their natural position and the bone is joined by good connection; then cover it with a plaster and bandage, unless there is an abscess in the member. But if there is an abscess in the member, then leave it for several days until the abscess drains, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage of the fracture should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it twice or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the calf where it meets the thigh and the back of the knee.
And introduce a long felt between the knee and the calf towards the knee, and the ends of the felt should be from the most upper part of the two parts, and then wrap it over the calf and the knee what remains excessive from the bandage.
And then place your hand on the cushion in the location of that fracture, and place one stone on the bones of the bed.
And then fill the empty space between the bed and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the contraction from coagulating.
And then begin the contraction strongly from the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you approach the edge of the fracture location, your contraction should be smaller and more loose and moist.
And then extend both ends of the strap to the parts where it reaches the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the stones on the other side so that the cloth does not remain in its own location.
And then lay the contraction on that, so that none of those things happen to the member, corrosion, abscess, inflammation, and similar to those; and if any of those things happen, then count yourself as having removed it from there, and rectify what happened as soon as possible, according to what we have said.
If the bone is fractured where it breaks, then try to align it as much as possible; if not, break it and return it to its place, and treat that which is preceded by a memory of healing within which it can be cured.
And some bands are strengthened with this fracture of the cushion or another that is adjusted to its steps, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
However, in the restoration of it in such a way that it does not occur to the patient with paralysis; and if it is restored alone, then another should be applied on the other cushion, it is necessary that he should immediately move that which is preceded by it.
And you should know that the cushion is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and other arrangements.
Chapter 15.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the knee cap.
When a fracture of the little toe occurs, it is often accompanied by injuries to the surrounding muscles and tendons.
However, if the injury occurs at the fracture site, it is either a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either a pain or a severe pain, and over it all is the sensation of pain.
The restoration of it is such that it should be equal to what was broken from its parts, and it should be attached and joined together as much as possible by equality and facility and craftsmanship.
Then place a bandage and place it over that round stone, if necessary for that; and strengthen the structure with it as appropriate.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have recommended for other fractures, such as the abscess cautery and similar to those that should be applied to the whole accident as appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the knee.
Know that in the chest there are two bones, one of which is large and called the sternum; and the other is thin and called the clavicle.
And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, restoration of it is made as with restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
And if both bones are broken together, the chest is converted into all parts.
And if the thin bone is broken, the chest is converted into the front parts.
And if the large bone is broken, then that one behind, and it is of those causes that are not within your knowledge.
And then administer extension and equality and ligaments of the ribs according to that equally.
But may it be, if the fracture of the chest is not healed without having any signs of movement, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will help your skill.
And in the bed, there is a cause for operation on the arm, and it is when you straighten the fingers and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed on the soles, and they are made entirely of white palm leaves; attach them to those that have a small groove, and do not be like the hands, and be the longest of those that are the longest in the bed, and of the denoun under the foot.
And then cover each with a blanket in two layers according to its length, and place one on the side of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be made of denoun from under the foot.
And then place the blankets in three layers at the extremities of the bed and at the middle, so that at this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left side, and it is a good position.
And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed; and it should be placed on the bed so that it keeps the patient from moving.
When you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And consider each day the bed and study it for the next day's study, and keep it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then stop that treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and those called.
Fracture of the talus does not occur in all cases; rather, fractures occur in some bones of the foot, and fewer fractures occur in those called, and they do not occur to them but rather in the same positions.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are raised above themselves between them, then place the patient on his side with his foot prepared as if walking.
And then place one foot on that which is raised from those bones, and press them, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage on top of it, and place a small table under the patient's belly with two cloths on it.
And then pull the patient's leg towards the body structure below, as you have covered that area with cloths and other materials of which they are in need.
And when the patient has passed three or four days, then you will remove the bandage, as you found the bones in equal condition, or they were fractured or dislocated, and the operation was done with such precautions.
But if you say they are fractured, then restore those, and equalize them with the other side, and recommend to you in the restoration of the mentioned method of the foot. And then place the fractured bone along its length, and place it close to the patient's leg; and place the table under the patient's body, which has been recommended to you, and pull the patient's leg towards the body structure below.
But if that which is fractured from the bones is two or three or more, then you will place each piece of the required amount wrapped in a lion cloth on top of it, and pull the table under the patient's body, and stand on one of the tablecloths over the patient's belly to keep it warm.
It is necessary for you to remember that you should not neglect all the causes that were mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have discussed; and pause at all times to consider this.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the clavicle, the scapula, and the humerus in a man.
When the clavicle is fractured, then perform that operation in a lying position, and gradually incline it to the side of the back a little, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife should place her hand on the clavicle of the other side, and do the same as before; and the arm should be gently shaken, and the back of the person lifted a little at a time, until the fractured part of the clavicle is returned to its position.
And then place cushions on the back of the person, and when they need to urinate, raise their back and let them urinate, and reduce and return that second as was done at the beginning, and then return to the first cushion.
And make this for seven days or around those, until he is restored.
And if you wish, take an egg yolk and strengthen it with a strong herb through a canavera needle; and insert the entire egg yolk into the wound, and blow into the canavera until the egg yolk is inflated with the wound, where the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with cotton and kept warm for several days until he is healed.
And when the bones of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the healing and setting of that bone what we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
And that which is directed should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, mainly to the one who has some study and use and understanding of this my book; because that fracture means to you in the greatest dispositions via dreyturiera in the healing and setting of that bone, and therefore understand well.
When the man's back is bent, take a blanket, and place it on his back; then cover him with a cloth, and wrap him in it, and keep him that way for three days or until he is cured.
Chapter XIX.
On the treatment of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient for the person who has a displaced fracture, and especially if the bone is large and thick like the bones of the thigh or arm, or similar to those, that you first examine them and perform amputation if the conditions for amputation are present as we have previously mentioned.
And if the displacement heals, then cover it with a bandage and apply a powder made of three parts sulfur to prevent further displacement.
And then begin to treat the fracture in that place, but do not prolong it if there is no pus.
If there is pus, then leave the treatment of it until the ninth day, before the pus disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause further harm.
If the bone is fractured and elevated above the shoulder, then cover it with a cloth and place it back in its position, and hold it with your hands to facilitate and minimize extension.
If the extension is not in your prepared position and the balance of the patient, then reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight spans, and its width according to the size of the wound; and for that reason, the doctor must have three or four of these instruments according to the quantity needed in treatment for all types of fractures.
And if it is round, and in the small groove for the reason that it is not bent, then place the handle on it during the operation.
And if it is sharp at the end that has a margin on its ends; and if it is below it to the greatest extent, and from the top of it into the parts.
This is the shape of it:
And in Greek it is called "willing labor pain", which is a rare thing.
So that the patient's limb can be placed on top of the elevated part of the prominent bone.
And push it into a tube that returns the bone, and be equal to some balance.
And so force yourself to equal the limbs of the fracture between them, and if the limb of that is thinly broken, and you do not take it with the tool for good reason, then you should insert the limb of that bone into where the tool has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone to all of that, then insert it into where the scissors or saw that we have mentioned would go; or press that with one of the saws in some way that is possible for you.
And remove those that are in the bone of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bone is reduced, and the reduction of the patient brings great pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you have agreed upon with the patient.
When your bone fracture is healed, and then submerge it in a tight, dark bandage, especially in summer, and do not place it on a hot surface or other cause that could cause further injury and decomposition.
And then administer splints at the time of the patient's complete healing of the bone fracture, and leave the surface exposed to avoid any infection that may occur due to the use of bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to expose the wound to the fracture, as it may cause further injury or infection, which could lead to serious complications. And if the patient's fracture is loose, soft, and different from other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you fear any of those bad accidents that we have mentioned, and there is great pain in the area, then do not place those splints on it, but rather use a hard cloth bandage instead of splints and press lightly on those areas.
When the pain starts to occur one or two days ago, and it is believed to be caused by a fracture, then remove the cloth that was placed on the affected area, and administer ointments, using those that are customarily used to treat wounds, such as quadripharmacon and similar ones.
And it is advised to you that you remove the bandage and consider the wound on each day at dawn and evening, until it is consolidated and healed, and make sure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain runs from it to the parts behind, for facilitation.
If the wound lasts for several days and it is not consolidated or healed from it, then know that this is a sign of small bones being broken, and therefore you should examine the wound to see if it is infected. And of those small bones that are separated and remained inside, those that do not separate and put the member and make it impossible to move, you should incise those that are possible for you.
If the wound becomes infected with a certain kind of corruption or putrefaction, and it is necessary to apply a specific remedy for that, which was previously described in the chapter about its treatment.
And regarding that remedy in which you should use your best judgment and present your remedy: when the large pieces are cut off, elevate it over the affected member as if it were bones of the cushion and assistant, and similar to those of large members, and do not assume attraction or extraction of it, which may cause death; leaving that in place for a few days, which will help to heal the wound within 20 or 30 days; and then cure the wound if you have seen it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20.
Of the treatment of a lump that occurs at the site of some fracture.
This lump often occurs at the site of fracture healing, and more so near joints, and is shaped like a member; and it prevents the member from performing its natural operation.
Then consider if the wound is recent and administer medicines such as aloes, and bandages, and compresses, and astringents, and similar to those; in which you take some or all of them, and confirm that they are astringent, or albumen of egg, or astringent wine, and place that over the wound in a stopper, and bind it well.
And do not loosen that bandage for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the wound is healed; or strengthen it on that layer of plaster, which has the property of reviving everything that is inflated in the limbs.
If the wound has become a hard and tight scar that always provokes pain, then cut it along the most inflamed part of it, and remove the excess and eminent, or ratze that with an acid rezerve until it is healed; and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
When the broken bone is restored and placed back into its natural position, it is not always as smooth and flexible as before.
When a broken bone is restored, and the member becomes smooth and flexible again, this is not always done for multiple reasons: one of which is the lack of solution to the ligaments and tendons of the fractured area, as they do not heal properly; or due to excessive stricture of the ligaments, preventing nutrients from reaching the member; or due to excessive use of ointments; or due to unnecessary movement at an inappropriate time; or due to weakness in the body of the patient and their overall weakened state.
And the cure for this is to rest the patient and make their body strong again before the wound is multiplied; and administer baths; and apply compresses and lotions to it.
And place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage can draw out any remaining impurities, or continue with ointments and water treatments until the nutrients reach and return to their natural form.
Chapter 22
About the treatment of broken bones when they are healed awkwardly and prevent surgery from being performed on them due to that reason.
When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed awkwardly and elevates the broken bone and causes swelling, and it is due to this reason that the limb is formed in the shape of the member, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then you should not accept the word of someone who believes that the member is newly broken.
However, there are many foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our time; and this operation is so disgraceful that it causes great fear of the death which is fatal.
However, if swelling and pain are recent, then it is advisable to apply cold water in the form of a poultice with softening herbs such as elderflowers and chamomile, and similar ones; and this should be done to the affected area. Or it can be made into an ointment with a softening ointment such as diallaquelon well made; or it can be made into a poultice with ground altea petals and mixed with honey of gualina or olive oil, and this should be applied to the affected area. Or it can be made into a plaster with fatty figures and mixed with columbine and similar ones to those of the medicines that are called consolidation.
Some wounds are dissolved by frequent rubbing with a lighter oil that is very moist, and should be applied to the entire limb at all parts in all hours.
However, if the twisting has already disappeared and is made strong and converted into bone and causes the need for surgery with a knife, then it should be removed, and the continuity of the bone should be dissolved, and any excess from the connection of that metal should be scraped off with small scissors, and it should be administered facilitation in that area with solace and study.
Chapter 23.
About speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is essentially the separation of one of its joints, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when an accident occurs to anyone with dislocation, it is necessary to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and it becomes difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And to avoid any harm or strain during the time of abscess formation, as it is caused by the accumulation of pus and leads to slow pain.
When that happens, it is customary to cover the patient with a blanket and to allow the abscess to form; then apply heat and oil to the affected member, and reduce any swelling.
And all members should be treated with the liquid that will bring relief to their location.
And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what was previously written in fracture; from the shoulder joint, it enters into the joint below.
Chapter 24.
Of the treatment of jaw dislocation.
If the jaws are not treated; and the dislocation of the other is caused by one of two ways: either they are pushed out of their places due to slight removal, and they become slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and completed, until they are mollified at the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and that it cannot hold that nor close its mouth, and the tongue of it is wrapped in its palate.
When the dislocation of it is minor, then return it to its major positions as if it were a minor cause.
If the dislocation is complete and total, then make sure that the reduction of it is administered more slowly, and not delayed at all.
And if the healer should have the patient's head, and then insert the doctor's fingers of one hand in the mouth of the patient, on the side of the dislocation of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or that he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of the patient should be held away from those parts; and command the patient to cease his jaws and remove those from each part; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes the jaw back in before it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, until it is made easier for the reduction of both and not delayed in the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And so when we return and cover their groin, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place on those wounds of cloth with ceruse, and make it from beeswax and rose-scented oil; and afterwards bind them with ease to the limbs.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their head be between two pillows, so that it does not move to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having looked at their face, then remove that which is forbidden.
And this should be administered with ease, and not forcefully through the opening of the mouth for food and drink and defecation, until the jaw is uninjured and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and not converted to their proper places, then apply a cold poultice of feverfew and soda, and frequently the belly of the patient is inflated, and frequently vomiting pure bile.
And when you see that, you will know that it is mortal; and those who die from that usually live for about ten days.
Chapter 25.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the sternum and the extremity of the muscle.
The sternum is not dislocated from the ribs by its continuity with the breastbone; and some are dislocated at the front part, and that is called a rib fracture.
And its restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then apply pressure to the area with your palm with strong pressure, so that it will return.
And place a poultice and powders on that area and strengthen it.
The extremity of that which is bent and connected to it, is not dislocated on any day; therefore, it should be reduced and bandaged according to what we have said and according to what you have at hand.
And then place the bandage, powder, and compression, and command the patient to rest quietly until they are healed.
And this method of treatment reduces the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its own location.
Chapter 26
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the tip of the titillus to the other part.
And the second is that it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done by turning; and it is not dislocated behind the shoulder; and it is not dislocated below by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated and deformed and stuck behind the tip of the titillus, and mostly in those where the flesh is thin, it is easily dislodged; but in those where there are thick flesh, it is stuck out with difficulty.
And many men have suffered from sudden blows or falls, and the muscle of the affected area becomes infected with abscess, and it is sore because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, you should not rush to treat that, and then proceed with the treatment of it.
And the dislocation of it is known when you feel the parts behind it; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the uninjured muscle; and you should examine in the hollow of the muscle head and behind the tilt of the muscle head, as if it were a bone, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its normal position, or move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or lift it, and then examine it carefully, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is called "fresh reduction" when it is recent and the patient is young.
And the reduction of it is that the doctor raises the hand of it to the parts above; and then place your fingers behind the tilt of it, and strengthen the joint in its normal position, and the doctor raises the hand of it, and extends it in its; and then place it behind where it returns naturally.
If it does not return, and from the beginning of the accident that caused the dislocation, many days, then have the patient bathed in warm water and administered a decoction that softens and loosens, such as if their joints were made of marble, with fenugreek, and melilot in water, and it should be administered.
Then have the patient lie on their back and be placed under their neck a pillow that is even between elevation and restriction, and have the doctor place their hand on the spine to elevate the muscle head, and pull the hand of the patient so that it does not hang down, and another servant holds the head of the patient, so that it does not hang down, because at this point it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce the second in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who is taller than the patient, and stand on the side of the other, and insert their muscle behind the neck of the patient and elevate the neck of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in the air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from below their belly. If the patient is heavy, then it is necessary to hang something else that may cause suspension, so that the other one does not worsen, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And if it is reduced by another method: and it should be placed on the ground a long pole with a round head, as if with a mortar, which is not too thick or too thin, and place it under the patient; then let him lie on the head of the pole with cloths, and the patient should stand according to the length of the pole, and extend his hand to the parts behind the other part; and extend the other parts of the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction of it is difficult for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a pole of the length of two arms, and the width of it should be four fingers, and the thickness of it should be thinned at the tip in this form:
And then place a clean cloth on their head to prevent them from descending into madness.
And then place your hand or arm under the patient's chin, and extend your hand or arm into the parts behind them, and tie their hand, arm, and elbow to the assistant and their hand and arm.
And then place one arm on a ladder according to the latitude, and extend your hand into the parts behind them, and the other thing should be suspended from the other side, as the joint enters soon.
And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover with a wool cloth of equal quantity; and apply prepared plaster of pounded barley flour and albumen on all the muscle, as it is rolled up above, and place a bandage under the chin in a decent manner; and roll up the bandage over the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to the neck of the patient, and let it rest, and do not make the hand of the patient sore for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be placed on a tray, while the member is being comforted, because it is more convenient for their healing.
And then the food should be given more frequently at seven or eight and exercise some movement; if it is stopped and not softened, then it is already healed.
However, if the joint is dislocated by moisture that happens to it or by another cause, then it is necessary to apply an astringent three times, according to what is said in the chapter on cauteries.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over them for some time, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot elevate that arm to the parts above, then know that the nerves of which, being at the top of the muscle, have been severed or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be held in place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made of the chest and the breastbone or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension to the maximum, until it returns.
And it should be applied in that other structure, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the healing of the member is delayed and the movement of it is slow, then the patient should use bandages wet with warm water until that gravity is reduced and it returns to its original nature.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, and especially at the part that is closest to the back, and the dislocation of it is not visible from where you are standing, or from the touch according to any figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, it does not return to its place, this is a clear manifestation that the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And if you cover them, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it arrives at the abscess, for if you see the abscess, reduction is difficult, and not always heals completely; and more so when it is in the parts behind, for it is worse than all the other species of dislocation, and causes greater pain, and more prolonged suffering, which may lead to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended on both sides, and the arm be expanded, and the hands of the physician be placed on the back of the patient, and he should press the joint towards the palm of his hand until it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is in the parts behind, then return to where you bend your arm back, and strike the back with the palm of your hand until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, and two other assistants hold it in that position to prevent it from moving during the extension.
Then rotate the arm in all directions, as it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage on their chest, or on their back.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, apply some oil to it so that it helps in lubricating the joint and facilitating its movement; and then gently push the joint back into place.
And then place a compress over the wound that is covered with starch and lime, and extend it downwards, and hang the arm from the neck, and let it rest for several days.
And then remove the bandage; and if the joint is formed in its proper place, then remove the bandage from it and leave it there.
And if you see that the joint is not strong enough, then apply the ointment and bandage again, and leave it there for several days until it is extended; and then remove the bandage.
If an accident occurs to the gravity near the reduction of the joint, and the position of it is in movement, then administer humidity in baths and gentle friction, and compress, until it is removed; or pause on the joint affected, this is a fatty cushion; and apply, and leave that on the bone and the new. And then place that in the bath; and when you remove it, then rub the joint with a prepared friction, and apply again on the affected area, this is a moist cloth, a woolen one, and the second, and the third, and the fourth. with a bath instrument, until it is softened.
And if you wish, pause on that cowhide wet and scraped with bread and strengthen on that; and do that some times, because that is moist and reduces it to its position.
Chapter 28.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, which is between the arm and the chest.
Sometimes the shoulder joint is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, and the opposite is true for other joints, but nevertheless, it is important to have speed in reducing the dislocation at the time when it occurs, so that the joint does not become infected or something happens in the infected joint.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the patient's arm on a table and the assistant extends the patient's arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back into its place.
However, it should be considered whether the palm is already attached to the patient's arm, then the patient places their arm on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceded by the arm, then the position of the arm of that person should be naturally on the table, so that the doctor's hand can be on the edge of the joint.
And if it returns soon, good; and if not, then the assistant should apply pressure to the abscess and leave that person; and do not repeat this, because otherwise, there is no suffering or pain on the reduction of the joint except that it passes through the days.
When the joint is second in its tortuosity; and the patient does not know any cause, but the muscle is softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are trapped or torn, and they are not engaged in it but should be strengthened with a pointed cautery at the base of it and strongly heat that thing.
Therefore, when the patient is returned, place your hand on the area that we have recommended, and let it be released and strengthened for several days; and then remove it and let it be released and the muscle of the patient should be exercised.
If the movement of it is stopped and it has some gravity in it, then apply that with some warm water and some friction for a few days, until it is alleviated.
Chapter 29.
Of the cure of the mentioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at all parts.
And when one of these parts is dislocated at the back of the hand or on its belly, then stretch the part and push the dislocation of it towards the fingers, until it returns.
And then support the head of the said person, suspend the device to the dislocated part, and leave it for two days.
And then suspend that one and extend it until it is equal to its previous day.
And when the first is not ready, apply the second according to that description, and do not stop removing it during the day and exercising movement, and at night; and do so for several days until it is straight.
And do the same with that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen of the patient, and apply it to that part and do the first operation, until it is healed.
And similarly, do the same when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Chapter XXX.
Of the cure of dislocation of the spine of the back.
When an accident occurs to one of the spine of the back or neck dislocation complete, and remains motionless for those spine from that place, then in that case there is no cure, because death approaches the patient.
When that happens, it is under the patient's control to expel that, and they cannot hold it back; and movements soften their members or their thighs or their arms or their chest, or one of those; or it remains a sponge in that place, where movements are made to remove those in four directions.
So that is now removed to the back parts and is called spongewort.
The cure of that is that you should consider whether the spongewort has occurred from impurity, because in that case it is not cured and there is no healing of all.
In that case where it comes through percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in that prolix speech, which is most likely to return profit; but I already have and have improved upon that from which few are exempt from the too much of that, because of its proximity to the understanding and exposure, which he has exposed and formed into various instruments of that kind, by which he shows that and explains that.
And those are not cured except by the one that happened to the chest properly, that is the one I have recommended.
And it is that the patient should be extended on their face, in a position as close to upright as possible, and then stretched out with a wet cloth underneath them so that their chest is not pressed.
And then a straight stick should be placed underneath them, with their head resting on the ground at the end of the bed near their head, and another stick under their feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold the stick, and not be still in the bed; and another minister should hold the other one according to that form.
And then cover their head with a cloth and place the firm lion's tail on their forehead; and extend the end of the lion's tail to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other band over their ankles and under their buttocks, and support their abdomen; and then adjust all the bands and tie them to the other stick that should be under their feet.
And the assistant should extend the bandage to the part of the foot where it was placed, and not leave the two feet and the bandages of their places in which they were placed, but rather not stop there as we have said.
And the doctor should place their hands on the strong spine between the vertebrae as they return, or place one on a table, and then adjust their feet on the table before they return.
But if they do not return in this way, then take a table that has a width or length of three brasses, and dig in the wall where we said that it should be the patient's place between the end of the table. And then place the other end of the table on the strong spine, and the doctor should place their feet on the other end, and then carefully enter until the spine is covered and they return to their place.
And if you want, open the chair that is rolled around the middle; and it is that you should stay on the ground with the patient's head in the back of the chair between two feet, the length of which should be one arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other chair exactly two feet; and the length between each foot should be a palm, and it has been done in each foot where the chair turns, and each should be held firmly on the ground so that it is not damaged.
And there should be a reed in which it is turned, and it should be rolled up in the two thicknesses of the two reeds.
And at the end of it is a thickness in which the reed is made, the length of which is a palm and a finger, which is rolled up; and in the other two reeds, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the threads that you have stretched in the chest of the patient in the thickness which is to be put on his head, and the threads that you have stretched in the cushions of him in the roll which is to be put on his feet.
And then each roll should have a minister who turns the roll on his hand, and the doctor according to what we have said.
And after the spine is returned, and the area is covered, then apply poultice of egg white, and stop; and then place a cloth on top of it, the width of which is three fingers or about those, and the length of it is the amount that took up the area of the swelling, and on the part of the spine, it is.
And then use a thin cloth that we have called a bandage to provide nourishment until the patient is healed.
And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing process, then use medicines that are moilific and liniscan for their administration, as recommended; and it is already administered in that location, a sheet of lead.
And some veins sometimes occur in the rear of the spine, and it is for that dislocation; and that bone which already immines because it does not want to be performed in that manner, this medicine will surely cause you to die.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle only occur in dislocation, and not in those that occur to the other joints with a slight removal and concavity.
And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, that it is dislocated at the back parts, or at the front parts, or at the inner parts, or at the outer parts.
And it is more commonly dislocated at the parts of the body in front, and less so at the parts of the body on the sides or at the parts of the body in the back.
And from the dislocation of the patient at the parts of the body in front, it is clear that when you adjust the pillow of the healthy person for the sick person, the healthy person's chin is longer and the sick person's nose is shorter than the healthy one, and the sick person cannot bend their knee but must lean on their elbow, and this is the place where the elbow often gets an abscess due to pressure.
And the reason why that person who experienced dislocation is at the parts of the body in front is because those accidents of him are opposite to this accident.
And the reason why that person who experienced dislocation at the parts of the body on the sides is because the pillow on the other side is extended secondarily, but it does not bend towards that pain in the knee, and if it goes to go there and cannot be placed on those parts on the side; and the urine of him is retained and the swelling of him on the side is an abscess, and you must place the ambulation of him over the thigh.
And if the person who experienced dislocation at the back parts cannot expand their shoulder, nor bend the arm that bends the elbow, and the blanket under them is shorter than the other, and the elbow is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed in that place.
The reduction of these species of dislocation is that you consider, therefore, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been treated by someone, then you administer reduction to it according to its arrangement, and it is not in that cure for everything; and therefore do not expect that in that one be made propitious.
In that one of whom the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you should do that which turns the joint and extends it to the back parts and front parts, and both to the right and left, which strongly returns and does not require other cure.
Then, if it does not return in this way, you should expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the blanket of the part most behind, or at their hands, or at the bandage which is placed over the shoulder; and another minister extends the hand of that above so that their hands are behind the tips of it; and then strongly hold the lion's mane on the edge of the cushion, and another minister cleanses the end of the bandage.
And if it is the extension of the patient or the part behind the neck to the part of the sternum, or the part behind the back to the part of the spine.
And if it is the extension of all those in a journey until the patient is raised to his own side and remains hanging.
This type of extension is special compared to all four.
And if the dislocation returns to that which we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary for all this that we say about the appropriate treatment.
In the reduction of his own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the parts behind, cover that the patient is supine on his own side; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place which enters the head of the cushion and the place that is left leaning; and extend the band in upwards from the angle to the most other part of the sternum.
And another minister strongly grasps the arms of him, and presses the large place of the patient's back and extends to the parts of the front by strong extension, so that it returns to its own place.
This special treatment is the most effective cure for this member that has been reduced, unlike other treatments.
However, if you are exempt from this treatment and do not obey its instructions, then tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong rope, looser than others, above the ankles and below the knees.
And let the length of each be equal to four digits, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by two digits.
Then hang the patient over the top of the bench, and let them be in the highest position; and let the length of their body from the ground be equal to two elbows.
Then command a strong young man to minimize the pressure on the cushion, and let another young man be suspended from the patient, and let the other young man strengthen the joint by pulling it back to its original position quickly.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, cover the patient with a blanket after we have recommended it to be properly humidified; and strengthen the ligament over the patient's shoulder correctly and over their chest.
And then bring two chairs for them to sit on, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the chair under their chest, where they can rest their body covered with a blanket, so that the patient is not dampened by the chair being between their legs, as you must avoid the extension of the parts to be stretched.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor holds their hand while performing the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is at the parts denoted, then make sure that the cushion is extended more widely, and follow this method according to the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long bone of the patient, and holds the other hand at that point, and at that extension pauses the one extended to the parts to be stretched.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, do not let the patient be extended at the back parts, and elevated on the ground; having covered him with a hard cause, as if it were a mattress, if the shoulder of the patient is dislocated forward, according to what we have said about the position of the patient on two mats; and it is on his face and the limbs are extended, as we have said, there is no harm.
And provide compression with a cloth on the place where the joint is.
Then, when the reduction is completed according to what we have said — and if the joint of the patient is not hidden from you, and you extend two cushions from the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends one cushion and expands the other, then you know that the member has returned — and then you adjust two things and press and extend the bent part so that the limb is not injured in any of the parts; and adhere to the patient for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, comparing one cushion to the other.
When you see those joints in their proper place, then know that the dislocation has been stopped, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and apply it again in an ambulation over each part for several days, until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cure of dislocation of the thumb.
The thumb is dislocated in three ways, either it is dislocated at the base, and at the joint behind, and at the joint in front; and it is not dislocated at the base.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to apply the cushion on the part; then know that the thumb is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is to have the patient lie down straight, unless they can do so; place a cushion under their head, and hold their foot between your hands; and then make the patient's hand adhere to their face, and hold their foot between your palms, and place those between their thighs for strength, and another minister extend their leg until that hand returns to its place.
And if the patient's back does not adhere to the cushion, it is because the cushion is not well placed.
And then place that plaster on it and make the back adhere to the cushion, and then tie those together with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient's bed for more than a few days, until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then administer strong extension to the tendons of which in the cure of the hand previous narrative.
Chapter 33.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
The talus sometimes remains in its place with slight removal, and sometimes it is dislocated with the correct movement, and the dislocation of which is done at the parts inside or at the parts outside.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus inflates from the part to which it is dislocated.
The cure of its removal is usually easy, and it is that it should be extended by ease to the hands and should be equalized within so that it returns.
In its cure when it is dislocated with the correct movement, it should be done by the patient lying down, and he should hold that one a strong and skilled person from the part behind the back of him in the middle part of which.
And then you should put your left hand on the outside of the lower part of the foot, and your right hand in the place behind the heel.
And then bring the foot to your right hand, and the left for two reasons, and extend the left; and push the chest of the foot towards the right side of the bed.
And then make those two reasons when you have counted them.
And then push the chest of the foot towards the third side of the bed, and you are at the back.
Therefore, return in one or two ways with this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, until it returns.
However, if you are prohibited from reducing it to that position, then have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a pillow under their head, and a cushion between their thighs, and you have covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
And then the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot towards their hands or the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and then each assistant stretches against the extension of their own side, and the pillow is extended between the patient's thighs, retaining that, so that the thing of the patient is not drawn to the parts behind their extension.
And the doctor should approach the dislocation with his hands, and another assistant should hold a clean cloth to the parts that have been dislocated, as the dislocation returns to its place.
And when the dislocation has returned and it is declared that the patient's health has been restored by its reduction, then apply a strong bandage to the affected area, and tie the foot to the bed.
And be careful not to injure the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage does not press too strongly on that area and cause pain there.
And leave it for two or three days; if the bandage becomes too soft, then remove it.
And remove it on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from walking for ten days. However, if it is necessary to walk during that time, be careful that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and avoid that which does not require healing.
And if the abscess bursts, then carefully apply what we have described in the previous chapter, in another place for healing and to prevent it from recurring, until it is completely healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the treatment of dislocations of those of the feet.
That which is dislocated should be extended with a little force; and that is not difficult, before it.
If the dislocation is in the back of the foot, then you should do so by placing the patient's foot on a level surface or table, and be there with him.
Then you should stand by the foot, and place your hand on what is near the joints, and gently press that part of the foot until it returns to its original position and does not appear in the elevated position.
Then you should place a table under the patient's foot that holds the entire foot, with two ends, and strengthen that part of the structure in a proper and firm manner for three days; and then remove it and make him walk again for several days, until it is strong and he is assured.
Chapter thirty-five.
Of the special types of dislocation that are caused by a fall or a fracture or any other way.
When any cause of those occurs, and you perform the cure and restore it, then many evils succeeding may lead to death.
And for that reason, do not presume over the cure of it, but rather follow the knowledge of the art, with long use, mercy and pity, not hasty, nor arrogant; and use in the beginning of medicines that cede apostems as much as possible, and leave the patient to divine judgment, unless to that one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for alleviation of the malady, and in which there appears some hope. And then you should try to quickly reduce it in the beginning of the cause, giving that it becomes an abscess.
And then if the member returns after they want, then administer the regimen that cedes an abscess as much as possible and cures the dislocation with that which is suitable for it from drying agents.
If dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then perforate their membrane, and do what we have said in simple cases of that in the locations of those.
And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my previous preaching has preceded; because that is better for you to give to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more salutations to your own way as you will see those in your time. This finishes the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed. Amen.
