Oh, sons, I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the completion of its goal in it, and by its explanations, and by its declarations, it seems to me that I have completed that which I loved for you in this treatise, which is part of surgery.
The operation of midwifery has been completely forgotten in our region and in our time, until recently the science of it was lost, and its evidence is hidden; and no one knows about it except a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been lost and have led to errors and uncertainties until the understanding of it has been closed and its strength and art have been lengthened.
And it seems to me that I have lived in this order of this treatise in the second way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and because it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and of the other instruments of the work, which is necessary for addition to the declaration, and for its preparation, which is necessary.
In ancient times, the reason why a skilled artist was not immediately recognized as such in our time is because the art of medicine is long, and it requires practice in the science of anatomy, which was rediscovered by Galen before he knew the great benefits of the members and their forms, and their conjunction and separation; and knowing the bones, nerves, and ligaments, and their number, and their hardness; and of the pulsating veins, the quiet ones, and the locations of their issuance.
And for that reason called Hippocrates, who said that a name is not important, but in the work itself, and especially in the art of medicine.
But we have already mentioned him in the introduction of this book; because who does not know what we have said about anatomy, will not avoid falling into error by which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those, for they are formed in this science and get their knowledge from that science and its experiments.
When a doctor folly and imprudently incised an abscess of Hansen's disease on the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries in the neck so that a great deal of blood flowed into the woman, causing her to die between her hands.
And another doctor saw that the dragger had taken a stone from a man who had passed it in his state, and the stone was large, and he brought it to him and passed it with a tube through the urethra, so that that man died on the third day.
And he had already tried to extract it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he knew that he would die.
And another doctor saw that a duke of our land was suffering from surgery, and he went to a skilled blacksmith who was experienced in the fracture in the thigh of the patient; and because of his ignorance, he extracted the fracture on the surface, with cushions and sticks of strong structure, and did not give the wound air.
And then remove the bandage according to his wishes, and then remove the restraints, and then remove the leeches for several days and command that they not be applied again; and this is when the dressing and the foot become infected, and reach a point of danger.
And then I was called to him, and I removed the bandage, and he regained peace and relief from his pains.
However, the decay was already confirmed in the limb, so it could not be stopped, and it continued to spread through the limb until the patient died.
And I saw another doctor who drained an abscess and made an ulcer, which healed in several days, until the fire of his malice was consumed by the Lord of him.
The cause is that the brain is purged of melancholic humor, so it does not reach him with all iron, but rather the member that suffers from all should be held.
And for that reason, children, it is necessary for you to have the operation done in two ways: one is an operation that is associated with salvation, and the other is a work that is performed in the best conditions.
And I have already extracted that in every place of this book where an operation is performed in which error and fear occur; therefore it is necessary for you to guard against that and lay aside that, so that the foolish do not attribute it to me and dishonor you.
And take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with ease and firmness.
And use the best way for the grace of God to lead to salvation and praiseworthy succession, and lay aside the terrible diseases of difficult healing, and hold your weapons against that which makes you fear, so that your stay in your faith and your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and further in the world and after your sanctity.
In some cases, however, it is said that: Do not treat evil disease, because evil doctors are not recognized.
And I have divided this book into three sections.
The beginning of the division of the rib, and the first of the first section. The first chapter is ordered by the head of the foot, in the forms of instruments and in the irons of cautery, and of what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second section. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on ventosas, and on plagues, and on the extraction of sagitas and similar things to those, all chapter and ordered by the forms of instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of tortion and similar things to those; chapter ordered by the head of the foot, and by the forms of instruments.
That you know the quality of those points and of the remedies of it, and in what condition is prohibited cautery.
Therefore, the speech about the quality of the cauterizing knife and its handle is a long and elaborate one, subtle for those who know it, and secretly hidden; and from there many people have spoken about it, and they have differed in their opinions, and I have taken a small part of their speeches, due to my ignorance.
Therefore, the cauterizing knife corresponds to the entire complexion universally, which is good or bad material, except for two complexions, which are tail-like materials.
In the tail-like complexion and dry material, they disagree; for some say that a cauterizing knife is suitable for that, and others say the opposite of that, that a cauterizing knife is not convenient in a bad condition, which is due to its quality and dryness, because nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that bad condition tail-like and dry material be caut and dry be healed.
And they say those who say the opposite of that, that for cauterizing it is done well in all bad condition tail-like and dry material that is in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humidity to the complexion of fire, the body of a man is damp.
I hear by the word of that person, who has experienced this thing several times before.
But may not come upon that one who has already been examined and exercised in the capital of cautery by previous practice, and knows the diversity of men's constitutions and the positions of their illnesses, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the span of time for those.
But in other constitutions, you should not fear, and especially in moist and humid illnesses, because all doctors have been agreed upon those, and they do not disagree about the use of cautery in those.
And know, children, that the secret of healing by cautery with fire and its goodness is that by cautery, medicine burns, because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and does not harm the other members unless it is adjusted with a small amount.
And the action of medicine burning reaches those in the members who are already sick, and it often causes pain to come into the sick member and often causes harm.
When the fire, due to its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do anything but superfluously, we already know this through experience and the length of time spent studying the art over the truth of the causes; and for this reason, I am excused from the length of this speech. And if it were not for the fact that it is not read aloud in this place, and the quality of the operation of it in the bodies and its expulsion by which it expels evils, the philosophical demonstrative speech would be sharpened in your minds.
You should know, children, that the time when it is appropriate to make a cautery and rest is at the best time of primeval.
I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, because the harm caused by time is submerged in the benefit of which the cautery thrown is made, and especially if it is for pain or necessary pain, quickly and firmly, the ones that do not suffer delay because of the fear of those who come with malice, which is greater than small harm entering through time.
And do not catheterize in your feet, or, sons, that is only understood by the common people and foolish doctors, because that malady which is cured by cauterization is not always disagreeable, and they stop that consequence.
And the cause is not as they say for that, because cauterization is not only in a place of medicine which alters the appearance and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pain.
But rather cauterization is used excessively in medicine for the sake of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that their malady returns in some time of the day, according to the appearance of the patient and the location of their malady, and its virtue, and that which is prepared in the body of the patient from the aggregation of the superfluities in it, and that which is obtained to it in the acquisition of foods and similar causes; but the malady in which cauterization is administered is a subtle malady of few superfluities and moistures, such as cautery for tooth pain and similar things, it is possible that in it does not return that pain, but rather it is done in small amounts.
And more commonly, people call the pointed cautery the best remedy in medicine, and they say that it is not a cure that is appropriate for me to use in this case, as they believe that there is no cure that can be achieved through medicine or any other cause that would approach the use of a cauterizing needle.
And the cause is contrary to that; and they understand that the pointed cautery is not the best remedy in medicine unless they administer the methods of treatment in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the cause, they administer some cauterizing needle, and it is appropriate for that. And from here it is understood that the pointed cautery is not the best remedy in medicine, but they understand this as many people and some foolish doctors believe.
And the ancients said that gold is better than iron for cauterizing, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the superiority of its substance.
And they said that the location of cauterizing does not matter, since it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen some people who are good and some who are bad, and cauterizing with gold is better than with iron if you do it in this way; however, when you make cauterizing with fire made of gold, it is not your declaration, because it is prepared according to the amount that you want by the heat of the gold, and because it receives the cold; and if you adjust it on the fire, the gold melts for the occupation of that.
And for that, a pointed cautery of iron is made to us slightly and more closely to the direction of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter in the second chapter of the cautery, and I have ordered those who enter between the feet, so that the patient asks what he wants from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery applies moisture and cold to the body part of which these causes are the main factors, causing corrosion, from the head to the parts of the hands and feet, and many sleep, and tooth pain and jaw, and generally all evil that comes from cold, such as paralysis, hardening and apoplexy, and similar in those evils.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first commands the patient to take a laxative medicine to cleanse his head, for three or four nights, according to the patient's ability and age and habit.
And then command the one who has the sharp razor to shave that part between your hands on a chair, and place your hands over their chest.
And then place the palm of your hand on the razor blade between their fingers. However, when you reach the desired location, mark that spot and then apply the pointed cautery made from olive oil of this shape:
And then place that on the location well, gradually applying pressure until it is firmly attached, and you should rotate that.
And then slightly lift your hand and look at the location, and if you see that some of the bone has been exposed, like the amount of gravel, then lift your hand, and if it does not return to its original position, then use the other tool mentioned earlier, if it is cold, before it becomes visible from the bone.
And then take a small amount of salt and dissolve it on the location and leave it there for three days.
And then place your hand on the burned area and hold it over the flame to destroy the scar of the fire. And then apply the tetraformic ointment until it is healed.
And they say that as soon as the plague is opened, the arm becomes more flexible and more useful.
And they say that the cord should be cauterized inside the bone, and it should be held with the cauterizer until a piece of the bone is stuck to it.
And then scrape off that which is stuck to the bone, and then apply the ointment.
And others say that the cauterizer should reach the back, until it penetrates strongly into the bone before it breaks, and this is the way to make small nails: And they estimate that from that place the fumes of the head come out.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then it should be healed until it is consolidated.
I have not seen these two types of cauteries used in all men, except in some who are secondarily afraid; and if you leave that one, it is better to avoid it when possible, because the head is often revealed by the solution of continuity of which we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of a fragile nature.
The first type of cautery is safer and better for me, and from that one, you should avoid it to save the work and ensure safety.
Chapter two.
Of the head cautery.
When the head suffers from chronic and long-lasting pain, and this is prolonged in the patient, and uses garlic, toothpicks, capipurges, ointments, guatz, cadels, gualinas, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cauterizer that they have not used recently, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not fragile and easily broken, then that cauterizer should use another cauterizer. And then cauterize that on the top of his head with a pointed cautery where the hair is separated. Cut the hair and expose the bone to the extent that we have found, and cauterize that with a pointed cautery on the back of his head in the place called the occipital fossa, â€” and that is the place where the pillow is placed. And let your hand remain still, and do not expose the bone, because the patient will suffer great pain different from all other scalp cauterizations.
I would say that this cautery is in this place, because it is used to cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more subtle cautery than that which is used to cauterize the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Third chapter.
Of the ancient non-antiseptic cauterization of the eyebrow.
When the pain in the part of the head is severe, or extends to the forehead, remove the medicines that make the head sweat, and administer the other cure, which I have mentioned in the treatment of diseases; and if none of this helps, then cauterization in that place is done in two ways: either with an acute cauterizing instrument or with iron.
May the pointed cautery be used as a medical tool to remove a splinter from the hand, and then apply ointment to the affected area and bandage it. And then make an incision in the area of pain on the temple with a sharp knife, deep enough to reach the affected area, but not so deep as to reveal it.
And then apply a strong compression bandage to the affected area for three hours; and then remove the bandage and treat the wound for two or three days, and then apply a poultice over the area where the wound is located.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, you can perform this with some medical tools that I have written about in the aforementioned treatise on medical instruments.
The pointed cautery is used in this manner: light the cautery with this method:
and it is called a claviule, because its head is shaped like a carnation, with some curvature, and in the middle of it is a small hollow.
And then place your hand on the location of the pain, and hold it -- to prevent the laceration from being stuck together -- and turn the small iron at high speed.
And if the amount of the wound that is stuck together by the nature of the cautery is such that it covers most of the body, and you lift your hand to prevent the artery from being stuck together, which is there, so that no blood flow occurs.
And then apply a bandage soaked in salt water to the location, and place it there for three days; and then apply a soft bandage, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
And if you see, cauterize the end of the cutting instrument according to the cautery, and guard yourself from injury to the artery in this improperly antiquated manner.
Chapter Four
Of the cauterization of improperly antiquated instruments.
When you treat the instrument that we have said about the previous treatment, and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if you do not improve the treatment, and sometimes by the disease that does not allow you to use the first cautery of medicine or the cautery of fire, then you should ignite the cutting instrument inside the body before it is fully burned, so that it is long enough to cover the location of the pain, or that one; and place your hand on a firm and strong position when you pierce the wound and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the mandible, which is damaged by chewing, and that the jaw not be stuck and the nerves that are affected by it, and that it does not become spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from the artery that is abscessed, where in its abscission there is fear, and much more for those who do not know what it is and are not studious and do not spread it; and leave the operation in its beginning.
And you will remember the regimen of blood flow from an accident to the artery according to the same method, in its place in this book.
And if you see this disease that does not allow this cautery and sees the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle loc of the head as we have reported, and cure the wound before it is healed.
And if you see, administer the cautery that we have said in the chapter of strangulation of the artery with two points, and this is the best cauterization and more conforming.
Chapter 5
On the cauterization of gout pain in the joints.
When pain is felt in the joint due to cold humors and has been treated with active causes and other treatments as mentioned in the previous section, and the pain does not subside, then use the cautery, and this is the one without points, of which this is the form:
And then bring the point close to the heat, and it should be moved around the entire joint as if it were turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each one. While holding the cautery, slowly move it along the edge of the joint as if you were touching it gently.
And if the pointed cautery is used in all joints, and it is felt, then cure the places before they become healthy again.
Chapter 6
On the cauterization of torture.
Torture that is cured and cannot be treated with other than the specific remedies that come from flexibility, as we have mentioned in the sections of diseases.
Avoid cauterization of the specific area due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that area of torture with jewels and capipurgi and guarguarismes, and do not compare your treatment, then you should cauterize the patient with three cautery points: the first at the golden ratio, the second slightly below their temple, and the third at the conjunction of two lips.
And place your cautery in the opposite direction of the affected area, as softening only occurs in the healthy part.
The form of cauterization is that you cauterize that area with the cautery in the direction of the golden ratio, a small one on the tip of the nose, another on the temple, the longest of which should be second to the length of the first, and place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the specific part of the codex is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a specific tool for the butcher, the shape of which is given in the table. May it however be more subtle than that one has a few days ago; and cover the area with a cloth to prevent excessive greasiness.
And then care for the area with that which is given as a process until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and cured with that which we have said, and does not affect your medication or the patient's temperature, then cauterize that area with four cautery: on all the hairs of his head; and with a cauterizing instrument, as we have said; and cauterize in the crown. And the method of the cautery is made according to what has been said.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and more behind; and then care for that which has been processed.
Chapter VIII.
Of the cautery for forgetfulness caused by a pimple.
When giving medicine to the patient at the beginning, give them large, strong pills and let them chew on them.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a poultice made according to the description in the treatise on the wound.
Then place some bandages on it, which is the use of cautery. Do that second, according to the order you have already said.
And if it is well done; and if not, then make three points on the back part of his head, which should be placed from the most outward part of the head to the most inner part of the head. Then place the largest amount of the said between each point, and then care for the point with the cautery that is used.
But if you are adding more and the patient is bearing it well, then make the point in the middle; and if you add more, then cauterize that over both toes.
Then care for it until it is healed; and the cautery should be shaped according to the form given.
Chapter 9.
On the cauterization of the perineum and the softening of the whole body.
That you process in the softening of the head and that you have mentioned; and then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that pointed cautery on the middle part of the head, and cauterize over all the corners of the head, and cauterize over the back part of it, and three cauterizations on the spines of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the patient's illness of softening the body of three of those and the patients tolerant and the illness is strong, then cauterize that pointed cautery over the spines of the back, and afterwards cauterize into when it is completely quiet of the neck muscles of the patient, and raise the left hand. And then care for that until it is healed, and this be cauterization olive oil.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but that epilepsy is by flexion.
And therefore, you should first modify the patient's mind at the beginning of their illness and on the other side, the cure that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is large and tolerates the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then give them garlic and mustard, which the servant has modified, by giving it for several days, with good nutrition.
And then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize that part with a cauterizing instrument in the middle of the back of the head according to the previous method, and with another cauterizing instrument at the occiput of the patient, and on each part of the head, cauterize. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that part with the cauterizing instruments that I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the spine of the neck and the spine of the back.
And use olive oil as prescribed.
But if the patient is a child, then place a thin cauterizing instrument according to this method.
Chapter 11
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and thin, and the humors are thick and heavy, then cautery is applied to those parts where we have said that they have a paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excessive and tends towards melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him that which cleanses his brain according to the water that has preceded in the division.
And then remove the cap from the patient's head, and make a decent cut on his scalp over the circle, and place that in the middle of his head.
And the patient should be lying down, and held from all parts.
And then place a liniment; and it is more suitable for an ancient sheep's bladder. And scald that over the fire for heating, which is suitable for the patient when it is most in him. And then place that in the middle of his head over the circle, and let it cool him until it is dispersed.
And give the patient this medicine throughout the week, along with the other treatment until they are healed; or if you want, make small points on the affected area, following the most of the body, but have your hand on a pointed cautery: this is a special type of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
And place your hand on that swollen area in bear's grease or gray deer.
Chapter 12.
Of the application of water descending in the womb.
When it is declared to you that the beginning of water in the womb occurs by the symptoms I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient water to drink that melts the top of their head, and keep that from all moisture.
And make that sweat in a bath for several days.
And command the patient to shake their head, and make points on the middle of their head with a pointed cautery; and then make points on two temples if it is the beginning of water in two wombs, or on one side if it is the beginning of water in one womb.
Cut all the veins and tendons that are behind the heel; and place the cautery in that long area on the side of the temples.
Watch for blood flow when the cautery is applied; and if you see blood flow from there, apply some medicine that is available to you.
And you should have knowledge of the method that is used for extracting tendons and treating those abscesses and preventing blood flow.
Some veins are cauterized in the neck behind two bones, which are usually produced by two cautery points.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cauterization of ancient tears.
When the tears from the ancient glands are persistently present through the veins and arteries that are manifest in the location of the cap forward and it is verified that this is excessive fluidity, then cauterize that point with the cautery that we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water collection in the glands, and place the cautery in the middle of the cap and two cautery points in the neck behind two temples, and two cautery points in the neck behind two bones. If necessary for addition, then cauterize that on the entire length of the cape's tail over the tip of the forehead with a small cautery.
Chapter 14.
Of the cauterization of bad breath.
When you treat that person whom we mentioned in the division and have not yet completed your treatment, then prepare and give to the patient three nuts; and remove their head, and cauterize it with a larger or smaller cautery of olive oil. And then cauterize that with a thorn on two cautery over the two foreheads below the hair, a little.
And watch out for the arc that you do not burn that one.
And of the thorn cautery this is the form.
Chapter 15.
Of the cauterization of the eyelids of the horses.
When the eyelid of the horse is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery of this form:
And if you, with a small pointed cautery, make points on the two temples, and lengthen them in every part, then you should do this. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the temple.
And do not press your hand too hard against the cautery, but according to the amount that the upper eyelid is stuck together.
Chapter 16.
Of the cautery of the upper eyelid when the eyebrows are converted into parts and pinch the eye.
When the eyebrows are converted into parts and pinch the eye, cautery in those places according to two methods, either by fire or by medicine that burns.
If you cautery with fire, command the patient to lean their eyebrows over those that clean them, as if they were those that clean them; and if they pinch the eye, then strengthen the eyelids of that with one band so that it does not become swollen until the eyebrows are born.
When they are born and grown up, then pause the patient's head on your thigh, and place your hand over their eyelids with a tent-like motion, according to the shape of a funnel of mercury, and start the tenting near the hair.
And then place a soft cloth or moistened cotton on their eye.
And then use the pointed cautery that has this shape.
And then cauterize the shape that was placed, little by little, in winding motions, until the surface of the eyelid is completely burned, like a funnel of mercury, appearing entirely proper.
And to ensure the healing of the eye work is that you lift the eyelid of the eye, which should be already contracted and the hairs of the eye raised for the puncture of the eye.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and place the cloth on it until the scar is healed. And then carefully cure that which has become infected within it to be healed.
But if it returns through the pores to its original place and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another cut with the cautery over that area as you had done previously.
But if the pores are in the eyelid, then cauterize that which is raised to its original place and equalized so that the pores do not puncture the skin.
But the cautery should be used as follows: command the patient to open the pores and equalize them, and then make a shape of rolled paper or cloth like a spoon from a mirror.
And then take some hog's lard and live caustic, and mix those causes well, and make that into a paste so that it is not dispersed; and then spread that paste over the paper which is made like a spoon from a mirror, and place that on one side of the eyelid; and place the other side of the eyelid in a soft cloth, and the head of the patient should be elevated.
Pause the medicine over the patient and press it gently onto them until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, which is like a burning sensation.
And if the patient persists in feeling that burning sensation, then remove the medicine and place a cloth on the wound; and when the burning sensation ceases, return the medicine and wash the wound with clean water; and then consider whether the eyelid has already been lifted as it would be from a cut or an incision, because it is ready; and if not, return to the place where the medicine was applied and where it did not penetrate until your operation is equalized and is contrary to the wound.
And then place a compress over the wound and wait until the pus of the abscess is drained, and then cure that area with a poultice or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to keep careful watch during your operation that the medicine does not fall out of the wound, and if the eyelid becomes soft and there is any cause for the hairs in the wound, then repeat your medicine on that spot where the eyelid becomes soft, as you did at the beginning, and continue until it is healed.
This is the form of the herb called mirt.
And you know that the bones of men are varied according to their size and strength, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly.
And do not hide the correct path to those who study this art.
Chapter 17.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the bone.
When you treat a fistula of this kind, do not follow the method we have described in the divisions of diseases, but rather cauterize it in this way: command the patient to place their head on your knee, and hold their head between your hands in such a way that it is neither too tight nor too loose.
And then place a cotton pad soaked in wine or a mixture of wormwood on the bone of their head.
And then ignite the cauterizing instrument, which has this form:
which should be concave, like the form of a spoon or pen knife, at one end of which is made the cautery.
If you see, it should enter into the other end. And if you want to come out with the needle.
But it is better to leave that which is concave as it is, or work according to the art.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and drain out the pus and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and remove the putrid matter from there.
And then place your hand over the cautery which is burning hot, and take away that little cautery from the side of the nose, so that it does not touch your hand or the patient's body, and then place the cautery on the gray matter of the nose and corrupt that.
And if at the beginning of the work, the cautery goes through to the bone, it is well; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, if necessary; and leave that there for three days, and then place your hand over that part which is covered with a dry cloth until it is healed.
If it has been passing through for several days and is not healed, then pause over the sharp, corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and then scrape it according to what is appropriate in its own chapter.
And there is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described as follows: go to the location of the fistula and make a hole in it, and then place your hand on that cavity with a subtle shape; and put in the amount of one drop of plumbum fundut; and hold your hand well for retention, and do not let the patient be burned by the plumbum fundut so that it does not reach the bottom of the fistula; and cover the bottom of the fistula with album of honey or water, which plumbum adheres to and heals the fistula wondrously.
And if the fistula is healed by the method we have mentioned for cauterization and cure, it is good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer a nose douche and reduce the fistula to the nose body when it comes to its own location.
Chapter 18.
On the cautery of the hollow in the foot.
Vesicles often cause tears in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you heal those tears with the cautery we have mentioned in the divisions and do not extend your cure, then ignite the small cautery according to this form that arises:
And the hollow of it is according to the thickness of the spoon.
Then place that needle carefully in those tears until the cautery reaches the point of the tears.
And then heal it with the cautery until it is healed.
Chapter 19.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the uvula or on the palate or on the teeth, an abscess occurs and you apply a poultice, and it bursts, and it becomes old, and boil and it forms a fistula, and then you heal it and do not extend your cure, then you should ignite the cautery according to the amount that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited in the mouth, and your hand into the throat until the hot iron reaches the front of it, and at the back of it make a blister or two; and then heal it with the cautery we have mentioned for the cure until it is healed.
And if the bone is fractured and healed, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary to discover the location and treat the broken bone as it appears in its chapter.
Chapter 20.
Of the cautery of teeth and the softening of gums.
When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth are decayed, and those remedies do not cure them, then place the patient's head in your lap, and shape the cauterizing instrument according to its form, which will be used, and hold it slightly above the tooth and insert it into that place while the patient feels the heat of the fire at the tip of the tooth until the remedy is absorbed.
And then lift your hand, and repeat the cauterizing instrument several times as you wish.
And then the patient closes their mouth with salt water and holds it for an hour, and this can be done because the decayed tooth is closed, the softened gums are strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried up.
Chapter 21.
Of cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or if there is frost or worms in it, and the cure cannot be done with medicine, then cautery is used in two ways: with a heifer's horn or with fire.
Cautery with a heifer's horn is to take a horn of a cow and blow into it, and then take a cotton cloth and wrap it around the end of the tent, and then insert the horn blown into the tooth that hurts quickly before it freezes.
And then repeat that several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you see, immerse wool or cotton in the horn above that, and place that on the hurting tooth, and place that on the burning iron until the iron reaches the beginning of the cavity of the tooth.
But cautery with fire is to wait until the candle or iron is ready, and if there is any impurity in it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, and place that over the tooth and your hand inside to prevent the cautery from being broken; and do some movements so that the pain remains or on that day or on another day.
And cover that the patient opens his own mouth with good border and holds that for an hour and then remove it; this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize as you wish your extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the shape of the cannula:
Chapter 22.
Of cauterization of extremities.
When the extremities are weak and affected by humors and not obedient to digestion due to medicines and you wish to make them obey again, then approach the cautery with the shape it will have, having two extremities ready so that the smoke of the cautery can be applied to the other extremity, and place that ignited over that abscess a movement, and if necessary of that, until it reaches the center of the abscess.
If the abscess is small, then pause the cauterization according to the amount of the abscess, and leave it for three days and place it on the side in a bandage soaked in boiling water until it has been completely burned by the fire.
And then care for that wound and dress it with bandages until it is healed.
Chapter 23.
Of the cauterization of warts on the feet and the contraction of hares.
When moisture comes onto the surface of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by complications, then it is necessary to evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medications, and then cauterize that place on the location where the lung is compressed.
And be careful not to touch the cauterization on the lung or burn the lining of the lung, but a little.
And cauterize that place with another pointed cautery at the joint of the neck on the back spine of the lung. The pointed cautery should be held in the same way as before.
Then, take care of that thing which was previously put inside until it is healed.
Chapter 24
Of the cautery for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moist humors, and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis, but rather an old illness, then cautery is applied to that thing with two cauteries on the furcula in the places where the ribs meet the sternum; and another cautery in the middle of the chest between two nipples; and the pointed cautery should be held as before.
And if you want, your cautery should be pointed with the cauteries called puncta, in the form that was previously described in the punctation of heel pain.
And insert the points into those; and then take care of that thing which was previously put inside until it is healed.
And if the cautery has three points, which is common for cauterization, you can make three cauteries in this way:
Chapter 25
About the cauterization of the nipples, which is a helpful remedy.
When the location of the remedy is displaced due to excessive lubrication and cannot be stopped at its return time, it should be returned before it returns to that usual position, and with a small movement it can be moved as we have proven, therefore first reduce the displacement, and then turn the patient on their back or on their side; and raise the chin, which is in the part of the nipple to the parts above and below.
And if the cautery has two points, this is the form of it:
And if you cauterize the chin before it enters the other side; and then the figure of cauterization will be as follows from four cauteries.
Some cauteries are adjusted according to this count and because they are eight in number.
Then place your hand over the cauterized area and help the patient to relax, and the member should not be discomforted for any time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is at the parts above and below, then make that, and if the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed, and the patient is healed.
Chapter 26.
Of the cauterization of the stomach.
When there is cold and moisture in the stomach that comes out of its composition and multiplies in it, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not confirm it, then cover the patient with two blankets, and extend his arms and things, and then cauterize that with three cauteries: one cauterized on the chest for the amount of one cauterized clavilh, and two cauterized on the sides of the cauteri, forming a triangular figure; and lengthen those that are not adjusted to make them equal.
And if the depth of the cautery corresponds to the thickness of the two skin folds of the neck's crease.
And if the shape of the cautery is like this, then add it. And if you want to cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this is a cautery in the form of a circle according to this form:
And if the stomach is cauterized at the point where this cautery frightens, then place your hand over the stomach according to the amount you want to test, and then cauterize that point with this cautery; and then care for that point with the healing that precedes it until it is healed.
Chapter 27
Of the cauterization of the throat.
When there is pain in the throat due to cold or moisture or heavy breathing before the normal complexity of its condition is disrupted by excessive exit, then place the patient on his back, and do not compare it with what we have said, but rather place three cautery points according to this form and this amount between the shoulders, which is the position of a man.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the greatest width of the said, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
Do not touch the patient with the cautery.
And if the amount of water that is adhered to the quantity of the upper part of the spine is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on his feet, then lift the lower parts of the body and raise the arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a pointed cautery, when you have subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and let the spine be adhered to the whole body so that it can reach into the intestines, as the spine here is thin; and know this.
Chapter 28.
Of piercing of abscess in the foot with a pointed cautery.
When the swelling or abscess in the thigh occurs and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the thigh or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the thigh, the patient's weight and pain are increased.
And if it is in the tunic of the thigh, then the pain is often severe and has exhausted many doctors with its treatment.
Therefore, turn the patient on their side; and then examine the location of the abscess, and then use a cautery that is shaped like a hook, the form of which was previously described on the other page. And then cauterize that and cautery until the entire wound is closed, until it reaches the bone, until it heals.
And then treat that until it is cured, like the treatment of other abscesses until it is healed.
And do not use this form of cautery except for the one that is prolonged in the art of medicine, and in which more bad outcomes have been known; but this has tried some time ago on this operation, however it is better to leave it alone and it is less harmful.
Chapter 29.
On the cauterization of gout.
The ancient cauteries of the joints according to astrology are second to this method, and this is the one you should use from the long dry stick that is found, and it should be as thick as possible.
And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuity of the shoulder blade and the collarbone; and with two small cauteries placed next to each other, one declining slightly towards the part where the beard was located, and with two cauteries in that area which are declining between the fifth rib and the diaphragm, declining slightly towards the back parts; and with another cautery at the middle of the chest; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with another cautery in that location which is between the two shoulder blades, and with two cauteries on the sides of the chest, next to the cautery that is between the two shoulder blades.
And do not hold your hand near the pointed cautery, but rather in the palm of your hand.
And it has been said that ancient healers used pointed cauteries similar to fire and iron, and they placed them in the location between the ribs, until they reached the pustule and removed the bad blood, as we have mentioned in the pustule of the finger.
In this perforation, the pointed cautery should not be used, as it has often caused harm in the location of the fistula that does not heal.
Chapter 30.
Of the cauterization of the tongue.
When you treat the disease of the tongue with what we have said about treatment in the division and do not compare your treatment, then cauterize it in three ways, all of which are correct, one of which is to make three or four cauterizations along the length of the tongue according to the figure of the cauteries of the finger, whose figure has been mentioned.
And each cautery should have the width of a finger or slightly more, and the handle of the cautery should be the same handle as in the finger cautery equally.
And do not place your hand on the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two flames, which causes the phenomenon we have mentioned in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the ligament that is at the end of the tendon, which holds the joint of the patient's left leg.
And your elevation should be the one that lifts the ligament according to the length of the body, so that the points can be made at the appropriate latitude.
And then introduce the two flames, light one, in the moment when those penetrate the ligament of the other part.
And then extract the cautery; and thus four points have been made.
If you see, cauterize with the cautery having three flames.
And then you should cure the pointed cautery that has been left in for too many days, as it is more likely to cause complications than the other previous causes of treatment.
Chapter 31.
Of the cauterization of hydrocele.
Cauteries are not used in hydrocele but in the scrotum itself.
When you are treating hydrocele, follow the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and do not compare your treatment with theirs, but rather use four cauteries around the umbilicus, one cauterizing over the stomach, another over the chest, another over the belly, and another two between the ribs on the back, and one cauterizing in the right side of the chest, and another over the stomach. And the depth of the cauterization should be proportional to the size of the wound.
And then leave the cauteries in place for as long as possible.
And do not cure the patient too quickly with that pointed cautery which heals by causing the two opposite forces to be united to him, and it should be applied gradually with help from the healing process.
The shape of the pointed cautery that is cauterized on the abdomen should be like a clavichord according to the form mentioned above, and the one that is cauterized on the two sides should be like an olive according to its previous form.
Chapter 32.
Of cauterization of the feet and thighs.
When the feet are filled with water and sitrina, it is said that you should cauterize the feet on the inside of the ankle, between the ear and the annular bone, and raise your hand above the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand again, and do not return to that position, because the sitrina water will evaporate.
And the cautery should be shaped like this: And then make two cautery points on each thigh, and in each thigh, make a cautery at the end of the cautery blade. And the cautery should be of the length of the cushion: and the first one on the top, the other at the bottom of the cushion; and over each cushion two cautery points.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some of its pus can drain from it.
Then take care of those causes that we have said.
Chapter 33.
Of the cauterization of womb.
When the womb is affected by cold and humidity that enter through weaknesses, then the digestive and retentive virtues are lost, which are in the stomach and intestines, and these are cured with those methods of treatment and not confined, and sometimes the patient suffers from cauterization of virtue showing, therefore cauterize that with a large cauterization on their stomach according to what was previously done in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cauterization of the circle and with four cauterizations around the subtle umbilicus, with the subtle clavilh cauterization; and with the cauterization over the alcatin on aloes large, or with two cauterizations.
If you see the excessive humidity and the patient is tolerating it, then cauterize that above the perineum and on the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the groins, as this cure significantly improves the condition.
Chapter 34.
On the cauterization of ancient ulcers.
When there are ulcers in their nature or one of thick humors that have been infiltrated, and they are cured by the method we have mentioned in the division, do not compare it to the other cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the belly button and two on the abdomen.
And if it is decided that the stomach of the patient is infiltrated and the food of the patient is not digested, and the face of the patient is swollen, then cauterize that above the stomach with a large cauteri as mentioned earlier; and with one cauteri on the forehead, and with another cauteri on the cheek of the patient with a clavilh, and leave the cauteri for some time under, and cure the patient inside before they are healed.
Chapter 35
Regarding the cauterization of the kidneys near their abscesses.
When you remove the kidneys, use a cautery that resembles a ray. Then place that burning cautery in the removed kidney, and wait until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, if they are too much, then cauterize each one after you have returned them, and care for those who receive that which is given to them from the tinctures until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on anything, it is better to use it sparingly.
Chapter 36
Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in nature between their parts.
When nature does not comply with the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by that, then heal with cauterization.
When there is an old fistula in the natural back, and it is filled with pus and corrupt humors, then that which is pushed through it should be thin and subtle, and you should know the depth of it from the front.
Then use a cautery that resembles a ray. And then put that cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you inserted the tent.
And repeat over that with the cautery until those corrupted bodies are burned away in one or two or three days, according to your need.
And be careful of the burning of nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the core of the bladder or the core of the intestine, then be careful of all those places; and do not do that unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then heal the place where it was cured.
And if the place is sealed, and the matters are removed from it, and they remain there for a long time, then you will know that it is completely cured.
If the materials are not from that place, then know that it is penetrating or corrupting the bones, or that is one of those causes from which remembrance will come in its location.
Chapter 37:
On the cauterization of the ears.
When there is pain in the ears from cold or from thick wind, and the patient's mouth is closed, then cautiously apply a pointed cautery to each ear, using a sharp needle for cauterization.
And if you cauterize too much, then wait a short time before applying the second one, so that three lines of cauterization will come, and they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter 38:
On the cauterization of the bladder.
When an injury occurs in the bladder due to cold and moisture, and the patient cannot hold urine, then apply a pointed cautery to the middle part of the bladder, using the needle as if it were a pen, and cauterize with one pointed cautery in the center and another on the side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the thickness of the foot; and cauterize that pointed cautery on the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use the hammer according to what is appropriate.
Chapter 39.
Of cauterization of the groin.
When there is a bruise and moisture in the groin, and it is forbidden to press on it, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and they suffer from pain due to their presence, then it is recommended that this area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a pointed cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries, and use the hammer.
Chapter 40.
Of cauterization of the dislocation of the elbow.
When moisture accumulates in the joint of the elbow, and it is caused by the inflammation of its area, and it is stretched out over the other when they are compared with each other. And the location of the dislocation is in the place where it hurts.
Then apply the pointed cautery to the part of the body where it hurts, similar to how you would use a tent in the circumference of the part, and so that the part falls into the middle of the circle.
And let the pointed cautery be in the form of the stomach cautery.
And if this pointed cautery is not available to you, then use three pointed cautery tools made of large olive wood.
And let the cautery be done according to the thickness of the entire wound; and take care of it until it is healed.
Chapter 41.
Of the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the part of the body, and its cause is that it is wet and humid, the patient is cured with what we have said before, and does not compare it, which is antiquated. Then cover the patient with cloths soaked in heavy humors, either with foul-smelling or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize that.
And the cautery in that case has two handles: one for medical use and one for fire.
When the second handle is used, it is one that cauterizes that part of the ankle with three triangular points in this form; and make them deep enough. And the space between each cautery is the thickness of the same and if the cautery is olive oil or large.
Sometimes several crevices are made on the head of the ankle so that there are four cautery points.
And if you want to, cauterize with the circle that precedes the form in the treatment of ankle dislocation, and let it contain and burn the entire tendon.
This is the method of cautery in such cases when pain adheres to the ankle and does not extend into the space.
If it extends into the space, then cauterize that part with two cautery points on the space over the area where the patient feels the pain; and one cautery on the calf for four days on the left side.
And if the pointed cautery, and the depth of the cautery according to the thickness of the nail.
And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading to the area around the foot, then cauterize that area with three or four points or more if necessary.
And if the patient complains that the pain is behind the foot on the cushion, then cauterize that area with a pointed cautery.
And be careful during cauterization that the cautery does not burn the nerves or cause great swelling, and that for that reason it causes pain to the patient.
And I have seen many of those who cauterize on the scalp and burn in the cauterization, and the bed on fire inflated before the swelling is achieved, and fire pierces and corrupts the entire foot. And then apply a strong solution of vinegar, and then that death.
And if the pain is in two parts together, then cauterize each one in this manner.
And the wise men in the cauterization of any cautery say: make it similar to a circle of iron, the circumference of which is the width of one palm; and its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or about a few centimeters.
And let that circle be another third; and let the spaces between them be equal to the width of your little finger; and those circles should be placed in two parts; and let the length of those iron strips be one or two fingers, and make them evenly arranged in the circles; and this is the shape of it:
Then let it be heated in the fire until it begins to curl and sparkle, and then place it on the surface of the affected area, the patient lying on their back. And then cauterize it with three cautery irons in a row.
And then leave it for three days; and then apply a poultice to that area and cover the wound for several days; and then care for that area with ointment until it is healed.
Oh, my sons, we have not used this kind of cautery for this part because of the fear of its appearance, and because we have found some that seem to be over it.
The best cautery for this part is the one that has caused less suffering in it.
The best cautery is the one that you make by making two circles with a needle-perforated skin in which the tongue of the iron door is placed; its length should be equal to the width of their nose, those two nuts or those.
And if the space between them is equal to the thickness of the said part; and it is placed under and over, and it contains something between them in this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the patient's body where they are lying, and take some water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like a small fire, and you should do that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient from biting and adhesion of it â€” because that biting is like from fire â€” until the biting stops.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove all the water from the back of the water bottle.
And then leave it for three days and place it over the edge where the black spot of the abscess remains, and leave it there for several days, and then drain it; this is considered a remedy.
And then care for that with water until it is healed.
And if the pain extends into the thigh or chest, make it in the same way as the water bottle is made.
And this is the method of the water bottle, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and unextinguished fire from the ashes of one part, and distill it in a new oil bath of which the old one has been perforated by a small tube according to the amount that enters into it.
And place the bottom of the oil bath in another distilled oil bath, and boil over that alkali and live fire from two drops of water which takes those by a certain amount, and put it on your hand for good compression, and leave the oil bath that issues from the ashes into the distilled oil bath.
And then adjust all of that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkali, because that water is very strong and is administered in certain medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, because that operation is like fire.
And some of the medicines that are cauterized with them, such as thistle and honey, are mixed with something that is not known.
And Guillaume reported from an ancient man about the operation and cure that is cured pain in the water and sciatica vein, and magnified much of that, and said that no other cure was needed, and because it is healed by a method such as recommendation, because very soon after that, he knew that of that.
And it should be near certain fresh herbs, and if not fresh herbs, then take recent fig leaves; and the powder should be made from a small amount of gray and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the cushion, or on the bed, and let it lie.
And leave it for the amount of three hours or for as long as the patient can bear the discomfort.
And then place that on the floor and when the body of the patient is coiled, insert that into the ground, where the pain ceases and it is healed.
And know that no one should use this cautery for these medicines, but rather the evacuation of the body.
May it be known that when a goat's wound is made in the vein that stretches, it should be cauterized with a lancet; and the cautery is made like this: take wool and dip it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and between the heel.
And then take a dry wound of a goat and apply it to that with fire until it is made into charcoal; and place it on the wool and leave it until it is stretched. And then repeat that, and do not stop doing that until the sensation of the biting pain reaches the whole body and the pain is relieved.
This method of cauterization is called a cattle cauterizer.
Chapter 42.
Of the cauterization of pain in two.
Sometimes pain in the legs is caused by various reasons, such as pressure or impact or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, by the infusion of wet and damp matter.
And cauterization is not used in this single species, which is made by the outflow of damp matter.
Therefore, after evacuation of the patient's body, apply fetid and similar pills to them, which are made on both legs in which the pain is three lines wide, more than that, according to the amount of tolerance of the patient and the effectiveness of it.
And this cauterization is made with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries or with the middle clavilh in this form:
Chapter 43.
On cautery at the beginning of gout.
Children are affected by this disease at a young age; and it is customarily said that it occurs on their structure in the spring, with elevation and movement.
And often at the lower back and on the neck of the patient, where it begins to overcome the other spondils.
And when you see that and want to prevent it, then do so with this pointed cautery that is circular according to this form: which grasps the cautery over all part of the spine equally.
And if you want, cautery in the circle of the spine with the pointed cautery two or three lines. And the points are placed between them.
And then cure the place until it is healed by what we have said.
Be careful that cautery is not administered in gout that is caused by spasms of the nerves.
Chapter 44
Of the cautery for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And if gout is cured by the method of treatment and the pain does not subside, then use the cautery again.
And you should apply the cautery to that area of the joint near the foot with a pointed cautery.
And this is the shape of the cautery made from olive wood:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain spreads to other joints, and that does not subside, then use the cautery on each knuckle with three or four points from each part of this olive wood cautery.
If you need to use other types of cautery that are necessary for this purpose, then apply them to the affected area, but do not press your hand too hard on the cautery before, only around the tip of the cautery.
If the pain extends to the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery mentioned in the previous chapter.
If the pain is only in the testicles and is called epididymitis, then make points around the base of the penis as it twists, make points on those two lines.
If the pain remains in the mentioned area, then make points around the base of each testicle and on the scrotum of the hand.
If the pain extends to other joints or muscles, then apply cautery to all parts of the helpers.
And do not discharge the patient from good care and reception of medicines, as if good care is given and feces are evacuated, this cautery will heal, God help.
Chapter 45
On the cauterization of wounds.
When the wound is in the groin and the intestines are protruding through the abdominal wall, and if it is approached too quickly, then order the patient to lie on their side and use gentle caresses to prevent the intestine from coming out.
And then follow the patient's hand between their thighs and command them to hold it in place while the cauterization is being done or the intestine appears through the abdominal wall.
And then return the patient's hand to their side and carefully try to repair the rupture on the opposite side of the abdominal wall, making it similar to a circle at the upper part of the body.
And then remove the cauterizer in the following shape:
while holding it with both hands and apply pressure. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
And place your hand with the cauterizing instrument at the correct angle, and insert the cautery into the patient's penis through the middle of the glans; and repeat that other movement if you have not succeeded in the first movement in the penis.
Observe the position of the intestine during your cauterization, so as not to burn it, as that could cause death or other great harm to the patient.
And know that when you have the cautery, do not press the bones, and do not complete your operation.
And know that the cautery for children should be thin according to their size and age.
And care for the location of the cautery for three days until the scab from the fire has healed.
And then carefully cure those other wounds before they become infected.
The patient should remain on their back for 40 days until the wound is sealed and the infection has passed.
And cover the food that you give to the patient according to the length of time of their treatment, which should be placed on their belly, and prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And when it is time to get up after 40 days, then administer appropriate medication, and keep that for another 40 days.
And be careful of hard work, eating, drinking, and violent movements, because when using this regimen of healing, the entire body will be healed.
And if you direct the cure of the ruptures in other parts of the body, and at the beginning, and you want them not to regrow, then cauterize the rupture with a red-hot iron according to the amount of it, and that which is extracted from the codena should be like the clean part of it; and then cure that which we have said, and do not adjust it.
And then the first doctor said that the rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery of this form, rather than with a needle.
And another line is placed on the side opposite the rupture, and another line above; and your hand holds a clavilh cautery, but the first cautery is thinner and better.
Chapter 46.
Of the cauterization of torticollis.
When pain occurs in other members due to blows or impact, and persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, it is customarily called torticollis and should be cauterized with a pointed cautery.
And the size and shape of the cautery should be according to the magnitude and duration of the member, its virtue and development, and the location of the torticollis and pain of the member.
If it is healed by the first cautery, then it is good; otherwise, repeat the process on that member; because of the custom of those pains, they are points in the member that approach the other member, so that you can obtain them with the cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter 47.
About the cautery for leprosy.
Some lepers are sometimes cauterized with a pointed cautery for great relief, and if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of the muscles and melancholy.
Therefore, when you want to cauterize that one, consider whether the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured with the method we have mentioned in the division and do not give, and be careful about the patient that the corruption comprehends all of his body and all of his appearance, then cauterize that one on the head as follows: with a point in the middle of the head, and with the second point behind it, turning the face to the end of the hair; and with others on two ears; and with another behind, on the back or nape.
And finally, your hand should be placed inside the bone a little before the first prick, and from there the scars are displaced, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated from it; and cauterize on the flesh according to what is necessary.
If the leprosy has already spread over the patient and is clearly visible, then you should cauterize those parts with the cautery we have mentioned in the chapter; and cauterize over the tip of the nose, and two cautery on both cheeks, and two on both collarbones, and two on the spine, and one large one near the spine, and one on the back, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of the patient's feet; and cauterize all the joints of the mentioned limbs and feet, and on each toe of their feet, and on the soles of their feet.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the sole of the foot, do not burn those.
Some wounds are cauterized with one cautery on the teeth of the lower jaw and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the cheek.
And you will know that the more you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and you will know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as with the other parts, so that the body of the patient has already been stupefied.
And you should know that the cautery sizes are large or small according to the members and joints as indicated by the tools of the specialties.
And then cure the cautery with flour mixed with honey and the other remedies until it is healed.
Chapter 48.
Of cautery for stupor.
When a member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and poultices, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numb member with a cautery according to the size of the member or its part.
And the cautery should enter the skin just a little. And then cure it with the other remedies until it is healed.
And sometimes the veins in the arms are cauterized to alleviate pain in the hands and feet, and the spine of the back and the muscles that move that member, and it is remembered the cure.
But do not cauterize that one unless it is known from the anatomy of the member and the exit of all the nerves that move the body.
Chapter 49.
About the cauterization of a wound that is infected.
When a wound is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a pointed cautery in a small amount according to the quantity of the species of the codeine until it is remembered the whiteness and the color of the wound, and the color of the wound is changed.
And then apply a poultice made of flour and lentils with rose oil and leaves of arnagle, and of goose or duck feathers, each one is a part and all are mixed, and then apply a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Chapter 1.
On the cauterization of the neck.
When a tumor begins to grow and you want to cut it out, then cauterize that round cautery in its circle around it as it is turned.
And they say that it should be cauterized with the other cautery in the middle place; but I have not seen that, because I fear that it will become an ulcer, and I have already seen that sometimes.
And it is better to be cauterized in its circle around it as we have said, or with a pointed cautery.
Chapter 10.
On the cauterization of the adventitia.
When some adventitia is late in maturation, and it is because of excess or because of the patient's age, which is old and weak, or because of time, and you want to speed up its maturation; then cauterize around it with a pointed cautery, and place a plaster on it to speed up its maturation.
If you want to make a puncture with the pointed cautery, then hold it like this: and pause it in the middle of your finger where the needle enters.
And if the cautery is left in that place where it has been placed, so that the body of the arm can be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 52
About the cauterization of corrosive substances.
Corrosive substances are corrupting agents that move in the body, which corrodes those who have it like fire eating dry wood.
Therefore, if you see that corrosive substance in the place where it is suffering from fire cautery, then hold it with a few small clavils and large ones according to what is appropriate in the place where it is corrupting.
And then cauterize it from all parts until you eliminate all the corruption and there is no cause left of it.
And then let it rest for three days, and place on the cauterized places some mixed oil inside until all the scars are gone and all the corruption is eliminated.
And then carefully remove those pus-filled abscesses.
If after three days the flesh has grown healthy where there is no corruption, it is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on that which remains in the corrupted areas.
And if some acute medical remedies are available, it is better to use them instead of a cautery. However, the cautery of fire is more useful for purging pus.
And I have already told the cure of it with acute medical remedies in the division, and so take that which will be needed from it.
Chapter 44
Of cauterization of clots and other similar things.
Clots that are attached to the parts of the foot after the illness that is called gout, which causes great pain and swelling in the foot; and cautery is used in those places in two ways, either by fire or by a pointed cautery.
However, the cautery of fire is that you ignite the pointed cautery in a similar way to a pen with a quill, which should be made of iron according to the amount that contains the clot from all parts, and also of thin metal.
And then place that fire above the nail, and rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave it for three days until it starts to move. And then apply that poultice made from wild marjoram leaves mixed with salt, and leave it on for one hour until the pain is eliminated from its roots.
And then heal the wound with fresh meat juice until it is healed.
If it does not convert, and if there are wounds on the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then you should administer in those cautery with water, and take a syringe of iron or iron pen, and place that on the nail; and then slowly inject a small amount of water into the syringe, and rotate your hand with the compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the syringe at the root of the nail, and find the water cauda reaching the base of the nail; and wait for the patient one hour for the bite of the water cauda, and then remove that, because the nail has its roots healed.
And if they were to come over all of them, it would be necessary to bring the other one in as well.
And then care for those who have been bitten by the teeth of dogs, which cause the flesh to rot.
Chapter 45
Of the cautery for trembling.
When someone has trembling due to a fracture in the nerves or fever caused by an illness, or for some similar reason, it is customary to cauterize with four cautery irons or one hot one on the spinal bones of the back, between each spine put one cautery; and on their chest, and over their stomach, place an olive oil cautery.
And the trembling of the patient stops and the healing of the illness is accelerated.
Chapter 51
Of the cautery for accidents to the body.
When there are abscesses in the body, and they cause wounds that are made of thick, corrupt matter; then at the beginning, as it appears, it is customary to cauterize over all of the pustule with a thin cautery iron, the end of which is extended to the fire; or with a long needle of iron; or with a round cautery.
And sometimes, during the beginning of their explusion according to this method; and not believing in it, they disrupt the excessive practices done by those, and cure them of those.
But first, you should perform evacuation with a trocar.
Chapter 66.
Of the cauterization of flesh wounds caused by stabbing with a dagger.
Many people are stabbed with daggers in the area that causes deformed scars, or in the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similarly, it is difficult to remain the same.
Therefore, when such accidents happen to anyone, you should immediately place your hand on the wound of the dagger, and press over that spot where the newly wounded people enter that flux of blood from the wound before it comes out.
And then place the burning oil and large ones, by many names, and blow on those until they are extinguished.
And then approach the second location and the affected area where the artery is torn, over that vein quickly enough so that it doesn't bleed again, and insert the cautery into it and restrict that wound.
And if the wound is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove the cautery and extend it, then take another cautery consistently from the cauteries that are prepared in the fire, and do not cease to do so until the wound is restricted.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that another evil comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the wound in those cases, and especially when the artery is large, then one of four ways: either with a cautery as mentioned above, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when the extremities are burned, the wound is restricted and the blood flows; or it should be tied with a strong thread or a bandage for its strength, or it should be placed on medicines of which the virtue is to restrict the wound; and they should be strengthened with a cushion or a constriction device.
May the one who administers a proper restriction of fire and air, and a tight structure of cloth or by positioning causes and similar, not comfort but rather torture.
May that one who has this and is not the doctor or medicine, open the indicated pause on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand the great cost of entering that part of the plague, and over the archer it should not remain; and over the archer, aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat until that sanctum is congealed and swollen; and may it be covered in what is necessary for cauterization or medicine.
Of incision and perforation and bleeding and of phlebotomy and of plagues and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter that all maladies in which cauterization with fire and medicine is convenient, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in which they are necessary, and the forms of the cauteries; and we have ordered the chapters of the subranean part from the head to the feet.
I will proceed in this chapter for that method, so that it may be helpful to those who seek that, regarding what has been asked about it.
And since I have begun that, child, you should know that in this chapter is contained what was written in the first chapter of cauterization.
And for that which is in this chapter, child, you should know that in the operation which is in this chapter, the removal of pus is done with great caution, and it is done by aspiration of the vein or incision on the abscess or extraction of the cause of the plague or excision of a stone and its like. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the worst of them is death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is uncertainty, because some operations require the hands of men, which are not suitable for unhealthy people. And some of them will lead you to your unhealthy condition and will be death for you, and you will suffer from the violence of that which comes from your unhealthy condition, and from the long duration of that unhealthy condition, and because of that fear, which means death.
And of those who give you such advice, you should listen to them and hope for their healing, as their illness is dangerous.
And therefore do not accept anything from someone who approaches you in this way; your caution should be greater than your gullibility, and do not presume any cause without first obtaining certain scientific evidence that verifies this for you, and to which successful results are attributed.
And use in the treatment of all your diseases the prediction and indication of which is converted to healing, for in that case you are helped by acquisition of fame and memory, of praise and glory.
O, children, may God grant you his understanding and not lead you astray and protect you, for that is in his hand.
And you have ordered this chapter to be distinguished by chapters following the second chapter on cauteries, of the cure of the head between the feet, so that it may be helpful to you in what is asked of you and for which you have a need.
First chapter.
About the cure of gout, which is contained in the heads of children.
You should know that this disease is caused in children by the womb and when the newborn's head is born, it becomes inflamed.
And some are caused by an unknown cause.
I have never seen this disease except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, it was accompanied by death, and for this reason, I have left work in those.
And I have seen that a child's head whose head was completely full of gout, and the head of which was always magnificent until it could not be met with the greatness of its own head, and more than the humidity increased until the fire died.
And this humidity is added between the bones and the cartilage, or it is added behind the bone on the socket.
If the humidity is between the cartilage and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should cut in the middle of the child's head through a fissure in the latitude, and the length of the fissure should be two nights until the humidity runs out, and this is the shape of the spoon:
And if the humidity is increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is below the bone, then you should expose all the corners of the head and pour water into them when you understand that the wound is clean and not to your liking. So that you make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
And remove all the moisture from the incision; and apply strength to the incisions with cloth and feathers; and apply hot water over it for five days, and remove the scab and cure the wound with tests and ointments, and strengthen the head to equality; and feed the patient with dry food with little moisture until the member is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of water, where some times it is in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and then pay attention to the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do what is best possible.
And observe that you do not sever the artery and engage in bloodletting, as this may cause the patient to become weak and die due to loss of fluid.
Chapter 2.
When a catarrh or rash occurs on the thighs or chest, and this is treated, and it is not cured by medication, then this cure is achieved by incising those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those arteries that are located at the top of the head, and the location is wiped with a rough cloth so that the veins appear, and the collar of the patient is strengthened with a cloth; and consider where the vein is placed; and the locations of each one on the locations that are close to the temples, and they are only visible in some people.
And therefore, when you want to pierce the vein, and incise each one at the tip of each part, entering into the bone, and this is done by the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula under the artery and squeeze it onto the parts above.
And if the length of the incision is too short, then when a vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating beat, which should be stopped frequently.
But if the arch does not appear at the edge, then measure the amount of gold from the aureola that is equal to three fingers, and then insert it, and penetrate into the bone.
And that which is taken from the blood is an amount of one uncia, and if it is not strong enough to move more or less, then all of this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the replacement of the arch of the bone.
And then consider the cause, and if there is any reason for the phimosis, then incise it in order to prevent abscess formation.
And then apply the cause with plasters and bandages of linen, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 3.
On the extraction of stones that are in the temples.
When an ancient or new injury occurs, due to humoral imbalances and the quality of the tendons in the temples, or due to vehement old age and similar conditions, and it is treated with methods of healing in medicine and does not improve, we have shown in these ailments extraction of stones from the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
The method of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises his fingers; and understands the stone that is in the temple where it is shown by its side, and it is hidden only in a few people due to vehemence of the fracture.
And if it is hidden, then the neck of the patient should be strengthened with some cloth; and then fracture the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the stone appears to you clearly. And here is the form of the spatula that you will take: And then approach the catheter that is inside you with ease until you reach the urethra; and then insert it into the opening and extract any excess urine from the surroundings until you remove the catheter from the urethra and discover the opening of the tunics which are left there, from all parts.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the catheter at its tip, and then incise one part according to the quantity by which the ends of it were stretched and contracted, and do not let any blood flow out, because if it is not incised, the blood will not be able to flow out at all.
And then evacuate about one unit of blood within three.
And if the urethra is large, then fold it in two places with strong double thread or cord at its length, and do not leave it to putrefaction during the consolidation of the wound and let blood flow out.
And then, approach the excess skin that is between two folds; and do this at that hour or another time.
And if you want, cauterize that pointed cautery into the bone, and it will stay in place of that metatarsal work.
And it is better work if the patient has fever or is in a scalded condition; because cautery is of those causes that help to end the moisture, and therefore it is better in healing.
And cover the extraction of the ribs that have collapsed in the old wound, and place them on the cleanly made powders, and then apply dry medicines to heal the flesh and wet dressings until it is healed.
And while you work another venture until the end of the discharge of pus from the rib, then you should tighten that pus, or the cautery, or what fills the wound, and strengthen your hand until it is tightened the pus. If for any reason you cannot perform that action, then pause your hand over the location where the swelling is congealed, and apply cold water to the area with great freezing intensity until the inflammation subsides, and strengthen it according to the comfort of the patient.
And this is more suitable for extracting arrows from the body, as you cauterize the vein with this cauterizer having two points, since you have properly located both locations and paused where necessary, until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that the part between the extremities of the arrow is not completely solidified by this cauterizer.
And this is the shape of the cauterizer:
And the sharpness of the two points should be exemplary. However, if the sharpness of two points is not exemplary, then it is better to use one pointed tool, because if the points are too sharp, they may pierce the flesh at high speed and cause damage.
Therefore, when there is some swelling in those places, apply heat to them and the flesh is removed more easily.
And this work is better than all works and more useful.
And the space between two wounds, the amount of swelling in the said.
Chapter Fourth.
Of the cure of bodies with sharp and acidic ulcers on the skin.
When the acidic ulcers are on the body and the skin over the crown of the head, and there is no cause for the cure of medicine in that area, and the face of the patient becomes wrinkled and feels pain in their forehead as if they were walking ants, and the wounds of that person are extended, humid and not covered with fur, and the scales on their skin are scratched by the acidity of their tears, the ancient remedies in the cure of those of this operation, and name that cure am spassa.
And you command the patient to raise their arms, which are on their chest, and then insert three equal fissures along the length of the chest. And if the length of the fissure is two times: the first fissure should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the chest, and the second along the length of a little movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other side.
And guard yourself from the beginning of the arches which are in two layers, and extend your hand from the continuation of the other jaws. And if the space of each insertion is three times the quantity, adjust it accordingly.
And if you have a sponge or dry cloth at hand, use it to absorb the blood.
And then place the blunt end of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the insertion of it: which is from the part of the temples into the second insertion. Excise the entire tendon that is between two incisions on the bone, and then move it from one incision to the second incision. And then place your foot in this space and insert the first instrument, which is called a chisel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that instrument on the flesh attached to the tendon, and the dull side on the bone, and push it until it reaches the incision, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Make sure that the incision continues at this point on the tendon, and then move it into the second incision.
And when an equal amount has been moved, express the places of the tendons that are swollen with a congealed substance.
And then place a piece of old cloth on each incision, and place the powders that are used to treat wounds and heal them quickly, and make sure they do not become an abscess.
And on the third day, you should remove the bandage and administer a large amount of warm water or tea, and then care for that area with a basilicon cream or rose oil and other ointments until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
About the cure of gout and its descents from the parts derived from the head.
When any person has frequent attacks of gout and its descents, and sometimes the wounds of the patient become small, and their eyes are weakened, and they have ulcers on their eyelids, and in the front of the head there is sharp pain and extreme weakness, then you should know that these accidents occur because the matters and gout come only from the veins derived from the parts of the head.
And the best cure for these is this: you should order the patient to raise their head, and then insert a small incision at the middle of the forehead, a little to the left (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and it should be incised through the bone; and extend your hand through the temples which are moist due to mastication), until the bone is exposed.
Dry the entire wound with a dry cloth or dry cloths and then fill between the two labia of the old man's crotch or with the cloths. Then apply powder and oil to prevent suppuration.
And when you remove that and see that the abscess has begun to decrease, then apply honey that flows from the nose of the flesh, and use that drying regimen which is made from wheat flour two parts and collofania four parts and mix it, and from there make a poultice and administer it to these wounds as if you were taking it from the native flesh.
Chapter VI.
Of the treatment of that which is in the ears.
All the causes that are in the ears are one of four species, either it is a mineral stone or a cause similar to a stone, such as iron and copper, or it is a plant cause, such as beans, or it is a fluid cause, such as water and vinegar and other similar things, or some animal.
And when the pain in the ear or another similar cause to those causes that do not adjust or believe in the ear, and pause the ear to the sunlight, and if you see the pain, then distill some oil of garlic or wormwood into that cause, and administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing condition, and open the nose for the event of sneezing. And then place some cloths or wool around the ear at certain parts, and extend the ear to the parts above, which are often forgotten in these causes.
And if it is not forgotten, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called the epicicloic subtle gastroscope, which has this form:
And if it is forgotten with the instrument, then good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the small double needle.
And if it is not forgotten by that, then make a needle of aram and insert the end of the needle into the ear tract and close around the needle with wax and softened oil so that it is not pushed out except the needle. And then carefully extract the sharp thorn that has deeply penetrated, as we have mentioned before.
However, if it is not removed in this manner, then take a piece of bread or a clean cloth, which is taken by the hands in a small amount, and place it at the end of the wound, and cover it properly placed. And then insert that into the opening of the ear canal to facilitate it, and then remove the earwax from the moisture.
And if it is not removed in all the causes that we have mentioned, then you should cut that part where an abscess or spasm may occur.
And the way to cut that is that you first bandage the patient's vein of the sephasic and remove it according to the method of its virtue, and then make that cavity between your fingers and convert the earwax to the parts above, and do a small incision in the ridge of the ear where the grease of the ear is located. And if the lunar-shaped crack reaches the bone, and the bone is found, use appropriate instruments; then quickly close that crack at that time, and cure it before it heals.
And if the cause is in the ankle and it is one of the large bones that I believe and which are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if you do not obey my advice, then take a thin spatula according to this form: and apply it to the abscess that has fallen into the ankle.
And do not do that when you think that the abscess has already been moistened by the vapor of the ankle, and pause it in small movements, and extract it with forceps or fine instruments, or at the beginning have some of this here mentioned, which is praised for the extraction of it.
But in the water that enters the ankle cavity, let the patient use a sneezing powder at the beginning, and fill the entire ankle with old cloth, and put it on the ankle where the water is, and if by that it is expelled, good; and if not, then later take some thin iron rods and lion's teeth according to the length of this, and calk those in the fire a little, and let the patient insert one of those in the opening of his ankle and strike one with another iron rod on the iron rod that is inside the ankle. Therefore do not stop this procedure until all the water is drained out.
Therefore do not stop this procedure until all the water is drained out. And once the water is drained out, you take a piece of paper or cloth and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until it burns the most of it.
And then put another cloth and do this many times until all the water is drained out, and discard that which was used with the cannula as mentioned above.
In the extraction of beasts entering that ear, if it is a small thing, use the same method and with a similar instrument, as we mentioned in the division; but if it is a large thing that causes pain to the side of the brain, then administer the extraction of it with great care and caution, and the cause of it is more difficult than all the other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms that generate in the ear, if you treat it with the same method and treatment as we mentioned in the division and distillations, and do not compare your treatment, then cover the ear with a bandage.
And if here is any cause of worms, then extract that sharp or thin object, but if there is no cause, then take a narrow and wide-mouthed canula like this one: And introduce the thin end of the canula into the ear, according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then suck out as much as possible with a strong suction, and do this repeatedly until all the worms are removed.
But if they do not obey you with the assistance, then open and close the circuit of the canula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have been extracted in the cure of worms, and look for this in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion is the one that you use to pour in the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, like this one: And make it of silver or iron, narrow, in which there is a small hole, and place it on top.
And so it should be done as they are in the cavity of the continuous catheter here where it is necessary. And if you wish, take the ray and wrap it around the end of the catheter decently, and then pour oil into the cavity of the auscultation, or some herb, or whatever liquid you want from these medicines in the catheter â€” and that is in the ear â€”, and then gently push the ray above and express the hand above to compress the temperature of the liquid until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the auscultation and the patient feels the oil entering.
And that which is in the ear should have already been heated with a little fire. And be careful that the cause of what you will distill into the ear is not too cold, because the ear medicines cannot bear such a thing.
Chapter VII.
Of the cure of opacities in the ears.
Sometimes wax accumulates in the ears of young children from the womb of their mothers, and this has also happened in some men, opacity in the middle of the ear due to plaque or no flesh in that area; and this opacity is sometimes made in the front part of the tragus of the ear which does not know the excretion, and sometimes in the parts before.
When the first symptom occurs at the beginning of the disease, which is not understood, it is in the major difficulties of difficult treatment.
And in that case where you understand the symptom, cover the patient's head with a cloth and look at that. And if you see an abnormal appearance, open the small sharp instrument of which this is the form of it:
If the end of it in which the width is small, one part is sharp and the other not; and the instrument is of two lion's teeth so that it does not touch the head.
And if the appearance is caused by flesh that has grown on the head or in the wound, then open several sharp needles and insert them into the wound before all the flesh is removed.
And if the appearance is at the beginning of the head, then take a sharp needle and burn that instrument a little, and place it in the wound of the head.
And if the patient has difficulty breathing due to the weight of the body, the effort of lifting it increases their difficulty in breathing; and be careful not to compress the nerves of the neck.
And then place a cloth of the second quantity equal to the width of the trachea on the neck, which you have wrapped in an Egyptian bandage; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take any and push it into the water and powder it over it according to three, and use it; and if you see that the neck is already infected, then remove the infected one and replace it with another one that you have wrapped in a cerot that is made with oiled rosin, until the abscess has healed; and cure it within that time.
If you have excessive bleeding from the wound, then submerge a cloth or cloth in cold water and place it on the neck, and use another remedy that stops the flow of blood, which is mentioned in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the treatment of atezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil, which sometimes occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some humidity, and sometimes due to dryness.
Therefore, you should hold those eyelids or eyes open, and cut those eyelashes from their roots, and place your hand over the areas according to the third method.
However, if the pain is caused by cold humors flowing from the veins, then you should cauterize those areas with a pointed cautery.
The best cauterization is to make incisions and remove moisture when the cause of the eyelids is still present; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eyelids are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Of the treatment of granulation, which occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Moisture occurs in the eyelids of the eyes due to some cause that is similar to granulation in its strength and hardness, and because it grows, it is called granulation.
And there is a collection of thick moisture under and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the operation in them is to consider if the great swelling comes from that which appears on the eyelid and is putrefied throughout; and the cause of this is unknown.
Therefore, make an incision over that part with the fissure, and scrape off all the putrefied matter within; and suspend it from there and cut off that part.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with stitches; and cure that within until it is healed.
And if it is small, then you will not be harmed by that which remains for that part where the oil of this restores and encases.
And if the swelling is declining to the parts underneath the eyelid, then scrape off that part and suspend the swelling from there, another incision which you indicate, and press it throughout; and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, then that is not known in any case.
And at the beginning, wash the wounded area with salt water; and treat the area with what is inside that will make it heal.
Chapter X.
Of the cure of axenrhine on the eyelid above the wound.
Axenrhine is a gray substance that is generated in the tunics of the eyelid above, and especially in children, aggravates wounds of those and causes them to lose their sight; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because tears gather on those.
And so you see them talking to their faces all the time, and on their sleeping faces; and they have swollen eyelids, which are already covered with inflammation, and imminent appearance of inflammation is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you cause inflammation inside them.
And some method of operation is in that which the patient pauses his own head on the finger, and then place cloth from him and from the wound, and make a circle according to the amount that contains all parts, and then place that over that and press the fingers of all to be added to inflammation in the middle of the circle, and then put some space in the middle of that humidity with a spatula through the incision, and the incision should not be greater than the incision made in flaubotomy.
In the first cavity that you open completely until you reach the arch, where in the most displaced processes, the arch is formed by a white-colored groove.
So extract those cloths that you have wrapped between the thighs, called parts of the fornix, and rotate between your right and left hand until it is spread out.
And be careful not to adjust in the groove so that the spatula does not reach the bone and the other side of it.
If you do not see at your arch at the beginning of the groove, then adjust in the groove a small facilitating tool until you reach your arch; and then extract that which we have said; and soak cloths in vinegar and water, place them on the area and strengthen those woolen cloths.
And so apply salt and place it in the cavity of the groove so that that which is removed from that moisture.
And then care for it until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs in that location, then treat it with a cedar oil plaster until it is healed.
Chapter 11.
Of the methods of touching the wound.
When the edges of wounds are not adjusted by natural hairs and their surrounding tissue, then touching the wound itself can cause damage to the wound, which is called tactinir of the wound, and it can be cured in four ways: either with a pointed cauterizing iron; or with an acute medicine as described in the chapter on cauterizing; or by making a tacking and suture; or by using cannulas as I have described.
And therefore cover that the head of the patient is in your left hand; then convert the eyelid to your left hand, and if it converts, good; otherwise, insert the needle in the part behind the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate above, and that is â€” near the edge of the eyelid where the hairs are â€” near the hairs, and pull the thread above the eyelid, and convert it to the right.
And then insert a needle in the part of the eyelid below the eyebrows, adjusting it to the lacrimal canal; and then extract the hair and place it behind the eyelid, dampening it with small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then apply pressure on the eyelid with a tent, and let it rest as if it were a fig leaf.
However, it should be noted that the figure varies according to the amount of edema of the eyelid, as it is different in men, where some require a large incision in the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid becomes swollen.
And then insert the needle above the two lines that have been sutured, and begin from the lacrimal canal to the lacrimal duct. And if your incision near the natural hairs has the same size as the largest of the king's.
And then insert the needle in one of the two corners of the eyelid, and then scrape off that entire area, and then adjust the stitch on both lips with a thin piece of silk or wool, and wipe away the pus, and make it adhere to any excess thread on two eyebrows, if you want to do that, otherwise, don't worry.
And after three or four days, approach the suture of the wounds and heal it.
And if you wish, leave the wound open for a few days and heal it with that which dries and constricts, as the eyelid is raised by the sealing of the wound and its adhesion; however, the suture is better. And thus, I will now discuss the ancient methods.
However, in their concern for the patient, and it is a good operation, and not in fear.
And there is another method in this, and it is that the finger figures as follows with the mirror, and then raise the eyelid three inches separately and bring them together according to this form:
However, if it is not possible to do that, then hold the inches, and if it is not equal, take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other wound towards the lacrimal major, and the second wound towards the lacrimal minor, and adjust between the called wounds at equality, and then raise your hand to the elevation of the equal, raise the entire eyelid over which it is best to be as we have recommended.
And then adjust both sides of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
If an abscess occurs on your forehead or your forehead, cover that abscess with wax and the same ointment, and apply it.
Sometimes eyelids are turned inside out, then cover that which you use for the forehead; but stitching in such places is more artificial.
To bandage the legs follows this method: First, you turn the eyelid and cut the figure that is intended according to what I have said; then, using art, make two thin strips of cloth of such length as the length of the eyelid and the width of their middle part should be slightly less than the width of the sparrow. You have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add each thin strip under that which superfluously covers the eyelid of the eye, and tightly stitch the strips of each part, leaving that one for several days, until the bandage dies and becomes denied and rots within a short time.
If it is too late, then break the tumor with a lancet, and then care for the wound until it heals.
So when it is closed, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not prick.
And this is the way to make cans that you will make according to this form: and have the quantity of length and width, neither more nor less.
Chapter 12.
Of raising the prickly hairs in the eyelid with a needle when the hair is hard.
When they are unnatural hairs, hard, rough, and prickly, then the operation is as follows: you take a thin needle and place it in a thin, soft, and sharp cedar wood, and then adjust its extremities and tips in a way that is subtle. And the length of the needles should be the quantity of one palm.
And then you make another thin needle from it in a short time, and use its tips if you want to.
Then place the patient's head on the pillow, and position it close to the sunlight so that your work can be clearly seen, as this is a delicate and small operation.
Then insert the needle into the eyelid at the point that requires stitching, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid until it comes out on the other side of the eyelid naturally.
Then pull the eyelid upwards and insert that into the eye socket, and have one or two or three eyelids at most.
Then pull your hand in along with that which is inserted into the eye socket, and make it come out naturally through the eyelid.
If it is inserted into the eye socket and does not come out naturally through the eyelid, then forcefully insert it into the parts that you have prepared, until it comes out naturally from the trauma.
And leave that in place until the vision of the eye is clear, as you would do by inserting it and the eyelid, and close the eye, and let it rest for two or three days, until the eyelid adheres to its natural position and heals properly.
And if the skin is too short, then adjust a longer patch of skin from natural ones, and raise it up to where it should be long enough, and then raise that one.
Chapter 13.
About the treatment of the ehrachtir which is in the eyelid above.
When the huel ehacratir is in the eye and the contraction of the eyelid is towards the upper part, to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the plate or scar tissue or cauterization, and this leporina is natural or accidental, and it is caused by poor consolidation of the plate or scar tissue or cauterization, or similar to its malcuratz.
The method of the operation in this is that you cut that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place it in that which is between those a cloth of lint, and tie them together when they are healed.
And do not use treatment of it from the causes that dry and contract; for if you do this, it will return to being more bad than at any time they did not have a fire.
Use in that case which has the power to soften like fenugreek, and rub with the water in which they are soaked and mixed with it, or with dayquilon, which should be liquefied with some oils, and apply on that place, and cure that.
The treasure of your cure is that you perforate all the affected area that is not consolidated according to the form that fire makes at the beginning.
This operation, which we have said, is nothing but a correction of chalicotherapy that does not return the form of the place according to what fire gives.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of chalicotherapy that is done in the eyelid.
This chalicotherapy that is done in the eyelid, which is not named vertadierament chalicotherapy; and it is of two kinds, one natural, another accidental.
Accidental chalicotherapy is done by pressure or by cutting or by cauterization or by other similar means.
And the way of the operation is that you take a needle in which you make double thread, and put it on the flesh, and make it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
And then extend the flesh to the parts above and below the needle and cut it with the needle, and incise it widely. And if the figure of the eyelid returns as it was, then good; but if not, take the needle and place it on the torn part, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two incisions on the side of the eyelid.
And the ends of the two incisions should be at two angles of the incision, which you have made while they converge, and make their ends meet when they gather together to form their figure.
And this figure is the Greek letter alpha.
And then place the flesh there for the amount that is the thickness of the eyelid behind it, which closes the eyelid.
And then adjust the separated parts and tie them with a thread of wool; and then care for those parts with what we have said about softening medicines and warm compresses until they are healed.
And if the laceration is caused by a wound or suture or cauterization, then cut the flat flap of the eyelid according to what is prescribed. And then separate the warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the sermon on the treatment of lacerations when it is raised or lowered, that it run in the operation, according to what is prepared in the form of laceration, and that is in the form of various shapes.
And the artist always prepares everything in each possible way that is possible within the time that he makes to return the figure to its natural form, or near it, and the patient according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in the best positions.
Chapter 15.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men who have their eyelid closed over the white of the eye, and it is prohibited from facilitating movement and their natural works, then you should remove the extramatter from under the eyelid, and raise it above or extend it to the corner.
And then you should insert a thin blade under the adhesion, which should not be sharp to avoid causing discomfort to the patient during the operation, and remove the blade that does not leave any mark on the eye.
And your incision should be made with ease so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you should place saltwater in the eye; or use a solution of vinegar dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid and eye with warm water, and place a piece of wool soaked in hog fat over the eye, and use it for three days until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the beginning of a nail and the height of flesh from the lacrimal canals.
You should know that the nail is of two types, either it is nervous, like a thin, sharp needle; or it is not nervous, like white mucus, which when touched can easily take hold and be removed, and the skin does not stick to it.
And the special ones do not begin until the larger lacrimal canal, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and movement of the eyelid.
The type of work to be done at the beginning of it is that the patient lies down with their head in the middle, and another person raises their eyelids, and with your hand elevates the eyelid, and collects the nail from underneath with a pair of tweezers and extends it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert a small piece of horsehair or wool or cow hair, or something similar, or make the tip of the needle thin and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and glue it to the nail; extend it to the parts above, and excoriate the side of the nail that is the pupil. And if you continue to push the needle into the back of them.
And if you then insert the Romanent into the lacrimal canaliculus with a thin needle or small forceps, and lift the flesh of the lacrimal gland so that it does not produce continuous tears from this.
And sometimes the finger is extended or bent as we have said, and then the thin needle is inserted into the lion's tooth-shaped part of it.
And be careful not to touch the corneal tunica with the needle and that it does not break in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
And then the insertion is made in the eye with a small amount of saltwater or a drop of honey, and lift it out again; and take care that what goes into it is healed.
And if the finger is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle, nor stick it in that part of the eye, then this special type of finger is cured by medicines, and it is healed as follows:
If you wish to incise that area, first you begin by making a cut in the patient's thigh and then take a sharp instrument of fine steel sharpness according to this form: according to its thinness. And if you see that that area is rarefied and contracted and you insert it into that place, then distill some of your own blood in the wound of the chief made from sanguisinaria or from the root of rosemary or from tincture of salt, and apply it to the wound on the other side.
And then repeat the operation until all that is from it has been removed, but if the opposite pus is in the wound, then you leave that area and cure the pus as soon as it is healed.
And then repeat your operation until it is healed.
The emergence of the nasal cavity, if it is not seen in the wound for great harm, should be suspended from an onion; and incise that area from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that you do not incise the flow of tears.
And then apply a drop of laudanum into the lacrimal canal and make him sleep until he is healed.
Chapter 17.
About the beginning of the disease and about that which is born from flesh adjusted in the womb.
Sometimes flesh is born in the womb and is overgrown before it covers the pupil, or it approaches or becomes stretched on the eyelids, and it firmly closes the eyelids to the parts of the forehead, and it is assembled at the door of the balustrade.
The operation is performed when the patient lies on his back; and then open the eyelids of that one and collect all that flesh with scissors, and that flesh is a forceps or a spoon; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until it is all finished with the scissors, and guard yourself from the womb that you do not descend that one of yours operation.
And your incision is the one that you incise those or with the needle which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small forceps which are collected as soon as the shape of it approaches this chapter.
When the incision is complete and the entire flesh is ready, then fill the wound with salt crust, or distill it into powder and similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound a cotton pad soaked in honey until it is certain that an abscess has formed.
And if there is any cause for alarm and the lord's health is not certain, and you fear an abscess has formed, then cleanse the wound and treat that abscess with a remedy that causes it to disappear, and repeat this treatment during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh that has occurred in the wound of this kind.
However, you must ensure that all wound care is done naturally or accidentally, using iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you have made sure that that member has suffered that operation.
Chapter 18.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
When veins are swollen and appear as lumps on the skin, they prevent the surgeon from performing their operation, and they must be removed over a period of days.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning to consider whether the skin in which the swelling is located is thick and not another malady that swells, then collect that swelling.
And if you command the patient to hold their head in your hand, and then suspend those veins with an onion or two according to your judgment; and that onion should be of fine double thickness according to this form:
or two onions gradually in a cloth according to this form:
and then collect those veins with fine forceps, according to their subtility, and wipe the blood away frequently until those veins are no longer visible from the skin and have been turned back.
And be careful not to damage the skin at the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation is in the morning after sunrise, and you have a method firm in your operation that you only incise those veins.
When you have finished, then you should distill some of the green or red wine into the wound to increase its healing power.
However, if that is not possible at that time, then gather all the herbs that reduce the pain of the wound, and apply them to the wound for several days until the pain is relieved and an abscess is prevented.
And then repeat the process until the wound is healed.
This is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
On reducing hernias to the abdomen.
When you treat hernias with cauterization or sharp medicine that does not heal immediately, then do not insert into the wound but rather make a small incision over the abscess to remove all the moisture inside and around it until the bone is exposed.
And if the bone is exposed and there is decay or discoloration in it, then use this instrument to clean it:
And it is named for a sharp head, and it is made of iron, and the head should be round like the one that is made by punching with a needle or an awl for a delicate puncture (like in the following form).
And place that over the location of the bone damage, and then gently rotate it between your fingers until you know that that corruption is removed.
And that should be done several times, and then the location should be restored with drying and styptic agents.
So if the location is consolidated and it is in good flesh and the body is free from sin and for forty days, and it does not recur and does not become an abscess and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And otherwise, then not in the engine but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: and that you uncover from second bone with iron or sharp medicine, and when it is uncovered like this, then you take a tribe according to this form:
The outer part of the iron is triangular, and its thickness at the end is as thick as this.
And place that one over the bone, and that one near the lacrimal; and let your hand hold some of the bone, and then turn your hand around to push it into the tribe where it penetrates the whole bone, and that one feels the patient's pain as if it were entering through the bone.
Therefore, restore the area with drying astringent remedies as you have been shown.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area are hardened, the matter that was flowing to the parts returns to its place, so that is more likely over the patient.
Chapter 20.
Of the reduction of the prominence of the bone.
When the bone protrudes completely and does not cause damage or reduction in the excretion, then let the patient lie down, and let it follow, and let you place some bandages with incisions and suction for good drainage; and let you place a liniment on the bone made of acacia, aloe, senses, and sarcocolla, and let you strengthen the plaster on the bone with some powders.
And the method for cleaning the bones is to take cloths of lion's mane, and each cloth should be folded into four parts; and make those threads.
And then place them one over the other according to the amount needed for the purpose. And then apply strength to them with a strong, thick bandage; and repeat the wound dressings with successive applications; and then remove the bandages and let the wound heal during the day and night.
But if the ligament becomes soft, then it should be kept straight.
And then remove the ligament as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, then apply the ointment to the bones and the bandage and the dressings until it is healed.
Chapter 21.
About the beginning of the elevation of the uveal tunic.
When the tear in the uveal tunic occurs, and it elevates and protrudes outside the eyelids like a large tumor, and it takes the shape of a man, and you want to incise it, then the operation is performed as we have recommended, that you insert the needle into the edge of the uveal tissue from below and above, and then place another needle double the thickness of the lacrimal part in the same place, and make it penetrate and leave the first needle according to its position; and then incise the location of the double thickness and lift that part of the uveal tissue around the needle, and apply strength to that thread.
And then carefully remove the needle and place it on the wool soaked in albumen and let it lie there until the thread is absorbed into the wound.
And then care for that place where the pain was, until the wound is healed.
And some compresses are made from the entire piece of cloth, and placed inside the wound, adjusting them to the shape of the wound, and then pierced with a thin spatula that reaches the bottom of the wound, and remove the albumen moisture, and lower the wound and insert it immediately.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of cataracts.
This disease that is called cataracts is not other than the one that is adjusted in the wound, resembling descending water and is not that one.
The way to perform this work is that the patient should lie on the prepared bed, and then take the chief's hand in your two hands, and when you see the disease approaching the affected parts, and then dry it and do not let it descend, and keep the light, and the patient will see the causes as before.
If it does not descend, you will know that it is a fever.
However, if the preparation for descent is not done correctly, you will have to make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula and place it on the conjunctiva continuing from the cornea (in the eye) until the fever is gone.
Therefore, when the fever is gone, you will have to distill water with cinnamon and honey in it that you have already made.
And then treat the other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 22.
Of the cure of the water descending from the eye.
We have already mentioned the specifics of the water in the division and what is appropriate to pierce according to the speech declaring it, then that second one for healing.
However, you should make the patient sit between your hands on a cushion and hold their eye open, then look closely at it.
And place your hand near the eyelid of his eye, if the eye is on the right side; or place your hand directly on his eye, if it is on the left side.
And take a spoonful of the medicine with your right hand, if the eye is on the left side; or take a spoonful of the medicine with your left hand, if it is on the right side.
And place the tip of the spoon near the cornea in the center of the eyeball, by the thickest part of the ray on the inside of the eye, and then pour the medicine into his eye and rub it with your hand.
And penetrate into the eyeball and feel that the spoon has reached its destination due to the medicine.
And cover that the measure of the spoon is the same as the distance from the edge of the pupil to the end of the eyeball, which is the corona of the eye; because you will see the pupil through the clarity of the cornea tunic.
Approach the area where the water is, and then throw a cloth down nearby, and if the water descends somewhat, then quickly cover the patient with that cloth to protect their sight and place it under them.
And then pause for a moment; if the water descends, then quickly pause that other cloth before it gets wet.
And then when it is dry and no longer descending, quickly remove that cloth, and with your hand wipe it off little by little, and dissolve a small amount of clear salt of gemstone in the water and pour it over the wound; and then place a cloth soaked in rose oil, albumen of egg, and honey on the wound and cover it.
And those that were used in our time for this purpose are the album of egg.
And if you do not obey your cloth to the instrument of the wound because of its roughness â€” which is one of the men from whom the wound is rough â€” then cover it with a spatula that is called the alberid, which has this form:
And then pierce that joint at that point, do not leave your hand in the wound, and do not make a mistake in finding the delicate location.
And then enter the second delicate location as we have said.
And you should prepare the patient for their sleep, lying down in a dark room where they can sleep on their side, and prohibit all movements.
And place your hand on the patient to calm their nature, and do not tire their head in any way.
And let the bandage be according to their condition by the third day.
And then remove that in the dark room and extract the free blood, and let the patient see some causes, and then return the bandage by the seventh day.
And do not do that in the hour of healing or soon after the infusion. Having said that, you should do that in order for the water to be able to flow more easily and strongly due to great and violent pressure.
If a boil occurs, then for seven days remove the bandage over it and apply the same remedy that causes the boil to heal.
Then examine the patient's face and place your hand over their mouth to hold back any vomit that may occur.
And gradually raise the patient from that position and discuss their causes.
And know that in some cases the disciple of vision is not exempt from certain precautions, and then proceed with the operation.
And we have heard of some of those that are in Arabia, and some say that they make fire by rubbing two sticks together, which is successful in getting water.
However, I have not seen any evidence of this in our land that has been proven to get water, nor have I found any such thing in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magic by which one can overcome those who know about them:
If the joints are naturally made of bone or iron, and their external parts are shaped like this triangle, with the sharp edge pointing in the same direction as that one.
Chapter 24.
About the cure of flesh not rotting in the nose.
When different flesh in the nose is adjusted in various ways, and one of these causes is similar to a scorpion's tail or a polyp; and this disease is called a polypus, which is similar to that object represented. And from there, the flesh is cancerous, blackish in color; and from there, the flesh is not of dark color.
Therefore, in those flesh that is not fraudulent or cancerous, make the patient sweat between their hands and place it in the sunlight, unplug their nose, and poke the wound with a sharp object in those flesh. And then extract that from the parts deformed, and then cut off that which you have understood of those sharp space agut subtil of one part where you know that all the flesh is stopped; because if it is from any cause of which the abscission is possible, then you remove that with one of the sharp instruments to facilitate it. If the lord has a boil or an abscess that has not healed, then pause over that spot; or it is one of the malignant abscesses, then cut out and cauterize the entire area where the boil has formed and all the cavities.
And then insert a needle into the nose, near the beginning of the eye, or in the eye itself. If the nose is opened and moisture enters into the palate, then know that it has healed.
If moisture does not enter after the second covering, then know that there is no flesh in the pus that has risen to the bones of the nose, where it cannot be reached by abscess.
Then cover that spot where there is some swelling, and apply a poultice in the area, and pause between each application the amount of the same or the medicine, and examine the patient and insert an end of the cloth into the nose to find out what cause is possible at that time.
And once that is done, bring their nose close to the opening so that it reaches the nasal canals, and place it on their own nostril, as many children do in school, and it is the most likely cause of that action.
And then place both of the patient's extremities on their nose, one on top and the other inside their nose, and administer a cautery of meat to the nostrils that are in the patient, and do that until you know that the meat is already in the patient's nostrils.
And then remove the patient, and place in their nose an abstraction of salt and vinegar, and do that for three days or more until the running wound heals all that is inside the meat.
And at the end of the cause, place in their nose a gauze bandage to heal them until they are cured.
But if they do not recover, use that.
And this is the form of the instrument to purge the nostrils with which they are distilled and medicines in the nose:
And do that with silver or earthenware, which is similar to a small lantern, with a small base, and the meat in a similar way.
And if you want, make a closed canula like that with a cane, and the canula of the instrument is to be made of purging lead and flat, open; to which you hold it in the back of it, through which you can remove oil or that water that you want from the sucs and causes suction.
Chapter 25.
About the nostrils outside.
Nasal discharges are not outside the nostrils, and it is magnificent and important in other days when one looks at its condition.
And for that cause, when you insert it at the beginning of the appearance of the intestine, and extract all of it. Then place your hand or cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
If it is too late for the insertion before the magnificat, then consider if it is calcified, hard, of dark color and little pain, then do not touch that iron which is the crancos abscess; because that person who inserted this abscess in the end suffered greatly from that one whom he had.
And if the abscess is of lion-like touch and not of dark color, and insertion is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and insert that remedy, and cure the area with that which dries and tightens before it becomes healed.
Chapter 26
Of stitching the nose and lips and ear when continuity is dissolved by wounds or similar.
When there is a loss of continuity in one of these cartilages, do not consult on that operation with just any man.
Therefore, when someone has any cause of those, consider whether it is a fresh wound or not, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches, and cure that within which it is healed.
And if the lips of loss of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then consider that you scrape each part of their bone surface inside which it is not healed. And then adjust the two lips with stitches and strengthen those, and above them sprinkle healing powder of dragon's blood and tripled salt, and place a poultice of diachylon, or any other consolidating plaster, on the powder, leave that for two days or three, and then remove that and replace that plaster and cure that within which it is healed.
May the solution of continuity or needles be added to the suture, as we have recommended in the abdominal suture, or add the solution of continuity with the thread that you have used and make it known.
Chapter 27.
About the extraction of those causes that come in the lower lips in the parts of the vagina.
Some boils are found in men in the parts of their lower lips, similar to hard abscesses, and some are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you should turn the lips and cut each of those hard parts, and fill the abscess with a mixture of tartrate of iron and sulfate of potassium until it is strengthened, and then wash with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that has hemostatic properties until it is healed.
Chapter 28.
About the beginning of flesh attached to the gums.
Great number of worms live on the gum attached to the jaw, which the ancients called albulus, therefore cover that area with an onion or with a cloth and insert it into the mouth, leaving the saliva flow or the sand.
And then place your hand on the area to stop the bleeding or apply powdery styptics or astringents.
And if that flesh returns, then insert it secondarily and cauterize it, as the cautery will not return.
Chapter 29.
Of the reason for iron teeth.
When sharp scales are attached to the teeth of the dead and the living, and some worms are black and are made yellow or green within which that gum rots and the teeth become yellow.
And then squeeze the patient between your hands and press the head of the patient against your chest, and remove the teeth in which those sharp scales appear similar to sand within which no cause remains, and that is black and yellow and other colors within which they are transformed.
If that is the case at the beginning of the reasoning, then it is good; otherwise, you repeat the reasoning on those points on another day and the second and third time until it comes to the end of the statement in which you want.
You should know that the teeth have required different shaped tools and various figures according to what is prepared for your operation. And so that you can see the tools that are used to cut the tooth from the part of the jaw and others that are used to scrape between the teeth in other shapes, and these shapes of tools should be prepared by you as follows:
Chapter XXX.
Of tooth extraction.
You should care for the tooth from its pain in all ways and for a long time before its extraction, because there is no cause that prevents its removal when it is extracted, because it is a sublimated substance through which extraction is made.
When the patient is ready to have that tooth extracted, you should be certain of what tooth is hurting, because sometimes the pain deceives the patient and thinks it is in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and hurting tooth is extracted, which we have already seen in the operation of teeth.
Therefore, when you must certify which tooth is causing the pain, and what you know about it, then cover that tooth with a space in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth to the gum in all parts, and then remove that from the teeth with a pair of fine forceps, or with delicate tweezers at the beginning slowly until you have removed them.
And then use a strong twist in the large hands for good speech or to stop the patient from crying out, and place your hand on the head of the patient between his teeth that he does not bite, and then pull the tooth straight in a way that does not give him more pain, nor does it give the patient more pain.
And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and place it there to facilitate and ease the removal of that which is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then cover that break and tighten it with a thin wire at the end so that it does not break in the hour of your construction on that which you have placed.
And when you perform the incision carefully around the entire part of the gum and guard your strength so that it does not break apart from it, return over the patient to alleviate the majority of their pain.
And beware that you do not do what ignorant barbers do in their practice and audacity regarding the eradication of them, as they administer things that we have not recommended; for many of those remedies cause great harm to people, and all of their reasons are false, or some of those, or that they have extracted from the jawbone with which they have testified.
And after the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or with salt.
And if there is a flow of pus, as with many remedies, then scrape some charcoal and sprinkle it on the wound, and if you do not find that charcoal, then cauterize.
The form of the forceps and holding them subtly is what is praised for the initial long extraction, with a short handle and thick, so that they do not bend when performing those tasks.
And there should be times with a thick handle until when they are not bent, they are short extractions.
And they should be made of Indian iron or right-angled extractions, and in the extractions of those, there are teeth of which some are inserted into others and are extracted with great force, and sometimes they have the shape of a beak of a ciconia duck, so they hold well, and they are of great strength.
Chapter 31.
About the removal of teeth and extraction of bones from the lower jaw that are impacted.
When you need to remove a tooth that is impacted, first place your hand over the location where the tooth is located for one day or two until that location becomes soft; and then insert anesthetic or hold the extractions of which the shape is like the beak of a ciconia duck or guanta, the form of the forceps:
The outer parts of their joints were cut with a knife or scissors.
And if they do not obey your command to open their mouth or hold it, then force them to open their mouth and remove all the flesh, and insert the instrument called the tongue depressor, which is a small lever with this shape:
And if it is short and thick, make it slightly thin so that it is not too thick.
If the mouth is opened, good; otherwise, use these other instruments of which these are the shapes: the shape of the first instrument is a triangular extramittent with some roughness.
The shape of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a more subtle tip.
And now you can use this instrument having two prongs of which the following is the appropriate shape: And other instruments that you will need for tooth extraction; because it is important to do this with the instrument that looks like an ice pick, and this is the shape:
From the triangular extremity that is twisted or shortened, which is some swelling, and not thin enough to be a triangle.
And another wise thing is that the instruments of the teeth are similar to other instruments.
May the artists be skilled and subtle in the art, at least so that they can perform the operation and treat various diseases; for some of these diseases are of different shapes, for which the ancients did not say or make a specific instrument.
May it be triangular the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth, or if it is broken, then carefully treat that which is in its place with the instruments and forceps that we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help you with this form:
And if there is some swelling little by little, and it is stretched or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or leak until the bone is completely broken through; then restore the place with appropriate medicines to that.
If there is a small pustule on the bone, then lance that pustule and its black core, and cure it within that it may be healed.
Chapter thirty-two.
On the care of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth are prominent and do not follow their natural course for those places, the shape is awry, especially when it comes to women, and especially to noble virgins; therefore consider whether a tooth is not too close to another tooth, and if there is no possibility of extracting or straightening it, then you should extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then you should incise it with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's tongue, and should be made of Indian iron with a sharp edge.
And if your incision is in the place where you incised it in three days because of the hardness of the tooth, and if it is not connected to another tooth.
If it is found to be extended to the ankle, then shave that part with this Indian iron knife of which this is the shape:
And if it is all made of Indian iron and the edge is the same; and if it is pointed with many small needles, which are made like this, then shave it a little at a time in several days to facilitate, so that there is no other scar and wound. Then line up that part with the skin, and shave it with this razor.
If it is found that one part of it is quenched and lies on the tongue, then cover that part inside so that the roughness of that fragment is stopped and covered, and is fully filled so that the tongue does not descend and the word is not corrupted.
Chapter 33.
Of the restoration of teeth that are damaged by gold or silver.
When accidents happen to teeth before the blow and removal by impact or by falling, and the patient cannot bear that which is missing, and you have cured it with hemostatic medicines, and your cure has not been successful, then in order that they do not rot in those that are strong by gold and not by silver, because silver becomes green and soon becomes poor, but gold never changes.
And if the needle is too thin and rough according to the amount that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the reciprocating motion is that you take the needle and take double of it between two healthy teeth, and approach that it increases am two tortuosities of the needle between two dirty ones, or if one or more, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth of the other part. And then repeat the task in the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with ease and knowledge until it is not dirty.
And your string should be the one that strengthens the needle against the edges of the teeth that do not escape.
And then cut off the excess ends of the needle with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place where you are working, and convert them to hide between the healthy tooth and the dirty one, so that it does not cause damage to the tongue. And then remove that which is there with a spoon.
If it is slippery or rough, strengthen that one or those with another needle in such a manner in all its time.
This is the form of healthy teeth and the figure of straightness of two healthy teeth and two crooked ones, as follows:
When one or two teeth return to their proper place in these areas, and they are recultivated as we have recommended, and they remain straight.
Only skilled and knowledgeable craftsmen can do this.
Some cow bones can be used for certain causes of teeth, and they are made into the shape of a tooth, placed in the area where the tooth is missing, strengthened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter 34.
About the beginning of the ligament that is in the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that is behind the tongue, some cow bones or the natural one that a man has, or an accidental and accidental one that has already been consolidated.
And the operation in this is that the mouth of the patient is opened, their existing cap in the throat; and they raise their tongue, and then insert that ligament nervous according to the latitude until the tongue is removed from its recent position.
If there is some difficulty or resistance in that area, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you should use a lancet and cut it through the tissue until you have dissolved the resistance.
And be careful not to make a hole in the flesh and that you cut here through armor and blood flows out of the wound.
And then wash the tracks of the incision with vinegar or warm water or cold water; and place your hand over the tongue to prevent it from falling out, which would cause another obstruction.
If there is blood flow, place your hand over the wound; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for this. And then treat those other causes until they are healed.
Chapter 35.
Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Some few wounds that occur near the tongue, resembling a small pimple, prevent the tongue from performing its natural operation; and it is greatly magnified until it fills the mouth.
The operation in this case is to open the patient's mouth in front of the sunlight and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, to which the patient does not feel pain, then do not touch that part which is cancerous.
And if it is declined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the onion in it, and scrape that part with a thin spatula, and scrape it from all parts; and if pus comes out during your operation, then pause above the patient's mouth, so it does not come out.
And then return to your work until you have finished it, until it is washed with warm vinegar and salt; and cure that part with the other cure at that time when it is healed.
Chapter thirty-six.
Of the extraction of abscesses from the armpits and of those that are in the groin, and of the other abscesses.
When an abscess occurs in the groin, they are glands that resemble fat, which become deformed and are called armpits, which when you cure them with that which we have said in the division and are not healed, then consider whether the abscess is hard, of dark color, and of little pain, then do not touch it with a knife.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with a knife for fear of infection; leave it alone until it has matured, and then either you will lance it or it will burst by itself.
And if it is of white color, red, and the root of it is thin, then that one should be lanced.
And the operation in it is that you consider, giving your operation, whether the abscess has recovered completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make sure the patient lies on their side, and the head of it is in your hand, and the mouth of it is open, and the servant takes between his hands the tongue of it, and the instrument most noble of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or aram, and it should be thin like a knife.
So when you press that tongue and it shows you the abscess, then grab that cloth, place it on that wound, and pull it out as much as possible. Another thing you should remove from the tissues, and then incise that with an instrument of this shape:
Another thing you should remove from the tissues, and then incise that with an instrument of this shape: and it is similar to forceps, but the outer parts of which are curved, so that the opening of each of those is at the end of the other, so sharp, which should be made of iron and well-tempered.
But if that instrument is not at your disposal, then incise that with a spatula of this shape: and it should be sharp on one side, not sharp on the other side.
And if you have incised one wound, then incise the other according to this method of incision, and then guard the patient from getting wet with cold water.
If there is blood flow from the wound, apply a poultice of ground dog dung or of myrrh and similar to those used for stopping bleeding, in order to restrict the blood flow from the wound, and then cure it within that time.
Some women have also been known to insert other abscesses or those two golden ones into their vaginas, and incise them according to what I said at the beginning of the chapter on bees equally.
I have already treated a woman with an abscess that was not in her vagina, the abscess tending to a dark color, of little pain, which had already closed her vagina, and the woman was breathing very straightly, and had been prohibited from eating and drinking water, and had already reached death if more days passed.
The abscess had already pushed so much that it had mezed two ribs inside through two holes.
Therefore, I advised him to make an incision and place it in one of the ribs, and then pull that out, and throw away a great portion of it, and then I advised him to incise that from where he understood the other wound, and then close the mouth of that, and press his tongue, and then place the rib in that abscess.
And then approach with a large part of it, not from it but a little bit of its skin. Therefore, the absolute remedy for that woman is to immediately begin drinking water, and then soon apply a poultice, and do not stop inserting it into that abscess for a long time, and successively apply a poultice in place of that, which is inserted until it is prolonged.
Therefore, you should apply heat and cauterize the remedy of that, and then make it stick; and then approach and do not clean what God has done to that place.
Chapter 37.
Of the incision of a boil when it is formed.
When catarrh is formed in the boil, and it is long, then it is not named perpendicularly; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubble.
When the remedy that we have mentioned in the division is cured, and you do not compare your cure, and you have often seen that the abscess has been healed from it and is thin, then cover that which is added round; and if it is at a certain length, and is bloody, of dark color or black, and is not at the same place, then cover the incision of it, where there is fear over the patient.
When you see that second hand which I have mentioned as white and long, you should make the patient lie down and take their tongue with an instrument that follows its shape and place the hook in the new place, and pull that one down and insert it into one of the two instruments that are called in the beginning of two needles.
And be careful not to insert it any more than what is adjusted over the natural term, because if you insert it further, you will damage their speech.
And when the insertion is done, use that which we have recommended in the beginning of two needles, and cure it until it is healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the insertion of it, be careful not to use the cauterizing instrument in the cauterization of it, and the handle of the cauterizing instrument is only sharp water, and you should place the head of the patient in your own hand, and take hold of the instrument that we have mentioned, and also take some of the water that we have mentioned in the beginning of cauterization, and make sure that it does not cause any pain or subtle injury, and fill the hollow of the instrument with this form:
If the extramatum is removed from the cavity in which the medicine is placed with the shape of a spoon, and the instrument for the medicine is placed on the wound, and the patient turns their head to the side so that saliva or drool from their mouth does not fall on the wound due to the internal medicine, so that no cause remains on the wound and it heals.
And place your hand on the medicine and press it against the uvula for the space of an hour until it is denigrated and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a piece of cloth and wrap it around that (the wound), and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray into a canula through which the cloth adheres to that canula, and do this until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the wound, and leave it there for three days or four.
And if it is necessary to repeat the medication, repeat that one, and after the cauterization, wash the area around the affected part with a cloth soaked in warm water, and change that cloth often during the treatment, and apply compresses inside until it is cured.
And this type of treatment is safer than the beginning and longer than fear.
Some wounds are cured with water that is more subtle than cauterization and beginning, which is cured with sublimation in this way: take camphor, hyssop, origanum, rue, scudded Arabic, camomile, broth, and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a bowl, and immerse them in a very hot agreement, and boil; and the bowl should be well washed with decent water, and there should be a trough above the bowl, on which should be placed an instrument made of aram according to this method; it can be made of silver or aram.
When the tip of the patient's tongue is inserted into their mouth before the steam reaches the uvula above the palate, then the uvula becomes obscured.
And then repeat this procedure until it dries, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the onset of abscesses, as it would aggravate the abscess, and do not do that, but rather declare the declaration of the abscess from there carefully.
But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a needle and make a small opening on the surface of the patient's tongue, as the lid of the hen's egg prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter 38.
Of the extraction of thorns and of what sticks to the groin and other causes.
Things stick to the groin or thorn of the foot or some other cause.
Then take out that which is visible from those, upon which the sight is placed, rather than using a tongue depressor, in order to declare what is in the mouth.
And that which is not visible and is hidden in the mouth, take out by making the patient vomit, because the cause of the disease is often removed from the mouth by vomiting; or by using a spoon of bread, a piece of rag, or a bowl of dry food; or by taking a sponge of sea sponge and soaking it in strong vinegar, and then placing it in the patient's mouth, because when the sponge is placed in the place where the thorns are and are removed, they are often removed. And also take an eel and soak it in strong vinegar, and then cut it into pieces and extract it; or take a pear and cut it into pieces and extract it.
If the above causes are not removed, then use an instrument of this form:
If it is a large needle, use a small one, and in the outer part of it, which you will insert into its neck, to facilitate.
And lift the patient's head up, and watch that the touch of his neck bones, so that it does not happen to him, or the bone or the spine, or what the doctor puts in his hand.
But if the patient feels pain at that insertion, because of his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and he puts it down, and pulls his hand up with the instrument, all this according to the amount that is prepared for him before he is pierced.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the extraction of blood clots attached to the neck.
When blood clots are treated with what we have said in the division of the cure and not with medicines, consider this in the neck of the patient at noon, because you have already understood the tongue of him with the instrument that you have recommended.
If you see blood in the urine, remove it with a small or precise instrument carefully.
And if it is not possible to remove it, then take a concave canula and insert it into the urethra of the patient, and place a lit iron in the concavity of the canula, and do this as many times (until the blood in the urine is dead and does not come out of the urethra) and keep the patient on a water diet all day.
And then take a full cup of water and pour it into the patient's mouth, and wash the mouth with that; do not force any cause in the patient's mouth and let the water cool for an hour, then another servant holds their hand, so that the blood in the urine feels like water.
And if the recommended remedy is not forgotten, then sublimate the patient with camomile or asafetida using the instrument we have recommended for the sublimation of the uvula.
Do that, so in four steps.
There is another way of operation in suffocation of that, you take an instrument in which there are coals ignited and the instrument is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is placed in that hole the end of the instrument; and then remove the suffocation; and place the patient's mouth on the end of the cannula, and close their mouth so that the suffocation is not forced out until you know that the suffocation has reached the lungs, because the lungs are the first to be affected.
And if it does not work, then you repeat the suffocation for a while, and prevent the patient from drinking, eating salty and other foods, and not drinking water, and if necessary, this regimen should be discontinued.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat blood from the neck when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps sometimes, but with some curvature. The one who is at the head should be similar to the beak of a stork, which is curved, and the tip of it is polished with a file, so that when it touches any cause, it does not leave a trace.
Chapter 40.
In which is the summary of the speech on the understanding and removal of abscesses.
Abscesses are special masses, of various shapes, according to the memory of them, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in puncturing and incising them by various methods, one of which is for the type of abscess itself to be introduced; and because of this, they understand about the humors.
And the second method is for the places where the body's accidents occur, such as the abscess in the head is different from the abscess in the anus; and the abscess in the flesh is different from the abscess in the joint; and each of them has a specific treatment.
Moreover, some abscesses that have not been properly drained can lead to the maturation of pus in those places or their complications.
Other abscesses that are punctured when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complications, such as abscesses near joints, when an abscess approaches a joint, it is prolonged into the nearby pores, and often the tendons or nerves of that joint are corrupted, causing contraction of that member; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay its puncture until it is matured, it will cause harm to the principal member; or it is near the anus, so puncture that unmatured one; and do not puncture it crudely, but rather the one that is near the anus, so that it does not perforate the intestine and is elongated to the parts of the anus, and is made a fistula, or that is done in the term of the abscess that is not healed. When you know the time for the puncture of the abscess, and it is ripe.
And you know when the abscess is ripe when the pain and fever subside, and there is a decrease in the headache and pulse, and an increase in the hardness of the abscess, and other signs.
And you know when the puncture should be made in the place closest to the abscess and from which healing is expected.
The puncture should be made quickly through the long bones of the body or the body itself, if the abscesses are in the joints of the hands or feet, and in the locations of the ligaments, tendons, muscles; and at the back, in all locations where reflection does not occur; because in those that reflect, use puncture according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy places, it is customarily said that you should not make the puncture until the digestion of the abscess is confirmed according to the complement, as we have said; because if you puncture that one beforehand, the length of the body of the patient is prolonged, and there is great swelling, and the lips of the wound are hardened and the depth of the wound.
If the abscess is too large to be drained according to the size of the flesh or bone, or according to what the member needs, then it should be drained according to what the limb requires.
And when administering small incisions, and in large abscesses, make a large and wide incision or section according to the difference in size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses where the pus should be contained and incised, when it is made, it should be done in such a way that the pus can flow out, as with those that occur in the armpits and groin.
And of those that have three-angled incisions; and of those that are made with the figure of a fan, as with the abscesses in the armpits.
And of those that are administered round and crescent-shaped incisions, and similar to those.
If the abscess is not like those that are shallow and superficial, then you should make a shallow incision or just plane it.
When the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, do not be afraid to drain all the pus in that hour; taking a part of it, and the next day put the abscess back together, and the following day take a larger part, and gradually drain more of it until it is completely drained.
Especially if the patient is very young, or weak, or a child, or elderly and in decline, where the animal spirit is more old and resolved at the exit of the pus, and very often the patient dies, and you perform these operations on them.
Be very careful with this chapter and your incision where you drain these abscesses, so that you remove the pus and consider whether the pus from the abscess is little, or a flat section, then you administer drugs of it or of another; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the incision are large, then you wait until they meet before draining them.
If a piece of the gallbladder or its neck is removed from the abscess, or if it has been torn there in the circle, then cover it with a piece of old or new cloth made of fabric, as when you have drawn out splinters or thorns, which are wet; and strengthen it within three days; and then process it and cure it with that which comes from the juices inside until it is healed.
If during the operation, blood flows from you, then administer cold water and vinegar in which a cloth of linen has been soaked, and place that over the location of the flowing blood, which is vegetated.
If the blood flow persists, then administer regimen and treatment and powders which have been recommended in various places of this our book and division.
If it is in winter time, and the location of the abscess is near nerves, then cover it with powders of vinegar and oil cauteric, and place those on the locations.
When it is summer, and the wounds are fleshy, let it be known that you place poultices of ground barley or vinegar and oil or wine and oil, and all of this should be applied within a day, as we have said, and then let it be known that you remove the abscess and cleanse that area, and administer to him what is suitable for his cure within a day, as we have said.
And thus is the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but separately, as we have already said, there are different ways of treating each type of abscess specifically.
Chapter 41.
Regarding the section on abscesses that occur in the neck of the shoulder.
Small abscesses in the neck of the shoulder, and they are of a special kind that contain tunicae that are their own; and their specialty is their movement.
And they are sharp, and of those that contain moisture similar to honey. And of those that contain moisture similar to feces, and similar to them; and of those that are rocky, hard.
And in the dry section, and in the extraction of those, you should not be afraid, as you would not do so with the extraction of those that do not cause harm.
And the operation in the dry section of those that you extract with an instrument of the shape that approaches it, which is called a trocar, as long as you know that it contains.
If that which contains moisture is cut with that section according to its length and on the surface in this form:
And beginning at the line of .B. to the line of .G., then when the moisture is evacuated, you should scrape that which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of all, because overgrown troops return, if there is any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian mucus, if present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill that place and leave it for another day, because that which is of that layer will be corroded by it.
And then apply the Egyptian remedy second and third, if necessary, until you are confident that there is no cause for that rash; then cure the ailment with the remedy until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains thick pus, then you insert this second remedy in this way: with a sharp needle, making it have the shape of a crochet, and inserting it between two lips of the incision and cutting that from all parts, and exerting your skill in extracting the membrane that contains that.
But if your tool causes discomfort, then do what I told you first.
And similarly, perform the incision and cure of the abscess containing thick pus according to what we have told you; and an incision over an abscess containing thick pus is more dangerous, because it is less safe and has less moisture.
And some people have such abscesses that they are completely dry; the cause of which is that if you incise over an abscess on the head of an old woman and pierce the abscess as hard as a deaf stone, white, and cannot be quenched, and if anyone is struck by it, it will cause harm.
In other places, accidental abscesses in the head or this is not this chapter, as with abscesses that come to the heads of children and must be explained by the reason of the hales, but the section of all these should be superficial section.
And place your hand over the lowest part of them to prevent the smell of the body from reaching the lowest parts.
Then use that which is appropriate for healing, as in healing.
Chapter 42.
Of the section of scrofulas, which occur in the neck.
These abscesses occur in the neck and in the armpits and in the elbows; and some occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and those that are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within their own tunic, and as with the nodes and abscess of the head, as we have recommended.
And the specific types of these scrofula are lumps, some of which are stony, and some of which contain moisture, and some of which are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
And in that one which you see in good position in the Tactile, of which the color of that which is manifest is propitious to the color of the gum, and is magical to all parts, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the ribcage, and is not prone, so that you should incise that one from the dry surface of the part above the part below the line of .G. within the line of .B., and score that one from all parts, and extend two strips of gum to the size of an onion, or to the size of a small onion if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that small one by one.
And it is more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised.
And the space should not be too sharp, so that it does not adjust your hand to the incision, or disturb the patient, and that you do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you were to incise a vein or ribcage and prohibit yourself from your operation, then pause in the place of vitrified trefoil or other powders that keep bleeding away, and clean the place, and leave that which is inside so that it does not increase the acuity of the abscess and soften the place and begin to be pus-filled. When the wound is removed.
So return to your operation before the time is completed.
And if there is any cause of other small scrofulas in the vicinity, then investigate those and clean them.
And if it is in the area of the large vein scrofula, then do not investigate that one from its area. Before you cover that with a strong bandage and let it fall through itself to avoid harm.
And then fill the area of the old wound that you have already immersed in Egyptian mud, and then heal it.
And if you investigate that entire scrofula, then cover it with a bandage and adjust the two lips of the wound so that there is no excess.
But if you see that there is excess due to the greatness of the scrofula, then investigate the area of that, and suture it and administer that which is called.
And in the case of scrofula that contains moisture, make a superficial incision on the location where it appears to you to be maturing, and pause the incision of that which is deepest in the flesh, as we have said.
And then administer the incision, using forceps and similar instruments, to remove that which is rotten from the corruption. And when you see the wound already cleaned, then you cure that which is generated of flesh before it is healed.
Chapter 43.
Of the separation of the core of an abscess through the swelling.
The ancients performed this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has done it.
And this is the inscription of their speech.
In men who have curvature, the extraction of the abscess should be avoided, as it is not done well because all the veins and major parts of the patient are in that place.
In those who have boils in the mouth or throat or two tonsils, when the illness is not in the teeth, cut off the section of epiglottis to prevent its loss which is done by incision.
Therefore, when you want that, cut off three or four small sections of the epiglottis, in the area between two circles for quantity, which is in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for section, which is private of flesh and the vessels of sinew from it are not painful.
And if the doctor is afraid, then extend the tongue of the throat to the back, and then pierce the tongue until it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of sinew if there is some cause from those.
And then incise the lip secondly as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal for the flap which is from that and this is the part that is from it which is disrupted and by the abscess of the mouth.
Let the wound remain open for some time.
Since the hour has come when such perforation is feared, add two flaps of the skin of the wound, and place it alone on the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that make the flesh heal before it is healed.
And as Albucasis says that the summary of this speech we have recommended is that if a patient with quinsy has already opened the throat, and the patient dies, and his mouth is closed, and they can insert the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the area of the wound for some time, and thus be saved from death.
And for that reason, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and such evil lasts for three days; and therefore, commander, in this way, leave the wound open, and cure it before it is healed.
And such as I have seen myself, is that a servant holds a knife and inserts one part of the lung canal into the patient's throat, and was called for its cure, and at once covered the mouth with the tongue as it is in the mouth of the dead, and uncovered the wound and covered the sanctum which was on the wound.
Therefore, it was confessed that there had been no incision of veins or guided ones, and the wind was from the wound, and healed that within which fire was used.
And if the servant does not refuse in the mouth, and then return to the better position of their dispositions.
And now I say that in the section of the epiploon there is no fear.
Chapter 44.
About the incision over the abscess that occurs in the groin, and is called hernia of the groin.
This abscess called hernia of the groin is an abscess of the second color of the body, and is caused by the women.
And it occurs in two ways, either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural one, there is no cure.
And the accidental one occurs in two ways, either similar to large nodes, or similar to an abscess that is made by the rupture of an artery, and in that there is fear. And do not let him make any presumption about it, like with a knife, unless it is small. And you should examine that and investigate it, and if you find a similar shape to a gout node, and it is not hanging from any of the veins, then you should insert that with the nodes, and extract that which contains the pus and blood; and if not, then you should thoroughly examine its entirety, and then treat the area with what can cure it before it becomes healed.
Chapter 45.
On the separation of the types of nodes.
Of the nodes, there are different types and I have already described all their types in the division.
And you should remember that it is difficult to distinguish between a node and an abscess when making a diagnosis.
Therefore, you should say that an abscess is characterized by heat, fever, and severe pain until the boiling of the excess subsides; and it is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
If there is no heat or fever or pain, and if you count the pulse of the lion which is in the heart, it is proper.
And if the second color of the body is like a cheese and is made in this way, whether larger or smaller, and there are two species, one being oily and containing moisture, and the colors of moisture are mottled, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you reach the cure of the pulse, remove that and inquire about that which is at the beginning of the instrument called the interosseous, according to its form, which is appropriate for this.
And it is necessary to inquire about abscesses and all swellings, and you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid place where you find the abscess, and you rotate the tips of this instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the abscess.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and remove the instrument and consider what is found in its tracks.
And if the current moisture is forgotten, of whatever color it may be, then you insert a dry surface section as described in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture in the traces of the insertion, then you know that it is dry.
And apply a dry surface section in the shape of a cross according to this form: As you were taught, suspend that with the noose, and scrape the skin of all parts to facilitate, and keep the skin or bag, if possible, over that and remove that pus from the wound.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to remove that skin, and therefore you must wait until that skin is healed before removing it.
If the wound opens again for any reason, too much or too little, then return the wound according to the most.
And if you see that the wound opens again in some small part, then complete the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place your hand over that part which is the source of the abscess cautiously, and cure that from another treatment until it is healed.
And if it is necessary to perform great surgery, then take both of his lips and heal that wound with it.
If the pulse is normal or not, then apply a poultice of tartar and leeches to that straight for two days or three until the inflammation subsides and the boil returns to its original state; and then return to incising that which remains.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of the instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those that are the forms of probes, and of three kinds, one of which is large, another is medium, and another is small.
The form of the large probe is this:
The form of the small probe is this:
They are made of iron, of silver, of the ends of curved instruments properly, in order that the instrument may not be injured by the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experimenters, and they are called Alberic and one of them is named Berid.
And there are three spices, one of which is great, pepper and parsley.
The form of the great experimenter, his shape:
The form of the pepper experimenter, his shape:
The form of the parsley experimenter, his shape:
It is convenient for those abscesses and ulcers and fistulas and boils that between them are of bones and other causes.
And there are made reeds, large, lions, as with great needles that are sewn the sails, and they are made of bamboo, or of wood, or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of bamboo.
And they are made of black lead, which are said to be for those who have opened the fistulas in the cavity of which they are reflections, that they are reflected by their light on those reflections.
And of three sizes, according to the length of theirs, and of the others, and of the shortest, according to the quantity of the opening of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Form of the great plug:
Form of the medium-sized plug:
Form of the small plug:
The forms of the needles are of three special types, namely those that have only one curvature, and they are of three sizes: large, medium, and small.
And of theirs there is a needle with two curvatures, and it is of three sizes.
And of those that have two curvatures, they are of three sizes.
And of those that have three curvatures, they are of three sizes.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a small simple needle:
The shape of a large pear with two curves: The shape of a pear or a bell with two curves: The shape of a little pear or a bell with two curves:
The shape of a large pear or a bell with three curves:
The shape of a pear or a bell with three curves:
And these are the shapes of the cautery knives that are sharp and sharp the boils and abscesses, and they have three species, four of which are large, pear-shaped, and small.
The shape of a large cautery knife:
The shape of a pear-shaped cautery knife:
The shape of a small cautery knife:
The edges of those that are made by cutting are sharp, and the other edges are not sharp, and they are not pressed in such a way, but so that it can be done well in the excoriation of the boils to avoid the fear of incision of vein or nerve, and for those it is healing for the patient and at the same time tranquility a little by the scar left from the excoriation of the abscess.
These are the shapes of amulets, and there are three species: large, medium, and small, as you see.
These are the shapes of herbs and their likes, which are made into a poultice.
And it is in the external part, where the pricked herb is hidden with a space, and in that place, you divide and open the parts as you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatulas, which are hidden between the mentioned parts for the perforation of abscesses and do not pierce the intestines, and there are three species: large, medium, and small. These are the forms of those:
The forms of those bandages that are removed from the wound of the sanguineous fluid, and there are three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
These are the shapes of herbs that are round or some length, and they are thin.
And you should have great skills in making these special types of incisions, thin and deep, so that for those abscesses you can quickly remove pus with velocity in necessity, and later when the first medicine is not effective.
However, you should not use those incisions to remove pus in all parts of the body, and you should only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the ribs of the chest and thighs, and on the ribs of the arms, and the breasts, and the belly, and the groin, and similar to those fleshy areas.
Some wounds are made with other instruments similar to these lancets, according to this form; through which the pus is removed when a bloodletting is performed, or you must make an incision of a vein or an artery.
And some wounds are made round according to this form:
Chapter 47
About the care of the breasts of men, which are similar to those of women.
Some women inflate their breasts to complement the pleasure of sleeping with them when they begin to become pale, and then they inflate their breasts, assemble their breasts like those of women, and they are remote.
And to those who follow this, cut the moon-shaped parts according to this line from .B. to .G., and then excoriate the entire groove, and place the plaster of fleshly medicament on it, and adjust the two lips of the plaster in a smooth manner, and cure that within which it is healed.
If the breast declines to the parts behind and is softened by its magnitude as if it were like women, then cut it in two at the upper part, making two sections similar to a lunar figure, of which each contains the end of the other, so that the major line contains the minor according to this form of the line from .B. and .G. And then excoriate the cord that is between the two lips of the plaster, remove the fleshiness, and administer what we have said about the suture and the powders that are necessary in the healing within which it is healed.
And if you do not complete the initial incision for the patient's anxiety and due to excessive bleeding, then cover the wound with a plaster soaked in corrosive liquid and leave it to eat away at the dead flesh, and then care for the area that is healing.
Chapter 48.
About the perforation of abscesses that come from the tonsils.
These abscesses that come from the tonsils are of the species of scrofula, hard ones, which contain a pus.
And of those that contain moisture, those that contain moisture should be incised in the lunar shape according to this figure: from line G to line B. And as soon as all the matter is evacuated from the abscess, then close it with a clean cloth and leave it for the next day.
And keep the wound open and treat it with an appropriate liquid until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the glands in the neck and the scrophula is present, then you should lance it as we have described in the section on scrophula equally.
And if the plague is spreading to areas that are not affected, then you should apply the cautery as we have described in that section.
Chapter 49.
Of the incision of abscesses that occur by accident or by vein.
When the rib is broken, and the flesh that is over it is consolidated, then you should make incisions in the abscess and remove the sinews by which inflammation and abscess are known to occur through the artery or vein: because when the abscess is caused by an accident, it is longer attached to the body; and that when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a noise in the area.
And those that are caused by the vein are reduced to the surface of the body.
And incision into this abscess is an error, and especially in those that are near the bones, and in the angles, and in many parts of the body; and it is a great risk, so you should avoid it if possible, and those that are on the outside or on the head should be avoided.
Over the area that belongs to them due to inflammation of the orifice of the arch, cut through the thick section in the long; and then remove the section with tweezers, and remove the arch, and remove the tunics that are discovered inside.
And then place the needle on that area and make it penetrate into the other side, and stretch the arch with double force in two places, â€” which causes you to have seen in the extraction of two arches that are in the temples.
And then push the area between two ribs with space enough to reach the entire spine, and dissolve the abscess.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated within the ribs; and then cure that with appropriate means to that area until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to section of the vein, then cover that area with your hand at the possible location of the abscess on the side, and then introduce the needle behind the location where you have held your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that area double in length until you remove the other from the other side, and then tie the abscess at two ribs according to what I have told you in the rib of a grape of two parts of two extremities of the vein.
If you fear that the thread might come out, then insert the reliable thread into the pus at the beginning of the wound, and strengthen the four threads in four places.
Then dry the pus in the middle of the wound before it is inserted into that which is inside, and insert the excess thread from the needle, and leave what is left inside.
And place your hand over the cotton that you have soaked in wine and oil, and administer the cure that is made with herbs and ointment while it is being healed.
Chapter 1 of the abscess that occurs due to the twisting of nerves.
Similarly, when abscesses occur in the bones and veins, and similarly when abscesses occur in the nerves when they occur due to excessive use or similar causes.
And it is made in the most suitable place for the assistants or the tailor, or in any place where the joints are not affected.
And if it is a severe abscess, and resembles the color of the other body, and is located in the major parts of the patient, and when stretched with violence, it feels like a great shock to the patient.
And if it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason it is left behind, and it is weak at all parts and does not go to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, those who are in the joints should not be pierced with iron, because it would often cause contraction.
But if it is in the head or forehead, then make a small incision. But if it is a small abscess, then use the forceps and cut that of the root.
And if it is large, then hang it up with an hook, and scrape that, and remove it; and place the wound under a bandage, and cure it before it becomes healthy.
Chapter 51.
About the lancing of an abscess that occurs in the cheek, which also occurs in the belly.
When men experience swelling in their abdomens and other parts of the body, which are called fungal due to their similarity to those that grow on mushrooms, with subtle reasoning and a large head; and their lips are conversed, and they are those that are small, and they are those that are very magnificent.
And I have seen one, and in his abdomen there were two parts that were more like mushrooms, and there was no difference between those white ones, of small reasoning.
And their lips were conversed and they opened, and water was running from there all the time.
Therefore, I inserted those and reinserted one in his foot at the eighteenth hour of the day, and the other at the sixth hour.
And the operation at the beginning of their insertion is to consider whether the patient is wet, and the color of the skin is white, wet, of subtle reasoning; then you insert it with a flat spatula, and in your presence cauterize it in the fire, because swellings that are caused by separation must be expelled by burning; and if you find the burnt part, cauterize it.
And if you see the patient becoming anxious and fearful, then keep a sharp sword near; otherwise, take a recent blood sample, strengthen that arm, which is the one we have mentioned, and let it rest for two days.
And then adjust in the stricture of the blood vessel; therefore, do not stop strengthening the large, dirty blood clot in that arm until it is removed and falls by itself.
However, if the arm is of large size, there may be some cause for fear and terror, especially in that one which is in the belly.
However, it is possible that you incise the vein of that arm, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And be careful not to incise the arm that is of dark color, light sensation, and regular pulse, because that one is cancerous.
And you will remember the cure for this condition soon.
Chapter 52.
Of the cure of an abdominal hernia.
An abdominal hernia is caused by various causes; or by a fissure in the navel, which is on the abdomen, and through which the intestine or hernia protrudes according to what is appropriate for the other ruptures; or by weakness of the muscle, which flows from vein or artery according to what is called this, or by constriction of the abdomen in it.
If it is by a fissure in the navel and protrusion of the intestine, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and appears in various positions. And if it is by the protrusion of the intestine, then the position of that one is like that of what we have mentioned, with greater diversity, and as you press that one, the pain disappears, and then returns; and very often it is in the same place, and is a magnificent motive to introduce the bath and great labor.
If it is due to moisture, then it is lion and not hidden when you press your hand, nor is it constrained or believed.
And if it is due to pus, then this sign appears in the abscess as it becomes black and declining.
If it is due to meat, then the abscess is heavy, large and hard, and it is attached after a certain amount.
If it is due to venosity, then the touch of it is lion.
And the operation in it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to pus from an abscess, or from a vein, or from venosity; therefore it should be prohibited from its treatment, because in those cases there is fear and fear as you have been taught in the chapter where he mentioned the abscesses from abscess and from vein.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or hernia, then you command the patient to hold his own, and be extended; and then touch around the entire umbilicus, and command it to be between your hands on its own two, and then circle with the thin span around the circumference of the umbilicus over the place that you should have properly placed the touch; and then extend the mass of the abscess to the parts above the ankle; and then tie in the circuit a strong or weak thread and the method of the thread's descent.
And then bring the towel over the abscess and insert the mentioned instrument into that place and try to push the intestine back; and if you have not previously guarded it through the incision, then you will extract the pus and push the intestine to the parts of the belly.
And if you have found the towel, then take that needle and remove any excess from it.
But if it is against your artery or vein, then circle that spot, and return to your operation; and take two needles and put them in those two fields strongly and insert two needles around the abscess in the shape of a cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, remove the needles and let the wound heal where the flesh extends and falls off; or if it is thin and can be removed, then cure that which covers the wound with something that will keep it clean until it is healed.
If the prominence of the navel is made of flesh and no matter or due to moisture, then cover it with the pus that we have mentioned and remove the pus or the moisture, which is found in it, and then cure that area with a remedy that covers it and that consolidates it.
Chapter 43.
Of the treatment of cramps.
We have already said, in the division, about specifics for cramps and how to treat them with medicines, and that it is advisable to use iron in their treatment so that they do not become ulcerated; and we have said that cramps are generated in the most and greatest care of their treatment.
The ancients said that some cramps are in places where eradication is possible, such as cramp in the breasts or on the cushion and similar to the members allocated to stretch all of that, and especially when they begin small.
But when it is old and severe, do not cover it with yourself, because you will not be able to heal from that or any other, nor has it been reached by that.
When the operation is performed as we have said, first you precede and remove the patient and purge them of black bile for some time, and then sew it up, if found to be manifest.
And then prepare the patient for the operation in which they are located, and prohibit them from eating anything that could cause a reason for the operation. And then examine every part of the body thoroughly without causing any harm. And then let the blood flow, and do not remove it in the same way, and express the places where the blood is flowing, and wipe away the thick blood from your hand or the instrument that you can possibly use from the instruments.
If you find thick blood at the beginning of a vein or artery, then cauterize it while the blood is still flowing, and then care for that spot until it is healed.
Chapter 4
Of the cure of dropsy.
We have already recommended, in the division, of the species of dropsy of the water, and the symptoms of each species, of its cure with medicines.
And the one who is cured with iron is only of the kind of toothpicks, and not close to iron of the kind of tympanists or of the kind of hypodermic needles, because that is fatal.
And when you have already treated this kind of hypodermic tympanist, with medicine and not with your medicine, then consider, why if the patient has been weakened, or is another sick person of the same kind, such as in the chest or stomach and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not treat it with iron, because there is fear over it.
But if you see the patient of great virtue and it is not another disease but only hypodermic so much, and not child or old, then the method of operation of it is that you lift the patient between your arms, and give it to the exact place of its belly with its hand, pushing water to the part behind the pentenilh, and then take a sponge in this form:
should be of two sharp points long, from the sharp end with a spatula; but rather it should be in some shortness gradually, so that in the operation you do not pierce the intestine, and that it does not hurt him.
And then consider whether the generation of hydrocele is due to the intestines, for it is said that you should make the section along the belly for the amount of three fingers behind, on the right side of it over the peritoneum.
But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the testicle, then your section should be on the left side of the belly for three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to a melon, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not let your section be on the side on which you want to place the patient so that the excess does not flow to that location.
And then pierce the instrument through the entire cord, and enter it into that section, and lift your hand between the cord and the siphac, and you scrape it; and if the amount is one finger or more.
And then proceed to pierce the skin until you reach the space where the water is located at the location. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape: and it is similar to a silver needle; it is made of silver or of thin gold or of lion's hair, at which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and it is shaped at its end by carving according to the manner of the pen, as follows:
And on the upper part of it is a ring, which when the instrument reaches the water, you should immediately raise it over the instrument, and then evacuate the water in small quantities, because if you evacuate too much at once, the patient may die from the resolution of their spirit animal, or an accident may occur to them that is approaching death.
You should also evacuate the water according to the amount of the patient's strength and according to what means to you the dispositions of the patient's strength of their leg and goodness of their body.
And then remove the instrument, and release the water that causes this, which is usually held by a thread that you should pull through the opening of which it is recommended that you pierce that second in that manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other side if the patient tolerates that, and remove a small amount of water, and do this for several days, and be careful not to let any water out.
But if you are afraid of the patient, and leave a large amount of water in them, then cure that one with burial in sand, and moisten it with water, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure that one with desiccating medicines until they are healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the melon and the finger close to the extraction of water, according to what I have said before.
Chapter LV.
Of the cure of children who are born without a perforated bladder.
Some of the children born from the belly of their mother, the head of their mixture is not pierced (or is straight or is not in its place).
Therefore, cover the opening with a thin substance according to this form as soon as it is born.
And place a thin nail with a flat head on that and tie it, and do this for three days or for fourteen days.
When he wants to urinate, he should remain lying down and urinate; then return that.
And if you do not place the flat head, it is possible that the urine that passes over that place does not clean this cover.
That is, the one who has a straight opening should be treated with a flat nail as we have said, for three days until it is enlarged.
That is, those in which the opening is not in its place, the cause of that is because of those who are born with a straight penis so that they cannot urinate at the proper parts, until they raise the penis to their chest; and it is not in the generation, because then the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, and it is a malady caused by a lack.
And the method of the operation is that the patient should be lying on their back, and then extend the head of the knife towards your left hand with great forceful extraction, and insert the tip of the knife into the location of the pericardium at a sharp angle, as if you were writing with a pen, or do not cut any part, so that the edge of the knife resembles the tip of the knife and that the blood falls into the second location.
And be careful that in your operation of phlebotomy, four things can go wrong with that; and pause at that point where you remove the vein, and cure the wound before it heals.
Chapter 66
About the white matter that occurs in the prepuce at the tip of the knife and corrosion and blackness and adhesion of the prepuce at the tip of the knife.
Four things that can go wrong with this white matter in the knife and its sharpness and flesh lag.
And one of them is malignant and the other is not malignant.
No-malignant, cover it with a thin ointment and remove the one that contains all the malignant parts; then place your hand over the affected area and apply the ointment until it is cured.
If the tumor is malignant, use a black ointment, then cover it with a cloth and apply heat to the beginning and end of it.
However, if the tumor is on the prepuce of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tumor is inside the prepuce and the other part is exposed, then cover the part that is inside with a cloth until it is consolidated; and then cure the exposed part, because when you cure the prepuce, it is not guaranteed that it will not be damaged.
And if there have been accidents in the genitals and the black and corrugated skin, then cover everything that has already been discolored and that is about to be corrupted or that has already been corrupted; and then apply linen over it and cover it with a poultice made of flour of scorsa de milgrana and of earths, thistles, and cress.
And then cure the other wound until it is healed.
However, if there is excessive bleeding, then administer silver nitrate in the following manner:
where the pointed cautery is placed at two positions apart, so it is at the bleeding and on the wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed completely in an hour, then introduce a catheter into the opening of the foreskin to allow the patient to urinate through it.
In the adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adherence does not occur except in those where the foreskin is known, and over it is not required circumcision; and when adherence occurs due to wound or abscess) then scrape with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to remove those exquisitely, then scrape with a spatula from the head of the penis and the foreskin, and pull out the foreskin, which when thin, is easily perforated by its thinness.
And then gently separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis with a small, sharp instrument, which has been previously soaked in water to prevent adhesion of another layer.
And then apply a styptic powder to stop the bleeding once it has stopped.
Chapter LVII.
About the cleaning of children and the treatment of that which happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continence as in other diseases: rather, it is a matter of our operation and our will, and it is particularly appropriate in children, so it is necessary to assign the best possible operation and method to prevent loss of life.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free people, because they do not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired by experiment that the majority of the craftsmen and barbers use circumcision and cleaning with a knife and a thorn; and they use a cord and an unguent.
When you have already tried all these methods and nothing improves the condition, it is better to use forceps, scissors, or a needle that can be used in surgery, as the string of the foreskin under two layers of skin, and the layer of skin is usually on the other side, and sometimes it is necessary to do so with great care. And the surgical procedure that is done for circumcision, and digital, of which blacksmiths use, it is not certain where the incision of the end of the male member is made, as it often enters into the wound of it.
In the operation, a needle, if not used properly, can cause damage to your surgery. The string of the child is short by nature, and sometimes it grows in such a way that it does not require circumcision, and I have seen such cases.
But from the circumcision that is done with forceps, scissors, or a needle, I have found by experience that the forceps have an unproportional incision, as the sharpness on top is the same as the sharpness on the bottom; and therefore when you press your hand in proportion to two sharpnesses, and make an incision at one time, it is a compression of the needle that contains the string of the foreskin of all parts, and does not make any error of all.
And the first step in the operation is that you make the child very still, especially if it is one of those who understands a little, that you only hold them by their back so much as necessary, and that you leave them alone for the rest of the day.
And then do everything possible to make that child happy in all that way. And then make sure that child is between your arms, prepared properly, and not naked; and hide the forceps in your hand or under their foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand on their back and blow in their mouth, and pull out the one that is stuck at the end of the back, and modify that which is added from the sound.
The form of the forceps for extraction, this is the form:
The handles of the forceps are not too sharp and the other ones are sharp, so that the end of the hook does not hurt, and the length of the two blades is as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
The mistake in extraction is that the forceps does not completely enter the internal mouth, or part of it must be inserted from the beginning.
Therefore, make sure that you insert the other one of your hour from the beginning of the wound and that you insert it at the same depth.
If you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract it with a needle and insert it there.
If it has passed three days, and that is what is inflamed behind the nail, then let that out carefully, scrape that area, and insert the second one that you have prepared.
And be careful of the nail head, so it does not hit that.
And cure that with the powder that we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it does not fit exactly, and you follow the instructions above, then that will not be the case.
And cure that with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 58.
Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction due to a stone or congealed mucus, or by phimosis or foreskin, and similar to those of which we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
And if the urine is not dissolved and the cause is very strong, then cover the patient with a blanket and use an instrument called a catheter, which is made as follows: It should be made of silver and have a thin, sharp point, like a lion's claw, and a thin, sharp end like a palm leaf and a finger, to which a thin, sharp point should be attached at the top.
And the method of extracting the urine by that person is to take the catheter, fold it in half, and tie it with wool or thread for good hold; then insert the folded end of the catheter into the part behind the catheter, and if there are any superfluous causes of the wool, do not introduce them into the catheter, but remove them from the border and from the album of the urine.
And perform surgery on the patient over the table, rub the affected area with oil and a mixture of honey and water, using olive oil and vinegar.
And insert the catheter to facilitate its passage until it reaches the tip of the honey; and then fold the catheter over the abdomen; and then push the catheter through that; and then push it through until it reaches the bladder, and that is when the patient should be able to urinate, and if this is not done in this order, but rather forced, it will cause twisting.
And then slowly pull out the catheter with the small thread, as the urine soaks the thread.
And then remove that and do for the cure of urine, use a catheter, do not stop doing that and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient is again relieved.
Chapter 99.
On the quality of bladder irrigation with a catheter and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When ulcers or abscesses occur in the bladder, or it is constricted by swelling, and you want to drain fluids and medications from there, then use an instrument called a cystoscope, and this is its form:
but it has a hole on its outside, so it is closed. And in that there are three parts: two from one side, as needed.
In the beginning is a container, in which that which is inserted is placed, and it has two quantities that correspond to it, its addition, until when any cause is drawn from there, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, the liquid is drawn, and when it is expelled long, according to what the cystoscope is made of, which is made of pitch in the battles of the sea.
So when you want to draw fluids from the bladder, insert the end of the cystoscope into the liquid, and draw that liquid which is inserted into the parts above, where the liquid is drawn into the container of the cystoscope.
And then, before entering the catheter into the urethra as recommended in the circle; and then, apply moisture with that water, which moistens the bladder at first, and the patient feels it.
The shape of the thin catheter by which the bladder is catheterized, and that is its shape:
And it should be made of silver or tin, of which the tip is similar to a small feather, and then the canal is inserted into the bladder.
And then, take the bladder in motion, and place it in that moisture which you want to catheterize into the bladder, and then tie it strongly with a double thread, and boil that moisture over the fire.
And then, insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then, place your hand on the bladder with that moisture which has already reached the bladder.
But if the bladder is not present, then take a pestle of pumice stone and make a circle from it; and perforate it throughout its entire surface; and then insert a strong thread through those tracks, as it is turned; and then add the circle where it is also added, so that you wait in that water which you want to catheterize into the bladder, and listen and observe.
And then approach that with the instrument and do as you did with the bladder, and express the moisture into the bladder through your hand.
Chapter 60.
Of stone extraction.
We have already mentioned in the previous section the types of stones and their cures with medicines, and the difference between stones that form in the kidneys and stones that form in the bladder, and their symptoms.
And we have mentioned the stone that requires surgical intervention and incision.
The stone that forms in the bladder itself is the one that gets stuck in the bladder.
And I will explain it with a clear and concise explanation.
Therefore, it is said that stones that form in the bladder mainly occur in children; and among their symptoms is that the urine that is excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels pain in the lower back, and then becomes paralyzed; and at that time, they often feel pain in the groin.
And it is the cure of children who have reached fourteen years old, and it is difficult to treat the elderly. In young people, it is considered that for this reason, they are between those who have not reached their full growth.
And of that one where the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is less, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of that one, we begin with the beginning of that which they call the crister, which extracts all the fistula, which is in their intestines; because that fistula sometimes prevents the passage of the stone due to its investigation.
And then press the crister against their feet and be careful and make them lie down in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it falls out from some other place.
And then make that cerec between your hands prepared, and the hands of the patient should be placed on the things of the patient, so that the bladder is completely made to lean down to the parts below.
And then bring that entire portion of cloth.
So if you feel the stone in the space, then immediately apply pressure to it.
And if you do not remove all of the dust from your hand, then apply some oil to it on the left side of the patient's back, if the patient is a child, or on the right side if they are an adult, and insert that into their rectum. And then bring that stone out through the same opening where it was inserted. And gradually introduce it into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that from the left side of the patient's body, and expel it through the same opening where your hand was.
And command the assistant to press on the bladder with their left hand; and command another assistant to extend their right hand over the patient's thighs, and their left hand to remain against the perineum, which is between the thighs, in the part where the incision was made.
And then introduce a pointed instrument through the same incision, which has this shape: And cut in that place between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle, towards the left side of the cushion; and the section should be on the stone and the titled "in the buttocks", and make a transverse section, so that the exposed section is wide and tight according to the quantity that the stone can hold, and not more, because if the titled stone is forced to hold the section, it will lose its functionality.
And know that there is a stone among them that has an angle and margins, so that the exit of it is made difficult by that.
And from that one is like a lion's claw, round, and made of stronger material exit.
Therefore, if it is the one with angles and margins, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not forced to hold the section, then cover that, or strengthen it with a decent gesture, the end of which should be like a razor that strengthens on the stone, and does not slip from it; or insert it behind the subtle instrument with curved end.
If you cannot do it on that one, then slightly increase the size of the opening, and if you want to draw out pus, cut strongly through that with a strong vitreous needle.
If the stone is larger than one, then at the beginning you push the finger into the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little more of that; and similarly do if they are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then it is known that you should incise that with a large section, which causes one of two things to the patient: either death or that they develop a continuous drip of urine, because the area is not completely solid.
If you administer expulsion of it before it is fully formed, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps before it is extracted in pieces.
Then when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with aloe and dragon's blood, and strongly that. And place that cloth soaked in oil or oiled and wet with water, to prevent the abscess from spreading.
Then place the patient on their back on their own pillow, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
When those airs have been removed, rub the area with water and oil, and care for that wound with daffinicon and diabazilicon until it is healed.
But if an abscess has formed in the wound, it is hard and corrosive, and if it is similar to one that is in the bladder frozen, and for that there is a prohibition of urine (and that is known as the exit of the wound with urine), then enter the said tool into the wound and extract that wound, because it can cause the bladder to corrode and putrefy.
Then wash the wound with warm water and vinegar, water and salt, and with all opposition to that special one, with that which is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And cover all the patient's body with cloths and adjust the medicines that are placed on the affected area.
And if the stone is small and located in the middle of the urethra, and it is stuck there, and urine cannot be discharged, then use this remedy to reach cure, as many troops are used for this treatment and it is called cure; and I have already extracted it, and you should take a small iron needle with a hook like this:
with a triangular shape, sharp, inserted into the urethra.
And then take a soft, flexible catheter and place it behind the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the urethra, piercing it until the hook reaches the stone. And then rotate the hook in the stone little by little, and you will pierce the opening of it until you make the other side penetrate; as the urine is already released.
And then place your hand on that area where the stone of the urethra is located, which is usually soaked in urine, and the patient is cured.
However, if this cure cannot be performed for some reason that prevents you from doing so, then place two fingers below the stone and two above it. And then push on the stone in that urethra between two grooves. And then remove it. And then remove the bandage and change the dressing, which is made in the abdomen.
It is not necessary to place a bandage below the stone, but rather to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and the other bandage above should be placed so that when the first bandage is removed, the edge of the stone does not return to its place and cause infection.
And for that reason, when you remove the bandage above, you should lift the skin on the parts above or return your hand to its original position and place it in the abdomen as we have said.
Chapter 61.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are not commonly formed.
However, if one of those has a stone, the cure is difficult, and it is forbidden by too many hands.
One of them is that the woman is very young and a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is very skilled and can describe to the doctor whether she has had intercourse with a man when she is chaste, or she is among the women who have husbands.
The third is that you do not have a woman who is very skilled in this art, especially the operation of the abdomen.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision over the stone in women is longer than the location of the stone, so it is necessary to make an incision beforehand, and in that place there is fear.
However, if you need to do so, make sure to get a very skilled woman who is rarely found.
If you are not privy to that, then consult a skilled and subtle physician, or present a well-educated and experienced midwife, or a woman who has knowledge in this art.
Then make that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct them to, from the examination of the stone until its removal; this is because it is necessary to check if the woman is a virgin, then cover the same area with a cloth and ask for the stone.
Then if that person is found, cover them with a cloth, and then command them to incise over that area.
If they are not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert the same area into the cavity of the patient and examine the stone, placing their left hand on the bladder, and carefully observe that area.
Then if that person is found, gradually moisten the area around the opening of the bladder with the same substance until it reaches the stone in the cavity.
Approach the position of the doctor's chair and place the cushion under it in the same place where it is usually placed, and center the stone in that part, and the doctor should not remain near the cushion afterward.
The section should be thin at the beginning; and then place the ray over that section, and if you feel the stone, then adjust the section according to the amount of stone that is known to be in that area.
You should know that the types of stones are varied: some are thin and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and have ridges.
Therefore, you should know what type of stone is in that area for what you mean by that.
And if you want to draw out the sand, place the triangular glass in that location for an hour until it is removed, and then return to your operation until the stone is completely removed.
And make sure to prepare the tools that are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you can be helped by those in your operation.
If you want to expel sand from the body, and know that the expulsion of sand is through the arch that is embedded, then place powder on the area and loosen that arch and structure, and do not repeat that; leave the stone and do not remove it, for if you do, the patient will likely die. And treat the wound.
Since the sharpness of the sand has decreased after several days, and the wound has healed, then return to your operation before the stone is forgotten.
Chapter 62.
Of incision on hernia in the groin.
Hernia in the groin is not more than an accumulation of moisture in the white canal that contains the testicles, which is called the scrotum.
And some of them are in the proper panniculus that nature has prepared in the area of the testicles, until it becomes another testicle; and this is the cord of the testicle between the white canal that we have said, and it is not that but scar tissue.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakening of the muscles, which occurs in the groin, so that this matter is pushed into these areas, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow caused by impact on the groin.
And this humidity has different colors, such as the color of it is declining to yellow or red, or black, or rusty, or is dark and muddy, or is white and watery, and that is what is most common.
And the signs by which one can tell if this water aggregation is of this kind: because if it is in the white blister that we have said, then the abscess gradually declines a little along with the figure of a bird, and appears in the groin, because the humidity comes from all parts.
And if the humidity is in the same skin, then the abscess gradually declines at the part of the bird and appears to be another bird.
And if the humidity is between the folds of the groin and the white blister, then one should compress it.
And if you want to know the color of the humidity in the abscess, then extract the color of the humidity from the pus that is found in the wound; and if there is any discharge from the wound, judge according to that.
Therefore, when you come to treat him with iron, first order the patient to be bled if possible, and then examine his chest.
Then place him supine on his back for some reason, and place something underneath him.
Then place yourself on the left side of him, and order the assistant to follow on his right, who extends his hand to one of two latches at the crown of the genitals and at the part of the mirror of the belly.
Then take a scalpel and divide the crown of the genitals from the middle position for the length entering into the penis.
And make the incision straight and equally distant from the line that should be the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white bone, including the cicatrix.
And expel that one, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not injure that one; and your excoriation should be the same as the one that was expelled, which is suspended by the highest part and subtly scrutinized according to the quantity possible.
And then puncture the bottom of the swollen part with a wide needle, and extract all the water.
And then separate between two lips of the section with the incisions, and extend the swollen part to the parts above; and do not touch the genitals that are contained, and puncture the swollen part in that manner that is possible for you. And puncture that one at its entirety or in parts, and more subtly than its lateral part, because if you do not scrutinize the incision of it exquisitely, it is not certain that the water will not return.
But if the wound proceeds from that deformed part of its code in the hour of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the swollen part, return again that one, and then adjust the two lips of the code of the genitals with a suture, and then care for that one as with the others until it is healed.
If the corrupted kidney is also affected by another illness, then first tie the veins that are attached to it, remove the kidney, and then cure that part with what we have mentioned before.
However, if the water is added in two equal parts, then you will know that two are hernias; therefore, insert that part according to what you have done on the other one equally; and if it seems to be an operation, then do it.
And then you will clean the wound, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or rose oil; and place another piece of wool that you have soaked in vinegar and oil over two genuflections and the miracle of the belly; and place cloths and powders on top of them, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fold them according to this form; and make the bandages for the extremities as follows: those that are pressed from the side or from wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the belt of the trousers, and one extremity is taken from behind the buttocks into the two, and the second is taken to the part of the underwear, and two extremities on top of two cushions and two other extremities on top of two angles, and all the structure should be adjusted in the belt of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a pointed cautery instead of natural incision; and you should take a fine-tipped cautery and insert it into the inguinal canal, and ignite it after we have recommended that it be done before the white envelope containing the water is opened, and then you should take the cautery in this form: and it is shaped like the Greek letter.
And then puncture that envelope, and ignite it inside before all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the envelope with your fingers, scrape it with your fingers, and scrape it with a fine-tipped cautery ignited; and insert it as much as possible inside in order to remove everything; and guard yourself from the heat that the fire does not touch you.
And know that this operation is safer and longer than the operation of incision.
But if you encounter resistance to the abscess at the time of incision or at the time of cauterization, or during the drainage of pus, then cover it with a remedy that you can use for that resistance, which is appropriate according to what is said.
If the patient is weak and does not want to undergo the second operation due to its horror, then administer anesthesia as we have recommended; and when you are certain that this hernia is dangerous.
Then place the patient on a raised cushion, and when you have punctured the abscess in the lowest part of the thigh, cover the puncture according to its length.
And make sure that the opening is wide enough for all the water to flow out.
Then place your hand on that spot and press it down, so that the water continuously flows out. And care for that spot until the infection is healed.
But if resistance to the outflow of water at that time, then you should puncture that spot: and this is not done unless the white membrane in the orifices of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water, then place a pen or instrument in the wound from which water is extracted, as described; or adjust a small pressure on the wound.
When the water returns, and is boiled for several months or in the environment of those; and as it is boiled, then according to that manual method, the patient will pass their days.
Chapter 63.
About incision on fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the incision on this hernia, there is great fear of losing the patient due to severe complications; therefore, I see its dismissal and being saved by that better method.
And you should remember the operation in that and the signs of abscesses.
Therefore, say that abscesses do not occur in the parts where the joints are formed and it is done for various reasons: either due to excessive acute pain, which is found in the joints, or due to impact.
And its color is according to the color of the part, and it does not appear in the pain, and it is a heavy abscess.
And if the abscess is very hardened, of which the color is dark, and does not move at all.
Some varicose veins are caused by the narrowing of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those that already exist, or by the inflammation of the veins.
This is called by the dispersion of the abscess when it comes out with the thighs, and does not cause any harm.
This is also not dispersed by the compression of the thighs, for any reason.
And it is also possible that on this special case and on the other flesh; and you insert the needle of the genitals, and then pull the cord to the parts above, and extract that from the white cipher, and remove the suspensors of the veins, and tie them, and insert the suspensors as you remove all the parts of the cord.
Therefore, if the cord is already attached to those flesh and has been healed, then you should extract the cord and insert that.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause of the phimosis, or between what is between the buttocks, then you should remove all that adhesion and cut it at the round beginning.
But if the flesh is native to the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should cut all that is there, and remove it as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with lanolin mixed with rose oil and wine; and then care for that wound until it is healed.
Chapter 64.
Of the cure of a hernia that is in the thigh.
The thigh is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a bulge, and it is difficult to move and exercise walking on the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, fear of that which precedes it is remembered.
However, they say operation in the second that did the first.
And say that you should place the patient on a raised bed; and then lower the suspensory ligaments of the testicles to their divisions; and then take the spermatic cord of the genitals and pull it towards the thighs, which are spread wide apart; and have another assistant hold those parts, and extend them forcefully.
And then insert a sharp, narrow knife diagonally through the right side of the veins where the veins are exposed.
And then scrape off all the parts where we have said to remove the cartilage in the extraction of bones, which are in the temples.
And then insert a double-pointed needle in those places, and thread the first one into the first of the locations where we have made incisions, and thread the other one through the last of them. And then insert them diagonally through the middle location according to the length of the wound, and extract that which has been added due to the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with the same remedies used to cure other wounds in which you wish to generate healing by causing the vessels that do not cause harm.
But if it happens that all the vessels are affected, then cover them with a cloth so that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles are crushed by the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the beginning of the vessels, and that they are stabilized, or that something happens so that it is not harmful to those.
Chapter 65
Of the treatment of intestinal hernia
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a section that extends over the abdomen from the angles of the stomach, causing the intestines to protrude from any part of the rupture.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or of the intestine, and these two species occur due to various causes: impact, strain, coughing, or lifting a heavy cause, or by similar means.
When the swelling of the joints is caused by prolonged exposure to cold, it occurs gradually over time and does not happen suddenly, and it is a boil that enters the body when the joint compresses the intestine.
When the swelling of the joints is caused by dryness, it initially causes severe pain; and it is a boil that appears differently from the usual boil, and this is due to the intestine, and the cause of the joint pain is from the parts of the joint.
Sometimes, when the intestine is pulled out through the abdominal wall, it is called this inguinal hernia.
Sometimes, when the intestine is pushed out due to windiness, and sometimes it tears in the intestinal opening, and it is held there, and this is a great pain for the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain and more so when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of this illness, iron is used with fear, because it causes vomiting, so it should be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine to its cavity with your hand at the parts of its cavity and obey its return, and then place it on his neck between your hands, and raise his legs.
And then place the cord that is the cord of the testicles at the parts above, and insert the cord of the testicles completely through the long; and then place two fingers of the section second to those that should open the section to them.
And if the section is according to the quantity that is possible to be cut from that, it should be opened.
And then scrape that which is below the cord of the testicles, until it is discovered white from each part.
And then introduce your finger in that which is the testicle, in that which is between white cipher, which is below the cord of the wound, and between the cipher second, and solve that adherence which is in the part behind the wound.
And approach the patient's groin to the divided parts, and apply a white cloth on his left side, and raise the abdomen towards the right part; and command the assistant to extend it, and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind after the solution is completed.
And cover the patient's feet with a blanket, so there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped in the white cloth during surgery. But if you find any cause, then you should apply it to the abdomen behind.
And then insert it into the part behind the scrotum, which is divided by a section that runs through healthy and unhealthy tissue as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then administer submerged wool in oil, and place it on the affected area; and administer the bandage that we have recommended (and some white bandages of the scrotum are cauterized, which we have said to place at the beginning of the temen of healthy tissue, because some bandages accidentally affect those) and leave the bandage until it falls off.
If the patient's feces are delayed, then apply a warm water enema, and place your hand over that area after it has been expelled.
And then cure the wound with the other remedy for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter 66.
Of strangulated hernia.
In this hernia, no one has seen anyone who has been cured of it without iron.
And the first said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is visible; the thing is that you should tie the veins near the section of the body; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, which causes that, until the veins fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter 67.
Of the dislocation that is made in the legs.
Some people have a rupture in the legs as we have said, and they point to the area.
And do not attribute any cause to the hernias in the groin; and if you do, that is rare; and it returns in all hours.
If the time is prolonged, then a slit is made in the scrotum before the hernia returns; and this is caused by the extension of the scrotum, which is as we have said, the cause being that the scrotum is stretched, and it becomes soft and the area becomes inflamed and swollen.
And the cure of this is with a pointed cautery as we have previously described.
And some wounds are cured with iron in this way: and that is that the patient lies on their back between your legs, and you grasp the area of the inflamed and swollen apostemas with a section according to the size of three fingers.
And then apply a white linen cloth that is pulled through the inguinal canal to expose it.
And then take the ray and place it over the inflamed area of the scrotum, and press it against the abdomen.
And then approach the two incisions on the outer part of the thigh, and adjust one of them to the other with sutures.
And then remove the outer part of the thigh, and do not incise the abdomen from all sides, nor stretch the intestine, nor any other cause that you know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then care for that in the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the wounds, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; because the abdomen contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And cauterization is better in this place, as it is more likely to bring about healing.
Chapter 68.
Of the softening of the cords of the testicles.
The cords of the testicles in some men are softened because the tissues that are between them are softened, and the discharge from it is treated accordingly.
Therefore, it is necessary for that person who is preparing to treat it to make the patient lie on their side, and incise the entire cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then adjust two flaps over the suture.
If you wish, use three or four sutures or a firm stitch to close the excess of the softened sinew at the beginning.
Then insert between the stitches; and cure by treating the other affected areas so that they heal and the wounds close.
Chapter 69.
Of Castration.
You should know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but it is allowed for certain reasons as I remember in this book; and it is not necessary to remember of that unless for two reasons, one being that the doctor knows it when he is asked about it, who can cure it; and the other reason is that we have had the necessity of castration of other animals for our uses, such as horses, cows, pigs, and similar animals.
And therefore it is said that castration is done in two ways: by traction or by incision and section.
When it is done through attrition, the way of the operation is to make a cut in the animal's tail between its genitals, where they soften and become thinner, and hang down. Then take those with your hand inside before they are resolved and do not appear from the touch.
When it is done through incision and section, hold the animal and take the string of its testicles with your right hand.
Then tie the suspenders and make an incision on each side of its belly between two ribs.
Then make an incision on those that will be removed from each excoriate. Do not leave any cause on those of the cipher, but remove the subtle one that is over the veins.
This method of castration is better than the one done through attrition, because attrition leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal does not want to eat.
Then take care of the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
Of the cure of hydrophobia.
Hydrophobia in men presents two forms: one is that which appears in the space between the testicles, in the area between the two testicles, a small worm can be found.
And some of these worms cause urine that is in the space between the testicles.
In women, there is a special form: the worm of the womb is located above the uterus, with two testicles of a man, a small amount at the bottom of the vagina, and two testicles like those of a man.
And the cure is of three kinds: two from men and one from women. And it is that you should insert those fleshy parts adjusted into the place where the worm escapes, and then cure those with the cure of other plagues.
And in the second form of men, where the worm is found in the space between the testicles, there is no cure or operation in it.
Chapter 21.
Of lens and flesh, prominent by causes of women.
A strong lens is adjusted according to natural causes until it is stretched and made to fit; and some women are magnified in certain ways within which they spread as in men and perceive during intercourse.
Then cover that you have the excess of lens with your hand or oil and insert it.
And do not end in insertion, mainly in the front of the eye, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then care for that with cure of plagues until it is healed.
Meat born is meat that was in the horrible of the mother until it fills that, and very often it is seen at the parts deformed according to its (and for that reason they first call this "deformed offspring"); therefore cover that you insert there as you insert a lens, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
Of the treatment of rheumatism.
Rheumatism is when the joints are not perforated or slightly broken. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental is caused by a previous illness, and that is made of meat not well adjusted or of subtle or thick fat.
And it is made in the front of the shoulder, or on its sides, or in the upper arm, or in the lower arm, and prohibits movement, engagement, and lifting, and very strongly prohibits menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by regularly looking at the menstrual flow, if the obstruction is obvious, then; but if it is not obvious, then you should look at it with your fingers or with a rod.
But if the obstruction is of subtle fat, and it is placed on the two lips, then you should cut and remove that.
And it is that placed on the two lips, and then you should place your fingers over the indicated points of the two lips.
The woman should be on her back, her legs extended, and then gently spread her labia to the extent that the delicate phimosis is broken and the obstruction is removed.
Then take wool and soak it in oil and place it on the wound to prevent the wound from becoming solidified.
If the phimosis is large and thick, then cut it with a scalpel or a sharp knife.
If the obstruction is made of flesh, then suspend it with a hook and cut it.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of blood from wounds due to bites, such as acetic acid, and blood, and earthworms, adjusted with egg white.
And then administer a wide-bore catheter to prevent the wound from becoming solidified too quickly.
Hold it for several days and administer honey.
And then heal it with the other method of healing until it is healed.
And sometimes certain accidents occur in the greater native land of other flesh, and it is customary to insert according to this method. However, if it is for an abscess in the neck, then do not make a puncture at the abscess in the neck in any way.
Chapter 73.
Of the treatment of hemorrhoids, tail, and red boil that occurs in the region of women.
Hemorrhoids are considered to be the enlargement of veins that flow continuously from those orifices; and since hemorrhoids are treated thus.
And I have already said in the division of those species and their symptoms, and to say whether those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore say that hemorrhoids and tail when they are in the region of the greater and do not appear to the touch, then in those it is not customary to treat with a needle.
May those who are in the highest parts of the body above which the cat senses, are cured.
And cover that you put the needle in a moistened place and approach the forceps or the sharp cloth, and insert those into the roots.
And approach the powder on those from one of the powders that are inserted for biting, like acacia and similar to those.
And soak the feet in cold water for an hour, and then place that in hot water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then make that with a decoction of wormwood and saltpeter and vinegar and similar things.
And approach take flour of ordinary and mix that with honey and vinegar and make a paste from that on the back of it.
And if the blood is separated, good; and if not, make it stick to both bandages, and at the nipples are the incisions.
And approach take wool and immerse that in the juice of colianders or in the juice of arnagloza or in the juice of guarravier and vinegar and make it stick to the place; and then cure the place with ointment until it is healed.
And heal that wound which has been treated.
Chapter 74.
Of the perforation of an accidental wound in the thigh.
Special notes on accidental abscesses in the thigh, including cranke, abscess, ulcers, adhesions, erpetomenes, fistulas, and other abscesses. And I have already described these diseases and their symptoms, and their treatments in the previous section.
And you should know that in this treatise on abscess, the one that occurs in the thigh when it is one of the abscesses that collides with healthy tissue, and if you want to know how the operation for it is performed with a knife.
Then consider whether the pain of the abscess in its initial stage is sharp with percussion and swelling, and sometimes it feels like it is on fire, and if you feel that sensation, then do not perform the incision immediately, and treat that which helps to stop the maturation inside until the severity of the accidents ceases.
And then you should do the following: place your hand on her breast over two pillows; and lean back on her back and adjust her feet to the part of the bed closest to the stomach, and her thighs should be spread, and her arms should be placed under her head, and a blanket should be placed over her conveniently.
And then the midwife should follow behind the left side and administer the instrument that is placed in the opening of the mother, the form of which will come in those causes that will be appropriate.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should place yourself on the right side of the mother's bed, and that which enters into the mother should not be more than the length of the mother's bed and should not harm the patient. But if the instrument is longer than the length of the mother's bed, then you should place cushions on the surface of the mother's bed so that the instrument is not allowed to enter entirely into the mother's body.
And then you should place the vertebra that is on the left side of the instrument above and that the administrator should hold the instrument and rotate the vertebra until it is placed in the opening of the mother.
When the incision is made, it is touched with the hand and lion's saliva, and then you should remove that piece of cloth from under his head with a spoon.
And when the pus is evacuated, place your hand in a basin of rose-scented or unscented oil to prevent infection; and hold the knife in the section where the main blood vessel is.
And then cover the wound with clean, wet cloth that has been soaked in water in which vinegar has been built up.
And then it should be cured after two days with the appropriate medicine that is suitable for that wound to heal.
And some herbs are washed in the wound and the area around it with honey and water, and then with water in which horsehair or long Arabic roots have been boiled, and then return to the medicine.
And if the wound is deeply embedded in the flesh, then you should be prohibited from treating it with iron, having care for that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to best treat pregnancies that are not in the natural form.
It is necessary for the midwife to know the natural form of pregnancy from experience, and when you see the woman expelling parts before and after, and desiring to smell the air, and above that is a sign that this part is not in the natural form, and the presentation of the fetus on its own head, and the second position is hanging or suspended from the umbilicus.
Therefore, when you see these signs, cover the abdomen of the woman so that the fetus can slightly move forward as it comes out over its own head, and the second position is born, and it is said that these excess movements are a good delivery.
However, if this part is not natural and unusable, because when the fetus is born over its own feet and the body of the woman is facing forward, and the back of the woman is one, or at the foot of the woman, or the head of the woman is born and the back of the woman, or on the abdomen of the woman, and it is greatly turned over its own collar, and similar to the unusable figures.
When necessary, the cause is often attributed to the woman who is wise and subtle in all these causes, and who guards against error and deception.
And by showing all the figures of those things, one can understand what is happening in them and how it relates to that and stands on that.
When it is done, it is placed on the patient's head for natural relief, and that is very strong on the woman and is done at that difficult part, sometimes the power of which has been weakened, then do that sweating, or what the women had before, and evaporate the condensation from the patient with fenugreek tea and warm oil.
Then insert the midwife between her legs and loosen that second skin, or dry it with her finger until that water is removed from it. And press the woman's belly until the child is born.
If not, then cover the woman with a mixture of mud and fenugreek tea.
And then command the patient, approach the crucifix, and ask them to be calm and make that sign of the cross; and close their mouth and nose for an hour, so they can die quickly.
And if the patient's breaths are often interrupted at the beginning, then gradually reduce those facilities little by little. But if they do not obey the instrument, then place your hand on their chest and lift their feet up, and gradually lower the sheet to the ground; and the hand should be held so that it does not fall during the concussion.
And if the breaths are not returned and the patient dies, then insert those and remove the remaining body of the patient or place their body in the lap of the one who is with them and remove that equality, because that person will die quickly.
When the patient is lying on its feet, then gradually push those upwards, and gradually turn the patient small, and gradually make them equal to that, and gradually take one of their legs and extend it little by little.
When they are lying between the thighs, then command them to express themselves, and make that extraction as gentle as possible, for it is a delicate matter if God wills it.
And if that is not possible, then gradually return the small child back into its natural second figure, as it would be more appropriate and gentle.
And if it is completely prohibited, then take some mucilage of flax and dissolved gum, and grind it well in the mortar for good percussion, and apply that to the woman's private parts, at the bottom of her belly. And then make that into a ceruse in rosewater, until it reaches its proper consistency.
And when the parts left of them are softened, then do the sublimation of myrtle and sub-pause that to them. And when the sublimation lasts for an hour, then make that into a powder on a plate, and then perform the extraction of the mouth of them, and lift it from there, and press the lowest part of their belly gently, as it would be more appropriate.
Lay the child flat on his back with one of his hands. Gradually reduce the child's abdomen, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and let her do it.
If the patient cannot move, then perform the jazzer on the left side, and shake the cushions under him vigorously, and administer medicines that you have and recommend from opiates.
If the child is born, then perform that serer on the ceramic, and study the reduction of the umbilical cord, and equalize the feet according to the natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to know if she has expelled.
The child is on its back, with its arms extended and the surface of its foot at the two o'clock position of its mother. The midwife holds the umbilical cord of the child and gradually turns it, and that facilitates.
And when it is equalized, pause over the womb of the child that you have recommended from oil and opiates.
And then command the woman to gradually expel, and when you have done that, perform that serer on a ceramic and command her to be inclined on her left side, and then command her to be comfortable; and make the woman sneeze again. The outcome of the prepared fetus on the side.
When the second bone of the upper arm is cut by this method, consider, and then you insert the second finger into it until it is drained of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then you insert it into the abdomen to prevent it from being retained and decaying.
And then apply the fetus to the parts that are inside until you place the second one in the vagina, and tell the woman to understand some signs, and if the man is not ready, may God will.
The outcome of twins or many fetuses. Know that the movements of twins are not natural, and some last three or four days, but this is strange and does not happen; rather, it is a cause by nature, and not a living thing.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, one second finger, and they are separated by a cipher, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each of those, and some signs are not ready as it is a fetus that is naturally alive, and its position has some signs that are not acceptable as we have recommended.
If it is difficult to remove them from their position and they reach the point where we have mentioned about the unnatural figures, then cure those as we have described.
And if the midwife skillfully and performs what facilitates and subtly, and quickly, and is intelligent according to all figure according to what is prepared by the engineer leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and aborts.
Some women are formed in the womb in one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten, and it is already verified that a woman aborts not until the sixth, and another all formed, which cause is made because of the glorious savior.
And all this knowledge should be in the science of the midwife that is very useful for that appearance similar to that, and therefore pauses to that which is known.
Chapter 76.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you are treating a dead fetus that we have mentioned in the division of medicine and it is not deformed, and if you find it suitable to use an operation with your hand, then consider whether the woman has healthy virtue and is not affected by any of the accidents by which she is feared for perdition.
Then the woman should be placed on her left side, with her head inclined to one side and her legs raised.
And the assistant should hold the woman's hand or place it on her left side to prevent the fetus from extending during extraction.
Then you should moisten the mother's mouth with oil and a mixture of mint, fennel, and sesame seeds.
And the midwife should place her hand on those oils and mixtures, and place her hand in the mother to facilitate the birth, and surround the area where the umbilical cord is in the fetus.
In those places: then you consider whether the fetus is prepared to be born on its own head, and then you look for the umbilical cord in its neck, or in its collarbone, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its beard, or in its shoulder blades, or in the places proper for the ribs, or under its hypochondriac regions.
If the disease is on his feet, then in the fifth vertebra, or in the middle of the back.
And hold the needle with your right hand, and press the curve of the patient in that place between the teeth on his left side, and insert your left hand to facilitate and keep the needle in any of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the pain.
And then place and hold another needle or the third one if necessary, so that it is attached equally, and not stretched more than necessary.
And it should be done at all parts, so that the incision of the patient is as it is done in teeth for the elimination of it.
And in that place where the extension is softened; and if any part of it is held, then hold that midwife's oil and insert those experiments and rotate those that are held.
Therefore, if the part of the child is forgotten, then move the needles to a place that is more painful; and do so until the whole child is forgotten.
If the limb is lying across the other and it is not possible to reduce it by traction, then cover that part with a cloth; and then remove all the flesh until everything is removed, and insert it or in the joint of the limb or into the cavity.
And if you do this in the other limb and both feet.
If the head of the bone is large, or if it has been injured in the traction, or if it is adjusted at the edge of the bone, then insert between these spicules and cut the head and remove the water, or dislocate that with an instrument called â€œalundatâ€, the shape of which will come from the shapes of the other instruments in the capital, which is appropriate for this.
Similarly, if the bone is naturally large: and then insert that with a mallet, or take that with an instrument called â€œalundatâ€, as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head is exposed and tractioned by the furcula, then cut through where the moisture that is in the chest is found.
If it is not complicated, nor obese, then you should insert the needle as soon as possible according to what is possible for you.
And if the area of the belly is abscessed or is in a hydrocele, then make an incision where the moisture that is inside flows.
If the foot is above the other, then the position of the leg is elevated and the direction of the leg to the mouth of the major vein is elevated.
If the belly and chest are compressed, then make an incision where the cloth that has been wrapped around your hand flows from inside.
If the other members are still and the patient returns to consciousness, then insert the hand on the left side; but if the mouth of the major vein is blocked, then insert the hand in the groin, and encircle the area around the head, and throw that hand towards the mouth of the major vein, and then insert an inch or two, and throw the hand towards those.
And if the mouth of the mother is closed by an abscess that has occurred to her, then do not force it open; before doing so, first administer an injection of warm, oily humors. And apply plasters; and follow the patient in baths that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the patient's back, if possible, it should be sharp: and it should be administered what we have said in the live foot.
And if that is not possible, then it should be scraped off with a spoon, and extracted.
And do not leave any cause of decay in the second tooth.
And when you have completed all your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure in abscesses that have occurred to the mother.
And if there is a flow of sanction, then first put in stoppage baths and administer the other cure.
And if you have already seen a woman in the belly of whom was made dead, and then another begun, and then the dead one is the other one. It happened to him after a long time that he had an abscess in his belly; and when fire was brought, he began to groan loudly.
And he was called for his care, and he was treated for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then he placed some strong-adhesive plasters on him for various reasons, and he placed an object in his stomach, and after several days, he placed another object; and he was very surprised because there were no bones in his belly.
And then he thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
And then he followed the wound, and he extracted some bones from him, which were existing in his intestines in various dispositions, and had been there for a long time, correcting him of a little groan.
And he did not doubt that this was strange, but rather that in this there was knowledge and help for him from the skilled doctor who administered the medicine for his cure.
Of the forms of tools needed to extract the fetus.
The form of a spoon that is used to open the mother's womb:
This is the form of a forceps in which the free parts are gripped, to which grip there are two spoons at both ends of two handles. But this spoon should be more subtle than a constrictor, and it should be made of either iron or wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers wide, and the margin of each end should be one finger wide, and the length of each should be a palm and a little more; and in the middle of the two handles there are two adjustments of that measure tool, which are already fixed, of which the length is the greatest of one palm and a little more, and the width of each is two fingers, or a little more.
And these two adjustments are inserted into the mother's mouth so that they can be opened when you turn those two prescribed spoons.
Another form similar to that one, more subtle and deceitful:
It should be made of wood or bone, according to the resemblance of forceps. But at the end of it has two additions like sometimes, and the length of those additions is one palm, and the width of each is two digits.
And when you want to open the larger one, then you make a cushion on the lightest part of the feet hanging down, and place that which is between the patient's thighs. And then bring your hand with the instrument according to the amount you want of the approximation of the mouth of the larger one that the midwife makes so that you want.
The form of the verticality that the ancients said:
The form of the impeller that is pushed against the fetus:
The form of the amidist that is held against the large head:
And it is similar to forceps at the end of which there are teeth sometimes, and some of them are made long according to this form, sometimes, to which there are teeth at the end of which is sharpened and held. Form of administration for a few:
Form of a single drop with a needle:
Form of a single drop with two needles:
Form of a spatula with two ends, where the head is removed:
Form of two flat spoons:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied in species of that and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter to their operation and also easier for the women because of their quantity.
And do not neglect to have those instruments ready, because the need for them is not excuseable.
For extraction of the second tooth.
When the second tooth is held, then command the patient to hold their tongue, and do that condition, and strengthen your hand on the mouth of it and on its nostrils, and if by force it does not succeed, then it is.
And if not, then take an olive oil and perforate the skin with a sharp tool, and place it on those herbs burning near the mouth of the mother, such as calamint, rue, and camomile, and Arabic and cassia lignea and santonica. All these herbs or some of them are immersed in water in the oil, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cannula of cane in the mouth of the mother, and hold that inside until the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then do that steaming as we have said, and the second time remove it quickly.
If this treatment is not effective and does not help, then command the midwife to immerse her left hand in olive oil or in a mixture of althea, and then enter it into the womb and massage it the second time, and when that has been found, then take it and extend it little by little if it is attached to the belly of the mother, then enter her second hand as we have recommended, and when it has found the second time, extract it little by little correctly so that the mother does not suffer from the violent attraction. Aboard a ship that is moving to the right or left for ease of movement.
And if the mouth of the main is covered, we have already recommended the cure with steam and medication from the root of the herb.
However, if all the causes that we have recommended are not forgotten, then guard yourself that you do not fatigue that which exists within the patient to the mouth of the main, but rather cover it with a cloth and apply a poultice made of egg yolk and tetrafarmacon; for this will cause it to dissolve and be forgotten.
However, when it poisons, it is lifted up to the head and stomach, and that harms the patient; and therefore cover it with sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies for that.
However, the ancients have already discovered fumigation with nitrates and dried figs.
Form of an instrument by which a woman is sub-fumigated for the retention of menstruation and secondina.
It should be made of cloth or linen.
And the narrow end should be placed under the cauldron and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the arms of the fire.
And hold that one until the fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
Of the cure of the child's anus not pierced.
When newborn children and their anuses are not pierced, which have been sliced thinly and covered with a bandage. Then ask the midwife to pierce that sliced part; and if not, pierce that with a sharp knife, and make sure it does not touch the tail.
And then place that soaked in wine and oil; and then cure that with the salve inside it is empty.
If you fear that it will be covered, then place a tube in the trunk to remove days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate.
And it has happened that the abscess of the anus is formed for the consolidation of a plague or an abscess; then cut open that consolidation, and cure it with the same remedy and ointment that we have mentioned for the cure of the plague and the pus.
Of the treatment of fistulas that occur thereafter.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part of the buttocks, with their wide opening and large size, which occur before or in the space of one buttock.
And it is a fistula or a sinus.
And if that opening is old and comes from the moisture of white or thin pus, and some wounds are from these fistulas, some penetrating.
And those that penetrate are known by the fact that they exist for the escape and for the windiness; and some use the patient's back for the escape, and often it exists from those worms.
And some wounds are from these fistulas in the space that penetrates into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some penetrating into the joint and into the back of the thigh.
And this is known as a penetrating or non-penetrating fistula, which means you insert your finger into the anus, and then carefully introduce a thin wire or iron rod into the fistula when it does not have turgidity.
And if there is turgidity in that place, then carefully introduce a thin wire or a thin piece of horse hair into the fistula until you feel the wire or the hair in your finger.
And if you do not feel it throughout and do not proceed with any cause of constipation, vomiting, or diarrhea, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and then treat it accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the meatus of the urethra, then the meaning of that is urinary incontinence, and it is prohibited to have that location treated with medicine so that it can be consolidated.
And if it penetrates into the joint or into the bone and causes pain in the circle, then know that the wire should be inserted through this way if there is no turgidity in the bone, and if there is pain in the circle of the part; and that from there, it may often recur; and that it does not work in that medicine, nor is it consolidated with oil.
In all these penetrating fistulas, there is no cure for all of them, and the cure for those is hard work and waiting for the doctors' advice on which one to choose.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, healing is delayed according to what you advise, and that which has already been tried.
And if the patient moves between your hands over his side and raises the cushions of him inside, the cushions should be inclined towards the patient's belly, and then insert a probe, or if it is in the fistula tortuosity, enter where you know the location.
And if that feeling is around the belly, then cover it with your hand and insert your finger into the belly.
And if you feel the probe already when it is inserted, another thing that you feel between your hand and that side or flesh, then you know for sure that that is penetrating; and then do not treat in that, because it is not in that healing, as we have said.
May it be said that this is a disease that affects men in their cartilage.
And for the treatment that is expected to work well in this case, you should use a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and introduce that fire into the fistula until it reaches around the bone; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all the adjacent fistulas have been adjusted and healed, which resemble quills of a goose.
And then care for those wounds wrapped in a bandage until all those healed flesh has been covered, and then care for those medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is healed, it is good; and if not, it will not be healed at any time by another treatment.
And if the tent goes in and does not penetrate into the place that is on the buttocks, and between that and the tent there is a piece of flesh or a cushion, and the fistula is in that place which is on the surface of the bone, then dry the bone from the beginning of the fistula, and if you see that the drying is done, and it is in the fistula until the extension of the tent reaches the place where the end of the tent is, and through the tent it is released and cautery.
And then clean those fistulas that are gathered around the pen needle and do not have any cause.
If blood flows from the wounds that occur when you perform those incisions, then let it flow and use a sharper instrument to cauterize with fire or acute medicine, because the cauterizing iron adjusts well: it stops the bleeding of those incisions and the drainage of the pus from the wounds.
And then cure those callosities that are wrapped in a cloth or cause a trissat within the place where the bone is broken, and then cure the plague by applying hard meat that generates and consolidates.
And these medicines have stoptic properties and drainage; when it is restored, it is healed and there is no risk of recurrence.
If the fistula has already passed through the anus and is elongated from the surface of the rectum, then enter the finger into the anus and investigate that one.
And so if the patient's skin is thick or fleshy, and it is placed for penetration, at that time it is not an operation in them but a second way of trust and hope.
The cause of this is to administer in them one of the three ways: either to cauterize that which we have said; or to separate that which you can reach through the cavity of which you have mentioned, so that it is possible for you to introduce those things and the proposed cure, and not process more because of a section in order that you do not pierce the skin containing the intestines, and that something happens on the patient and immediately after the procedure; and then cure that which we have said that four times it is successful; or to lengthen that covering and moisten that puddle which separates that incision from the cul, as we have said, or by that tent or another sharp instrument, and then moundify those fistulas which are in the section through the intestines which you can percrustacio; and then force yourself to make the restoration of the whole plague of the section, and if the opening underneath is not consolidated, and remains open in the part of the cul, and is more painful for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the tent into the fistula, and it is around the surface of the anus and on the edge of the anus, then take a perforated extremity, which is like a needle for preparing the wounds in this form.
And insert it into that soft envelope of wool or around those; and then insert the tent into the fistula until it reaches its cavity.
But if it penetrates near the edge of the anus, then you extract the wool from that part where you introduced your own thread into the anus; and remove the end of the wool and adjust both ends, and let it rest for a day or two, and when more of the wool is inserted into the flesh, then remove those parts of the flesh that are between the two ends of the wool and that which can be removed.
And then care for the wound until it is healed and healthy.
If the orifices of the fistula are not penetrable, then make them so, in whatever way you have prepared, but ensure it is not too sharp to scratch the skin; and then introduce something into that which is healed.
The shape of the spatula used to open the fistula: its curvature is sharp on one side and flat on the other, so that it does not scratch what is not necessary, sometimes.
For sutures of hernias where there is blood at their beginning.
Hernias can occur in two ways, either between the buttocks like this, or with a grainy appearance, as if they were made of rice. And of those, some are small and large, and their blood comes from them immediately and is one, and its moisture, and its surface on the buttocks, and in their extremities.
However, those that have their surface on the buttocks according to the few moisture, from which there is a yellowish or a little blood, and its appearance is continuous, and its color is like that.
And the treatment for that which is stuck in the womb is that you command the patient to lie down and breathe deeply until the womb opens and the stones appear before your eyes. Then you sit and hold the instruments that you have with your hand, and then incise those ribs.
If the instruments are not held well in those places due to their moisture and softness of those, then take those with a rough cloth or a cotton or a piece of woolen fabric, and extract those with the tweezers, and then incise those and sprinkle some powder caudas on the incision, so that they are in place of a cauterizer; or cauterize those as prescribed in the chapter on cauterizing. And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the womb does not open to egress, then crestericize the patient with a cresteric that has a small bite, and then wash it with that water which is in the womb and which opens egress more easily when the patient expels.
If the swollen parts deform the anus, the cause is usually fecal matter, so you should remove it with your nail or with a blade, scrape it off, and then cure it with what we have mentioned before they are healed.
And that one who comes first should administer a suture according to this method: take a needle and insert it into the swollen part, then remove the swelling from the upper parts, and make the needle penetrate into the other part, wrap the two ends of the thread on the part behind the needle, and longitudinally; then tighten the swelling against the structure strongly, and tie the thread and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, and leave one uncovered, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
Then place a cloth soaked in warm rose oil or wax on the anus, and place that on the chest and command the patient to lie down. And then leave that one in the box; and when it is healed, cure those wounds with ointment or other medication until they are healed.
And if you do not have those things in that medicine, then cover those with a sponge or your finger into which they are moistened and hold the scab of the pus above, which prevents them from consolidating; and then cure those that are consolidated.
And then apply those with very strong pus that the first one enters and are excoriated; and then cure those that are healed.
You know that almsamen, it is clear, and not if it does not redden like the color of chilblains, and it is made throughout the body and especially in the parts below the feet and the feet, and it is caused by those pains of the body.
And then cut that which is inside the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that precedes in its head.
Warts are small, hard, round, open sores on the surface of the skin, and they often appear in children.
And its treatment is to extend or cut that one, or to remove it with forceps or a needle. And if you wish, cauterize that one, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
Ants are small, hairy or large open sores on the surface of the skin, and when they bite there is a sting in that place, and it is made around the skin like the bite of an ant.
And its treatment is to grasp a needle made of quill or of thorn, and it should be strong, and place that ant over the ant within the circle of the needle's parts; and then rotate your hand with the needle through which you have cut that which is inside the ant's circle, and place it in the flesh, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you wish, do so with a hollow or iron needle according to this form:
The part of the needle above the canula should be thin, unperforated, wrapped by someone who knows how to apply the appropriate pressure and make the necessary rotation.
And if you wish to cauterize the wound according to what is mentioned in the cautery of ethylene in the chapter on cauterization.
In the form of instruments that are used to give anesthesia.
Some anesthetics are made of silver or lead or melted or malleable; and some anesthetics are made of those instruments small and large according to those that are used, such that the one administered in the treatment of small children is small; and of those whose tongues are free or doloyrous, the anesthetics of those are small.
The form of large and small anesthetics:
The end of the needle above the canula should be wide according to this method; and at the distance where the bag is tied, it should be as follows.
And the end of the rope, which is inserted into the anus, should be as thin as a lion's tail; and on one side of the leg, it has two knots, and on the other side, one knot, and the width of the knot should be according to the size of the rays and a little thicker.
And the bag in which the medicines of the bladder of an animal or sheep's wool are placed, and the lid of it is a palm.
And it should be pierced by a thin thread as it is wound; and if the space between the knots is the largest of them.
And enter those knots firmly with a firm cord of fine silk, or around them; and adjust the bag; and when it is placed in the bag, it should be straight in the head of the crucifix between two distinct strong coils, and crucify each knot: But the quality of crucifying that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be scalded according to the amount of the patient's tolerance; and beware that it is not too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and their thighs raised and supported by a pillow or blanket; and then apply an ointment made of oil or albumen of egg or mucilage of fenugreek or a similar substance to the anus to facilitate evacuation, and the assistant should hold the basin and express the contents until it is all evacuated from the intestine; and then remove the basin and the patient can lower their thighs to the side.
If the medicine does not work as expected, hold it for as long as possible; and if sleep comes to the patient during the night, it is better to keep them lying down.
But if you insert the patient in the bed of those with abdominal pain and the application of medicine, then repeat the cautery until they are healed.
And if there are fistulas or abscesses in the anus, then use a thin and sharp lancet from the lancets that infants are cauterized with.
Of the cure of the plagues.
It has already been said in the division of the cure of the plagues that such things were suitable for free people, and it is said thus the cure of those who are sick and treatment according to the complement.
Therefore it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and where they occur.
And the causes by which wounds are caused that bring about plagues are similar to those of a stone, or an incision with a spike or a sword, or percussion from a lance, or a staff, or a spear, or similar to those of other wounds.
May the plagues that are in the body be similar to those that cause fever on the head, or neck, or chest, or abdomen, or thigh, and similar to those of the members.
And it is mentioned that the cure of some plagues is done by following this reasoning and rule on other plagues.
I will begin with the simple ailments of the head, which will be remembered at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when a simple headache occurs and is not a fracture, consider this: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and if the neck has only been bathed and is very painful and you fear that the patient may develop an abscess, then first apply leeches to the cephalic region as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract them according to the amount of their virtue if no other cause prohibits leeching, especially if the stone that is causing the pain is small.
And if the application of leeches to the opposite side of the affected area is harmful, then protect the patient from drafts and from eating heavy foods.
If there is any cause that prohibits the use of leeches, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or fish.
And if an abscess develops on the affected area, apply a poultice of roasted bread crust or of wine in which has been steeped bay leaves.
If you are sure of the abscess, pause over the wound, if it is recent and the air has not changed in the same place where you will recommend a small amount of powder.
And if the air has already changed there, then pause over the wound with ointment until it is healed.
If the wound is large or is at the beginning of a space and the lips of it are not adjusted by threads, then adjust them according to what I will recommend for the stitching of them.
If the wound has already been discovered from the bone and the flesh, and it is not retained by threads but only a small suspender, then insert that and care for the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place, and command the patient to eat foods in which there is grease: caps and form coytes and similar things until it is healed.
And if there is putrefaction in the wound and it does not adhere to the bone, then insert all of that and drain that, and care for that.
If in these areas there is an artery or vein from which blood can flow, and it is not removed by medicine, then you should look for the uncut artery, and if you find it, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument or tie it; and if necessity requires that what we have said does not work, then you should cauterize where the blood is flowing.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then the cause of them is easily found; however, you should powder them with this powder, which becomes solid after it has been applied, so that air cannot move them.
The method of the powder is as follows: take one part of broken olive oil, two parts of dragon's blood, and three parts of extinguished charcoal; grind all of this into a fine powder, and then fill the wound, and tightly bind it with a good bandage so that it adheres to the wound and coagulates with the blood.
Then tightly bind it above the wound and leave it in place, do not remove it until it is healed, because the medicine cannot be removed from there until it is healed.
And some people used to do that alone with cauterization, when it was not in your presence and with a sound mind.
And this surgical operation is performed on the large wounds when it is necessary to place it over those and to straighten them, and their recent wounds are sound, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then this powder should not be placed in that position, but rather cure those with what we have said, whether you place it on those wounds with digestible ointments, or you place it on those feet with flour of eggs and honey mixed with water; and then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if an accident occurs to the broken wound in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with this method.
And I will direct the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is poisonous.
Of the plagues of the neck
However, if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in medical treatment, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
However, if the nerves of the neck are cut or the artery, then if it is nerves, not in the engine but that cure of it should be avoided with that which causes strong hemostasis, such as zinc and similar to their quartz and contractor. And do not place anything over the plague of all blood, because the substance of the nerves is blood and the continuation of it is to the brain, which is the most important of all the members.
And if that which is cured by deceptive medicines, such as washing with warm water, some vinegar in olive oil, rotted or not, and then when it is washed with warm water and the others pearls following this manner, and find humor.
If the pain is great, then administer stitching or cut the lips of the wound, and then cure it with powders until it is healed.
If the pain is deep or accidents occur in the lower part of the wound, then pierce it at the most prominent point.
If the pain has already cut an artery and blood flow occurs, then separate or dry it, tie it, or cauterize it if necessary to prevent that from happening.
If the pain has already cut the spine of the gallbladder or completely, and the veins of the collar are saved, then adjust the wound edges of the codex with stitching on the neck of the gallbladder and do not touch that; equalize it in front and reduce it to its natural shape, and apply a structure decent, and leave it for several days; and then cure it with ointments in which there is stipticitat and excitacio until it is healed.
If the pain has already reached the bones, then prick that area, and if there are fragments of bone, extract all that you can from it; and what is not accessible to you, leave it until the pain subsides, and let the body's own healing process take place.
And if the pain is recent, then powder that area with the powder that was recommended to you. If the pain is caused by a fistula, then cure that area with the ointment that will soon be remembered to come to its own capital.
If the pain is caused by a lancet or a cauterizer, and if you consider the depth of the wound, then know that the pain is mortal.
And if there is no depth and the pain is recent to its own source, then you place powder on the first hour of the wound, and do not strengthen it so that it does not remain in the depth of the wound and that it returns to the body and that nothing harms the patient, but rather place something attractive there, and remove those bad-smelling dressings.
If the vomit is not present, then place your hand on the orifice of the wound to let out that which comes from the humidities; and make the patient lie on their side so that the liquid in them flows out.
If the wound has passed three days or more without causing spasm, heart pain, or stricture of the abdomen, and if other signs are good, then you can consider the wound to be healed; and then treat that with cold compresses and the other cure until it is fully healed.
If the healing of the wound is excused, and it has been opened for a long time, then you can consider it to be a fistula; and therefore treat that by its own capital (or main) method.
And if the wound is caused by a cut or a gash, and it is simple on the surface of the chest or back, then treat that with water that precedes stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If there has already been an incision in the bone, and you have already separated it from the surrounding tissue, then twist the plate and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separated. If they are not separated, then loosen the tissue that surrounds the plate, which is facilitated by its extraction.
And of the other plates in the other members, the remedy for healing is the same as that which we have mentioned.
Of the plates of the belly.
The disposition that occurs in the belly is either large, or small, or mixed.
And small disruption is done difficultly by another method, and it is known that the reduction of them is more difficult, so unless you restrain their incision to their proper place as soon as possible, because they open and swell, making the treatment difficult.
And the best disruption is to move it, since in that case it is not difficult to reduce the hernia, as it is difficult in the two special cases mentioned.
You should know that there are four methods for stitching the belly, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching other parts of the body.
And two other types of stitches are common for other parts of the body, but they are more appropriate for the stitching of the belly.
I advise you to have each of these exposures and declarations.
Therefore say that when the part is small and there is no cause of the hernia in that case, and it is difficult to reduce it, then one of the two methods mentioned is used: either by patience of the disruption as we have said, or when the hernia becomes inflamed due to the cold of the air.
And when that is the case, then cover it with a cloth that you soak in warm water alone, or that you boil in water with salt, pepper, and spices, and apply to the hernia before the inflammation is resolved.
Some wounds are made in that place where there is a stoppage, and it is better to use water alone for the resolution of the inflammation.
And when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which salt and vinegar are dissolved, because for this the instrument of the patient is relieved from pain.
However, if the instrument of the patient is removed from this cure, then divide the disruption with a small instrument that is not sharp-edged.
The first cure is best when it is appropriate that it is not dry, and it is not necessary to occupy it too quickly or inappropriately.
Of the instrument, if its shape is like this:
One part of it is sharp-edged, and the other part is not sharp-edged, and its tip is thin, and it is not as thin as a needle, but rather blunt at the end.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine comes out, then cover it so that its reduction is according to its natural form in its proper place, if possible over water, because that is better.
When the disruption is widespread and in the lower part of the abdomen, then let it rest on its back, and place its legs upwards as high as possible; and if it is in the upper part above the abdomen, then place its head and chest upwards as high as possible.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then place your understanding and consideration quickly above it so that the part where the pain is higher than the other.
And thus, administer this in the major and minor wounds.
And in the minor wounds, place what is prepared by you between your most skilled fingers, which should hold the disruption completely and adjust its lips, and remove from one to another until some stitch causes another.
And this is the common method of suture: you take a needle, or count a second needle according to the width of the wound; and leave some distance from the end of the disruption of the said ring, and strengthen the needle once, or do not put it in the two ends of the thread that are on the other side of the part that is behind the thread of the parts that are inside, until you make that penetrate into that part; and you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the cylinder, and it has been made four times.
And then apply strong pressure with the needle in the circle of the needle, and some stitches of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the wound by addition of decency; and then leave the largest of the aforementioned and place another needle in that, and then tie that with the same as the first needle; and do not stop doing this until the needles are all completed inside the wound.
And the needles should be of medium size, because thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and large ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is better to use needles of medium size.
And do not let the needle be stuck at both ends of the wound planned, because the flesh should not be penetrated too easily and the wound should heal before its consolidation.
And they should not be prolonged for stitching so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then carefully insert the tips of the needles to prevent the patient from feeling pain; and place cotton balls on the expanded parts of the wound, which hold the tips of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound has consolidated.
And these types of needle stitches in skilled hands are most suitable for small wounds, as they have one or two or more needles in their stitching.
The second stitch is also similar: and you administer the four tips of the needle, two on each side of the cipher, in a row, with a needle that is evenly wrapped in thinness and thickness.
And then when the needle has penetrated these four tips, reduce the needle from that part of the wound where it began, so that the true retraction of the wound is not too high, and so that the stitch is the second stitch of strong fabric.
And pause between each stitch the amount of the thick part of the wound.
And this stitch is for women.
And this stitch was used to close the wound that occurred in a man's abdomen, which was punctured with a knife, and it was the rupture of the main wound of a palm, and it was located around two palms from the intestine at the lower part of the member; and then you reduced that because the intestine had been open for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated in the space of 15 days or so, and then it was closed and healed; and after that, apply this ointment for a while, and take care of him.
And other doctors had thought that he would not be healed; and by a miracle of fire, what you did not close with that wound, which was in the place where the wound was not at all or any medicine, but kept over the wound for two days and abluted assiduously with honey water until the fire healed.
May you direct two types of sutures according to the narrative of Paracleus.
And if you begin with the suture of the sinew, and insert the needle from the part of the foreskin to the part of the glans.
And so, when the needle penetrates the sinew and the other thread follows the correct and longest path of the whole body, and leave the end of the cord in which you inserted the needle; and let the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin in the other side of the penis.
And so, when you have made the other thread penetrate, then make the other thread penetrate in another direction at the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin; and leave the end of the cord that is on this side, and let the needle penetrate in the other end of the thread from the part of the glans to the part of the foreskin.
And make the other thread penetrate in the way that makes the thread penetrate in the cord at the end of the needle, which is in the part where all that penetrates.
And then begin by approaching this patient from the side that is closest to the chin in the other direction, and extract the needle from the codex that penetrates, and then return it to that codex and cover the end of the codex that is on the other side with the extracted part; and extract the needle from the codex that is near it.
Do this twice and another time, and do this once more approaching from another direction until you have covered all that is deformed according to that example.
The advantage of this method of suturing is that you approach the sutura of pellicies, which covers the wounds, so that you approach the chin once from the side of the end of the codex, and then complete it from the other direction.
The second special method of suturing, which is called "Gualia", and this is recommended for use in this case, is that you approach that second semilitut, which doctors cover with that, so that you add all the parts to its corresponding part at the convenient place by nature; and then apply the end of another part to the other end of it, and then do this according to your recommendation.
When you have the needle at the end of the mirror, near your own hand, and make it penetrate into the part of the body from that spot, and let two other ends of the cord; and then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from the fore to the other two ends of the cord.
And then rotate those needles, and make each one penetrate from the part of the body into the other two ends of the mirror on the opposite side.
This method of suture is better than the common stitching and is the stitching mentioned earlier in this text.
This is the word of Guillaume.
And moreover, they say that the stitching of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert each one with a true thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle of which you are supposed to use, and make that penetrate into the other side according to the second stitching of those that join the hearts equally.
And you know that when the disruption occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture of it is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
The diagnosis of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
The cause is that when you obtain the plague recently from the same person who has been exposed to air that alters it, and reduce the intestine and clean it and prepare it inappropriately, then place powder on that fleshy substance.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place powder on that alcohol which you have present before they make hard and coagulate, and are consolidated and solid; and cure it as is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place powder on that as soon as it begins to get warm, cold, and exchange those two vegetables daily, as you have been taught, until it is healed, because you do not need other medicine in cases of simple plagues.
If you fear that the plague may spread to the main members, then apply warm linen soaked in quality oil or rose oil, and place it around the affected areas.
And if you feel pain or putrefaction in your intestines, then apply this stinging black ointment, and especially if the poison has reached the intestine and is causing severe pain inside its cavity.
You should know that the pus from the large intestine is less dangerous than the pus in the small intestines.
It is difficult to cure the intestine known as "genu" because it does not receive any healing from the plague that is in it; and this is due to the large number of veins that are in it, its great length, its thinness, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If that which proceeds from the plague is a thread, and you are able to remove it, then reduce it according to your rightfulness, and reduce the intestines equally.
If it has passed into the space and is already done correctly or not, then you should apply a firm pressure on the area that is darkened by the patient, so that blood flows from it, as there are veins and arteries in the skin.
And then insert that other thread, and place two ends of the loose skin from the part that is left behind the wound, so that the attraction of the patient's wound can be taken from the cavity of the skin and the emission of the wound discharge.
Remembrance of wounds that occur in the abdomen.
When a disruption occurs in the abdomen and it is small, it is possible that it can be repaired in some people, because they have seen that one who was wounded in their own belly by percussion of an arrow and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had formed a fistula, and they were able to manage and ventilate it.
Then they continued the treatment of it so that it was not considered in the healing of it, but they subtly introduced that which is whole and the area is consolidated.
And if you have already seen the location that has been consolidated, apply pressure over the patient's abdomen to prevent any further damage; and do not attempt to move them at all for this injury, keeping them in a comfortable position while eating and drinking, and then place them in bed and let them rest.
And some experienced doctors have said that when there is an abscess in the intestine, and it is small, you should treat it like this: first, take large needles; then adjust the two lips of the abscess and place one of those needles with the open mouth over the two lips of the abscess; when you place them on top of each other and strengthen your bite, cut off the head of the needle, which adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another needle near the first one, and do not stop doing this until you have done it for each amount of the abscess.
Then return that and the abscess to its place; and those needles remain in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine is torn by a sharp, thin needle attached to it; and you take the end of these needles, which is very sharp, and wrap it around the end of the intestine, then insert those needles into the disruption.
And this method of suturing is not other than the second way of faith and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the thin intestines, then it cannot be sewn up but only closed, and not healed from all of it.
Of the cure of fistulas and abscesses.
You know that all wounds and abscesses when they are covered and aged, and become ulcers, and are not consolidated and do not heal over time and are not removed, then, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is called a fistula, and we call it a sinus.
And in truth, a fistula is a narrow, hard, white wound that does not cause pain and has the same cavity as the cavity of a thorn; and to remember it by that name, it is called a thorn.
And in moist people, the wound gets sore; and very often, the moisture is drained away in a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is moved, and it is scarce, and thick, and thin, and subtle.
Here are some of the causes, their symptoms, and the treatment with various medicines in this division.
And now I will tell you how to treat fistulas, which are caused by surgical procedures.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; among these, those that reach the great veins, arteries, nerves, intestine, bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the spinal vertebrae, or some joints composed by such composition as is between the hand and foot; and of these, those that are closest to the principal member and similar ones.
And among these fistulas that follow this manner, those are the most difficult to treat and do not receive treatment, and occupation is often due to labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas does not reach the locations mentioned above, and you expect and believe in its treatment, and you want to know about it, then take an attempt with iron or fire, and if the fistula goes straight, and you can see it from there.
If the fistula is twisted, then use a thin probe to investigate it, as the weight of the body can alleviate and straighten the twisting.
And if the fistula is very difficult to handle, it is not possible for you to insert the probe into it.
Then clean the orifices with their own secretions, as the moisture you use to clean one will spread to the others and infect them.
And then examine it carefully, according to the method that is possible for you to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the long fistula or propdan is in its cavity, or whether it is a fistula with many openings that covers everything completely, and whether it causes the patient pain, and whether it is caused by compression of the hand over the area, and similar to the signs and causes of abscesses.
And when you have understood all these causes accurately, then proceed to the cure with confidence: and consider whether it is an apparent fistula near the joint or in a salt location, long from the joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations that I have mentioned to you.
When the wound is dry after the first dressing, and you see that there is pus in that filter and rotten flesh, and that which is born in the orifices of the flesh, or from the intestines and similar parts, and cure it within that time when it is healed.
If the wound is long and deep, and is in the correct position, then cut it as much as you can, and remove all the rotten flesh; and apply wet dressings in acute medicines, and introduce them into the cavity of the wound, which you have understood with iron.
And do that to it for some time until the acute medicine has corroded all that is in the cavity of the wound from the corruption.
And then restore it with the ointments that generate healthy flesh within that time when it is healed.
If it does not heal by that, then you should cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it is necessary for you to confirm this, then inquire about that and seal the second one as we have recommended, unless you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member present as we have said.
If the bone is yours to discover and it is in any corruption and blackness, then remove that within which the corruption is contained entirely; and cure that with what enters that is healed.
And if it is not healed and the bone does not exist as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore, you discover again and carefully make the reason of it and its purification by the same means, and strongly fortify it, and restore that.
And therefore, if it is healed, good; and if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep long distance of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore, you cannot enter into that, but only lay aside that.
If the broken bone is small, or it is possible to pull it back into place, then use delicate forceps that are suitable for this.
If you have the strength to extract all of them, and do not lay any of them down due to your strength.
If you encounter any resistance due to the moisture, and there is no fear or error in the beginning, then insert the ligaments or flesh that are nearby, and remove the bones.
If you do not have the preparation of an oster to remove the bones of your hour, then place a poultice on that area that will soften the area where those flesh and ligaments are located, and keep the poultice from becoming consolidated and strengthen the section that you have incised in your operation.
However, if you are afraid, then place the incision above the shoulder in olive oil, or below the shoulder in Egyptian anguent, or in any of the verdigris oils, because when those ligaments soften, and the bones are separated from them, the adhesion is loosened, and the bones are attracted to each other.
If there is a large bone like the bones of the back or cushion or similar to those, and that which is corrupted from it is only the surface of it, then remove that rust only behind where that blackness and corruption is held, and then restore the wound.
If that which is corrupted from it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and that entirely incise into the area where the corruption reaches, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
And I advise you to ask that person who has experienced that in their thigh for the purpose of placing support and assistance on your operation.
A young man around the age of 30, who experienced pain in his thigh, and from the parts that were putrefied spread over the matter of the body within which the matter reaches the thigh, and it is a great abscess, and not from an external cause.
And then the doctor extends the flame over the affected area without waiting for the abscess to be lanced, and the matter that comes out is mixed with the patient's blood, and the cure of the flame is paused until the bed becomes fistulized, and the points in the wound are all red and filled with humidity from the body.
And then all the doctors took care of him for about two years, but not in that place, but in the arm, until he was called back.
And he saw the bed of that person and the matters that were coming out of those wounds were all mixed together; and the body of that man was completely yellow and the color of the bed was yellowish.
And then he inserted the tent into one of those wounds and reached the tent to the bone.
And then he examined them quickly and found that they had reached all parts of the bed.
And then he showed and inserted into one of those wounds what had been described as entering before corruption, and at the same time he found that it was already corrupted and rotten; and it was already corrupted and rotten; and it had already penetrated into the muscle.
And then I would apply that which was discovered and prepared from the bone that was exposed.
And then I would apply that which was not in the bone but rather that corruption which I had removed and prepared, and which had already been discharged.
Then place your hand over the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it is not consolidated.
Then repeat and expose over the bone again, secondarily over the first exposure, and also continue to remove corruption from the bone.
And apply that which appears from that corruption, and then I would perform the cure of it and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then I would expose it again and not cease to gradually incise the bone part by part, and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until I have incised almost a palm of it, and that which was extracted from its marrow, and then apply it with medicine, and it is consolidated more firmly and healed.
And repetition is not necessary in the operation of amputation or separation of limbs, but for the disposition of the patient's will and for the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, as they often die from excessive loss of blood.
And healing is for complete cure, and nothing is in place of hard meat; and it is good to position the patient in their own body and restore its strength; and he is treated according to his conditions and does not cause harm in any way.
If the bone is in place of the body already broken, then proceed with this method: and it is that you take a bandage and strength at that end of that bone, and command anyone who stretches it; and pause that bandage of thickest wool from the first bandage; and place it over the flesh that is left after the bone, and extend the outer part of it to draw the flesh to the parts left behind, and you uncover the flesh over the place that you want to sew so that the stitch does not wound the flesh.
And place the table beside the bones properly, as it is not prohibited to use the saw that does not dry out the rotten flesh.
And carefully saw the rotten area of the bone little by little, as it is not visible from the outside and requires another method to remove it.
And if the bone is rotten and not imminently breaking, carefully separate it from one end to the other, as the corruption may be in the middle or in a separate part. Then remove all the flesh from every part; place your hand behind, and saw the first cut until the corruption is continued with the sawing of the other part.
And if the sawing is done according to the location of the corruption, do it little by little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is at the joint, carefully saw the rotten joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then do not saw at the ratio but rather in a way that does not damage the other joint.
If the corruption is in the chest of the patient or the foot, it is difficult; however, you should inquire about the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and cut that, and wash it according to each disposition that is possible for you, and let the wound be corrected to you, when not against your own vein or nerve.
You should know what are the saws and the serrations to cut these bones are according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the size of those, and the subtlety and greatness and parvity of those, and the hardness and rarity; therefore you should prepare all kinds of operation tool suitable for that operation.
You should know that this operation means to you on the special tool of which you need; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and testimony of the ways of diseases, therefore now you have them for you to use that is suitable for all tools to disease.
And you will see that in the end of this chapter, the number of simple instruments that you will process with your prohibition, which you will experience on the others. Saw form:
Another saw form:
Another large saw form:
Ray form: The head of this ray should be in the form of a star-shaped crown, and its points should be in the form of asterisks.
And it is only appropriate to use those that are worn out when the joints are corrupted, or if the mouth is very wide open.
Smaller razor form:
Flat razor form:
Another well-made saw form: make the arc of it more rounded and the sharpness of its iron, and the handle of it should be well-made. Form of it:
Form of a razor with a hollowed-out shape:
Another form of a razor:
Another form of a curved razor:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Another smaller form of an incisor:
Form of another incisor, resembling a ray, with its end shaped like a saw, and is displayed in certain places in the process of bone removal:
Form of a ray that is suitable for the process of drilling through bones:
And its end is triangular and has a sharp tip.
And it is made of Indian steel, and similarly coated with all the causes that we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the tips of incisors and the sawing of bones.
The tips can be sharp either by intrinsic or extrinsic cause, or when you have treated that corruption with those medicines and the cure does not work, sometimes the corruption will lead to the member that is not cut by any cause, therefore cover that member within that hole to prevent the patient from dying or suffering from greater damage to the member.
When the member of the one who has been affected, is made black within that it may be judged whether the fire has burned the flesh, or if the wound has become infected with pus, approach the blackness close to that member which has already entered that one and which takes all the body; and then cover it with a cloth.
Similarly, if it is caused by the corruption of some poisonous causes such as a scorpion's sting, or a viper, or a rat, and similar ones.
And if the corruption or the poisoning is at the end of that member, then you insert it and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter into the body.
Similarly, if it enters the body, then you insert that of the reed of the fire, and do not give space to the corruption until it takes hold of the reed of the arm.
And if you do that, then insert the arm into the cavity at the joint.
If the corruption spreads and the smell around the wound increases, then that is the death of the patient; and in treatment, the quantity of that is a matter of virtue.
Similarly, if the corruption spreads and the smell of the foot increases, then you should insert that into one of the nails.
And if you take it from the sole of the foot, then you should insert the entire foot. But if you can enter through the knee, then you should insert the thigh into the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already reached the knee, then there is no hope in that case, and you should let the patient die.
And the method of inserting the member or cutting it is that you strengthen the ligament at the part just before the one you want to insert, and strengthen another ligament over the area; and you extend the minister a ligament to the parts behind, and extend the minister another ligament on top; and you separate the flesh that is between two ligaments a span wide inside so that all the flesh is discovered; and then insert or cut.
And cover the wound with cloth from all parts to prevent it from touching the area and to allow the patient's injury and abscess to be adjusted and cauterized.
However, if bleeding occurs while working, then cauterize the area constantly, or place some restrictive powders on it; and then return to your medical work before it is completed.
And then bandage the affected member with a suitable bandage and treat it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you that which happened to a man in his foot, this accident that you and I have recommended, which occurred because of the black color in his foot due to an injury that was similar to burning by fire.
And that corruption happened first in his toe before it spread throughout the foot.
And then that man prepared himself for such severe pain that the cure would not reach the member due to its intensity of pain and burning, and he did not scream at all, and it healed.
Over time, it often occurs in that patient with corruption of the mentioned joint.
And then it affected me, and I felt the need to reflect on that excess of which you have spoken above about the medicines, to cleanse the body of the patient; and if the excess is not reflected, it begins to go to another part where it began in the joint.
And he told me to incise the joint of the patient, and I did not want to do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, and more because I feared the beginning of the incision of the joint, which was of great importance to the patient.
And since he left me, he returned to his land and I was told that that man had prepared and incised the whole joint, and was cured.
And I have not added this narrative except to be helpful regarding that which is called this illness, and to understand the meaning by which it is understood and according to which it is done.
Of the care of the intestines and the quality of the clysterization with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in the fleshy parts of the body and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and it is broken and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the place remains open like a vessel, and the codex that is over it is covered with fine cloth, and it does not reach the depth of corruption, and it does not press on the bones or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until corruption reaches a member, then it is called a fistula and does not heal.
The treatment for it is to insert that codex entirely as it is rolled up, and more so when it is thinned out and made with cloth, and comforts that it does not adhere to the place due to its corruption.
However, if you hope that the codex adheres and that the corruption has not been completed due to further consequence, and in the codex there is a space, then you treat it with a salve.
And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the brace that you use has an odor of fat, then cleanse it with this Egyptian medicament which is made of oil, vinegar, and zinc in equal parts, and place it in a vessel, and cover it with a cloth until the medicament becomes thick like honey.
And then take that which is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with that, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for a period of several hours.
And then extract that which is spicy; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the purity is restored.
And sometimes the sinus is cleansed with ash water, when this medicament is not present; and you should take the ashes of willow, and place them on the water; and then add that and cleanse it inside until you confirm that the sinus has been opened.
If the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of ashes, then clysterize that with a mixture of honey and salt, and clysterize that with a mixture of vinegar and honey, because honey softens and cleanses, and vinegar makes it stick to the intestine, and more so when there is an excess of stipitation and dryness.
Then, when you have done this for some time and feel that the intestine has been relieved, then clysterize that with water that makes the flesh in it.
And if you take some gentian and dissolve that rosy oil and vinegar that is stipulating; or clysterize that with some medicines and other oils that have the properties that I have written in the treatise of oils.
And if the orifices of the intestine are narrowed in which the clyster needle is not received, then gradually enlarge that with a small iron, and pause in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the anus is opened, then you add the lips of it with sutures and leave as much quantity in which the intestines are added to each other.
And if the anus from which the intestine is lifted to the parts above, then dry that in the lowest place which is in it so that the intestine can pass through, because when the intestine is constricted in the precordia of sinus, the flesh is generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the environment of the lowest bone as you want, then prepare the member with preparation for which the intestine from which the intestine properly follows what is appropriate for you and that there is no cause of the intestine retained in it.
May that which is above the orifice of the sinus, which remains in place throughout the hour to prevent what is adjusted in its place from coming out. So that you know whether what comes from the arm is spit or little, or digested, or not digested.
And if you have considered the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is in the abscess.
And if your medication is prolonged in this way, and you see that the matter that has been poured over the orifice of the sinus has adhered, or if it has not adhered, then you may remove it on the third day, and when you remove the plaque, change the dressing and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus there comes a thin substance that is not adhering, do not despair of its healing, because the healing of it will take place, as in some people who have a slow generation of flesh in those places, and in others where it is done the opposite.
If the sinus is filled with undigested food, you know that it does not adhere; if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and prolonged, then adjust in the drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried like diaphenine, when they are adjusted with excessive addition of zeig.
The most effective remedy is to take diaphenine and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it on the wound like an ointment, and cover it with a bandage.
And in this action, when there is no undigested food, diaphenine, when it is thickened, use it; or take mallow and aloe and ense, and grind everything and powder over the honey when it is on the fire, and apply a cloth over that over the sinus; and apply a cloth over the honey when it is thickened, and powder over a cloth and strengthen that.
Some of the remedies are administered with long aristocracy and lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of ergots and centaury, and use those simples or adjust them, trim those and crush and powder over the honey that has been recommended; and use that.
And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal with this remedy, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already inquires in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with the fistular remedy as mentioned above.
Of the remedy for bent fingers and nails broken and incision of the digit added and section.
Panarici is an abscess that does not come from the nail of the said toe of the foot or the foot, and it often occurs in the other mentioned ones, and as it prolongs and its cure is highly valued, it is a cautionary abscess, or it is corrupted, and soon breaks into the bone before it erodes the root of the nail, and soon corrodes all of it, and soon perforates its corruption into the bone until it reaches the odor fetent, and the end of the said toe is made black.
And when you have that same iron that we mentioned in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover that you insert the entire excess that remains from the nail and approach to cauterize the place where that is useful in an injury.
If the bone is healed and the nail is healthy, and the attachments of the nail have already completed the flesh to the parts intended, and they begin to pungent and bleed at that place, then cover that you place a thin cloth underneath the angle of the nail that punctures the flesh, and push it towards that, and insert that flesh with ease, and place over it what remains of the flesh of the medicines that burned corrosively until it is all consumed; and then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
If the corruption has already entered into the bone, then cover that you insert that bone and the extractions, because no time can heal what is in the bone corrupted.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption starting there, then insert that into one of the nuts according to what is remembered, and cure it within that time so that it heals.
And if the nail is injured by a blow or a sharp object, and there is intense pain in that area, then first, at the beginning, you should lance the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp, transverse cut above it, and be careful not to cut into the flesh that is under the nail, because you will cause the patient severe pain, and also damage the healthy flesh in the area; and then cure that place with something that relieves pain.
And it is said that this is common in the bones of many men, and very often it is all flesh, and very often it is in the bones, or very often it is in the nail.
And many of them are not at the root of the joint, or it is the origin of the pain in many nuts of those. When born in a place where chestnuts are not common, it is not considered bad, but when born in joints, it is considered unlucky.
And of those who are not born with flesh, the section is considered unlucky, and it is that you insert that devil's root into their main vein.
When born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; therefore, be careful of its abscess.
When born in the flesh of chestnuts, it is recommended that you insert the meat into the round beginning near the bone, and then use one of those convenient serrated instruments to cure it within the time when it becomes healthy.
When consolidation occurs in the mentioned between their mottled skin or by birth of the person who was born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by combustion of fire, or by similar causes, therefore, be careful to remove that consolidation before the mentioned return to their natural form.
And then place between their clothes some olive oil rubbed with rose petals to prevent consolidation from becoming too thick, and separate between those, or place between those a thin layer of plaster until it becomes consolidated according to what you advise.
And similarly, if there is a consolidation in the wrist called carpal tunnel, then dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and suitable for the figure of the limb.
At the beginning of vices, they are varicose.
Vices are varicose, and their veins are thick and full of melancholic superfluities that come from the members of the body, and more so in the abdomen, and especially in the abdomens of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Therefore, you should administer purgation of the body of black cholera with some enemas that are strong for expulsion, and then draw blood from the patient from the basilic vein.
Their cure is done by two methods: one is that it be incised and the black bile is thrown out, and the other method is that the vein is raised and all of it is drawn out.
The section of the abdomen is done by this method: first, the lower abdomen is anointed with a hot tail before the black bile is thick and slimy from the abdomen, and then the patient's abdomen is raised to the most elevated part of the couch between the abdomen and the end of the bed, and the vein is dried in one, two, or three wide sections, and then the black bile is raised to the uppermost part of the abdomen above and below the patient's abdomen until the quantity and times that you want and that it can bear are reached, and the patient tolerates this.
And then approach that one, and command her to refrain from foods that generate black vomit.
Repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is not noticed by the patient.
Raise the bed of the patient in this way: you who raise the back of the patient, if it is mottled with blood, and then place it on a cloth and massage the back of the patient with warm water until it becomes red and the veins are exuded; or if exercise is strong, it should be done before bedtime until the limb is scalded.
And then cut the cord in the direction of the vein for sectioning at the long or back of the leg, or at the bottom of the leg you should give it a tourniquet, or at the bottom of the foot you should tie it with a thread.
And then raise the cord with a needle and excoriate the vein from all parts until it appears to the senses, and it should be palpated by someone who has seen that one decline to black.
And so, when you have removed and cut that white cord,
and then place your hand through that opening that is raised and shaken by the cord, and hold the lion's mouth open with it.
and then cut another section near that section for three times, and then remove the cord from the part above the vein that appears.
and then lift that and insert it behind another section of the leg, and then remove it and lift it through the second section where it is inside, and then remove it from the section that is above it.
and do that through the section from which it is most superior or most outside of all the sections, where everything is inside; and then insert it.
And if it does not obey you to extract and lift, then insert a strong double-edged needle and tie it to that and remove it, or insert behind the cord and rotate your hand over all the part where it is shaken. And be careful that it is not pierced; for if it is broken, it is difficult to raise that part and it comes over the patient causing harm.
And when that whole area has been scraped off, place your hand over the wound covered with wool soaked in oil and not soaked in oil, and cure it until it is healed.
And if the vein is twisted and has a curved shape that does not follow the rectitude we have mentioned, then cut it across all its curved parts and at the locations where it is wrapped, and suspend it with a suture within the time you raise it completely.
And be careful not to pierce the vein and not to wound that area, for it is difficult to raise that part; and use your prudence in that.
The shape of the incision made when the vein is cut:
It should not be at the exact point where the sutures are or have a sharp tip to avoid wounding the vein; and it should be made of thick, flexible gold, for if it is too thin, it will pierce the vein due to its thinness; having enough thickness as we have mentioned.
From the extraction of the vein of the leg.
This vein is born in the hollows in lowlands, such as in the Ategi in Arab lands and in low, dry, infertile lands of little greenery, where there is no herb or shrub.
And it often arises in other parts of the body, not just the hollows.
And the condition of it is putrefaction that comes from leaving the wound unattended, such as poison from snakes and vermin, and worms breeding between the wound and flesh.
And the susceptibility of its occurrence is due to this vein that happens in the hollow, violent inflammation; and at the location, it is blistered; and then the vein is removed from the area of that blister, which seems reasonable.
And then, when it appears from there, you should wrap around it a piece of lead the size of your foot, entering into two inches, and leave that and let the lead hang from the leg.
And so many wounds from which blood flows to the parts affected, wrap that in a cloth and place it on that. And if the wound is extended, then you insert a piece of it and wrap it around; do not insert that which is red inside until it is outside and dry, because if you insert that, it will be contracted and go into the flesh and cause abscess and pustule in the area and ulcer.
So that it can be treated properly and removed piece by piece, until it is completely extracted from the back of it and there remains no cause in the body.
And from this vein, it is extracted in some people who are in its length of 2 palms and 10 fingers, and I have reached the conclusion that it is one of 20 palms.
And if it is inserted at the time of its treatment, then introduce the ray into the throat of it and pierce that along the length of the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction of the area for several days with medicines; and cure that by the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein has some wounds that cause pain, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it causes great discomfort, and it comes from which orifice.
And so treat that as we have said in the division and apply that which is above mentioned.
Of the section of worms generated under the skin and it is called cow disease.
This disease is not named in any land, but it is called cow disease because of the many wounds that are found on the beasts and it is a worm that is not between the skin and flesh, and it goes through the whole body and falls down, and it is shown at the sensation of its own flesh in each member before the tendon breaks and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors that happen to worms and serpents and earthworms and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared for the evil of it, because when it goes into the body and is raised to the head, and reaches the brain, then great pain comes in it and enters and destroys the brain, and that causes many wounds.
And so when you want to heal that and extract it, it is not done unless you first examine its appearance and position with the sense, and then firmly hold what is above it and what is below it with a cloth and strongly bind, and then dry it and extract that.
And if it is present in the flesh and not removed, then you place a hot cautery over the area where it is, and the main cause that is feared is corruption of it which corrupts the area as we have said.
And if you see that it has reached the top of the skull, then strongly bind over the forehead with a strong binding, and then dry it and extract that; and advise the patient to use medicines for the evacuation of bad humors, putrid, and guard against foods that generate putrefaction.
Of section for pain in the nose.
This disease is not named in our land nose, and is pain the kind that occurs in various members, and it is passed from member to member.
And I have also seen the second that I will tell you. He was called to a sick woman in a village, and discovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and after being there for an hour, he saw that inflammation go away like worms moving in this way, but more slowly than it should be, as if it were live silver when it moves from place to place.
And then the pain went away from that place and settled in the muscle, and after an hour it stayed there.
And then it corrected itself in the other body before it reached the other arm.
And then I recommended it to me that it turned around all over her body after I saw it; and it was too marvelous of the change of it and the speed of member in member. And I had already seen that happening in some people by that way, but I had not seen words that those who atroban dolor are mutated from member to member. I have not seen such things in the hands of women.
And I have not thought that this is so, but rather because the woman was of old age, with dry bodies and exposed veins, and in this appearance it seems to me that the warmth has been exchanged.
And it is necessary that this appearance does not occur in those who are delicate and have a human body with constricted veins.
And as you wish to cure it, and the patient feels that pain, do not show your hand in that place where we have said, but strengthen over it and gently press on that area until it is inside that warmth covered, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not see those things in the hands, then cure that exclusion of the body and that which expels warmth, and give those bad pills and serapis pills and similar ones.
From extraction of sage.
Sage is diverse according to species, and according to the locations of the body in which they are found, because of their diversity is that some have large points, and small, concave, and deaf, and solid; and some have three angles, and some have tongues; and some have astelas.
And the symptoms of the second part of the body when pain occurs in that area, passing through the bone, and is located above the skull, which is on the brain, because of the strong soda, scotomy, vertigo, pain in the temples, inflammation and pain in the tongue, spasm and mixing of understanding and vomiting of anger, and severe leucocytes are abscinded from the word and the voice is destroyed, and it is located above the location of the wet white substance similar to pollen, and it is similar to the swelling of flesh.
And if you find yourself in such circumstances, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the splinter, unless it is necessary.
When the splinter is in the heart, as it is close to the right breast, and feels like it has caused a serious injury, but not a fatal one; and its movement is similar to that of the limbs, and comes from the black plague, and if that fear and trembling and sweating persists, then you know that death is near.
When the splinter has pierced the lungs from below, and the veins that are close to the neck have become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they breathe with great difficulty, and demand air frequently, then you know that the end is near.
And if the splinter pierces the skin on the chest, and the pain is close to the small ribs, and is accompanied by great and sudden pain and a loud cry, and does not affect all the limbs of the muscles, then you know that it is not a serious injury.
And if the sage is placed in the stomach, then one may vomit forcefully due to some undigested food.
And if the sage is placed in the stomach and remains there, then one may vomit some undigested food, or cloth, or intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for recovery from its removal.
And if the sage is placed in the bladder, and it disrupts urination, and causes some problem with the discharges from it, and there is great pain on the patient, then one should know that it is fatal.
And the other members such as the face, neck, and jaw, and the shoulders, and the back, and the ribs, and the breastbone, and the spine, and the legs, and their similar parts of the body, are saved according to the best dispositions when the sage does not pierce vein or artery and is not venomous.
And I would advise you who have seen these sages to know what it means for the cure of this illness.
The cause of this is that in a man, a sharp object enters the lacrimal duct of his eye through the nose, and they extract it from the other side, behind the gray of his eyelid, and it heals, and does not cause harm to his eye.
And they extracted another sharp object from a Jew who had it in his eye through the gray of his eyelid, behind the outer eyelid, and the object was already hidden and could not be removed except for a small part that adhered to his cheek, and it was a very sharp object like those of the Turks, with no gold handles.
The Jew healed, and there was no harm to his eye from this incident.
And they extracted another sharp object from a Christian who had it in his thigh, and it was an Arabic sword, and it was the one that had its gold handles; and then they carefully removed it from between two wedges, and it was already submerged in his thigh; and then they carefully removed it, and the Christian was healed.
And another doctor extracted a stone from a man's belly, and he thought that he would die because of it; and since it had passed thirty days and he was not moved from it for any reason of his dispositions, he incised on the stone and sutured over it, and he was cured, and no harm came to him.
And he saw another man in whom a stone was stuck on his back, and the wound had closed over it, and after seven years, the stone was found in the center of the cushion.
And he saw a woman in whom a stone was stuck in her belly, and the wound had closed over it, and she was not moved from it in her dispositions, and the woman was not harmed in some of her natural operations.
And he saw another man in whom a stone was stuck in his face, and the wound had closed over it, and he moved the stone, not causing much pain, and similar to these.
And he extracted the stone from the man of the king's prince who was stuck in his nose and had already declined to the straight part, and the entire stone was hidden.
And I was called to heal him in the room of the surgeon within three days.
And then I again examined the wound of the surgeon; and then I inquired from that person with subtle touch, and did not feel anything; but he felt it with a sharp needle behind his ear, and then guessed that that point was at the end of the surgeon.
And then I applied the place with an ointment that has both attractive and digestive properties, confident that this place would help me find the location of the surgeon, so that it could be cured.
And I did not notice any significant accident in that location where the surgeon had achieved it; and I continued to apply the ointment on it for several days without any accident; and the wound was healing gradually, and the patient remained under my care for several days until a day when the surgeon felt pain in his nose and told me about it.
And then I applied sharp medicine to the wound for several days until it was ready; and with the touch of the needle, I again examined the end of the surgeon, which adhered to the flesh.
And then approach and adjust in the opening of the wound by that sharp medicine until I see the end of the bone, and pass through it for several months within four months.
And then approach and widen the wound further, and enter the forceps into it, and remove it, and do not give up, until you finally manage to pull out the forceps with the shape of those at the end of the capital, until you extract it; and then restore that wound.
And doctors judge that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, and you restore it and the wound is consolidated, and heals the patient completely, and there is no harm in it in any case.
And you recommend to you the quality of extracting some bones for which you can apply that rule and meaning on that which I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood by narrative nor can they be applied to them freely.
And the craftsmen know how to compare a few things with one thing; and they know what is present in what is absent; and they must acquire new knowledge of operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when accidents occur.
And therefore it is said that wisdom is not forgotten in the members in which they are fixed, but rather by two methods: either by attraction of the place in which they are inserted; or by the opposite part.
And that which is forgotten in the place where it is inserted, or from which wisdom comes, is located in the flesh, and is attracted and forgotten.
And if it does not obey the command of the hour in which it is catched, then cover it for several days until the flesh that is around it becomes rotten, and its attraction and exit are delayed.
Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey your command, then leave it for several days and repeat the attraction and movement in each day, and it will be forgotten.
And if you do not obey your master's command to approach those days, then carefully cut around the spine in that bone of all parts until the space is widened by the spine, and then extract it.
If the secretion is already accumulated in the body's location, and it is blocked from sensation, then you should probe that area with a thin needle, and if you feel that, then you should inject that area with appropriate medications for its attraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the thickness of the plague and its length, and there are no nerves or veins there, then you should make an incision on the plague in order to enlarge it and make it possible to extract the secretion.
And if you have the appropriate tools to hold it, then you should remove the flesh in which it is embedded from all parts and perform the necessary procedures; and then work on that, if you cannot hold the flesh in the fracture of the ribs and twist of those within the obesity.
And when you administer the extraction of the secretion in any location where it is, then you should use your hand with forceps to all parts that make up that obesity; and subtly work on the subtlety that the secretion is not broken and that it is made to your difficult attraction of it and from that extraction.
If you cannot do it at that time, then wait until the parts that are in the circuit of the patient can be separated, and then repeat that which was done before. If there is resistance to the flow of sanction, then administer the remedy that we have said for its cure in its capital.
And guard your skill in the incision of veins or nerves or cord, and administer it in every possible way to facilitate the escape of the sanguine; and do that which is easiest, most tranquil, delayed, and firm, as it should be and according to your recommendation.
And therefore make the incision against the sanguine so that the patient is in the figure according to which you should cauterize the wound in it, as it is more beneficial. If that is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
If the wounds that are extruded by the contrary of the other part, or if any part has been damaged by the process of the other parts, or if it causes gilbosity in the external maturation of the wound due to the feeling of the part below the proposed code and often in that eminent; then you separate over that; and the section is according to the quantity in which the forceps are taken.
If it is held in the bone, then turn the blade against the second resistance before the saw enters the bone, and spread it, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then insert it again until it enters.
And if the saw is in that place, then push it against it.
If it has fallen and you want to administer an impact, then insert it into that place, if it is deaf, use a concave instrument to guide the saw's concavity into the bone and then push it against it.
If the saw is concave, then push it strongly into that place, where the saw is guided by it.
And if the saw is poisoned, then cover it with your clothing wherever it is, if possible, and then cure it with that which is appropriate.
And if the saw cuts into the chest, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and it is near where you touch that part with your hand, and it is possible to cut above that, then cut above it and be careful not to injure a vein or nerve, and then extract it, and after that, apply a poultice if necessary, and cure it within the time it takes to heal.
Form of forceps that are used to hold the skull fragments.
With their jaws closed like a beak that are made with a grip when placed on the skull to prevent it from slipping.
Of those are made special shapes, large, thin and flexible, according to the amount of skull size and its thinness, and the width of the area, and its construction.
like a ray that is used to push the tool into the concave skull and to push it out.
Of vein tapping.
The veins of vein tapping, which usually bleed from the throat, there are six in the cap, these are two pulsating veins that are located at the temples, called alhasisain; two herbs that are located on the two sides of the temples; and two veins that are located in the two lacrimal ducts of two eyelids that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle of the forehead, and the vein that is at the end of the nose; and two guidegi that are located on the neck; and two veins that are located in the upper lip; and two veins that are located in the lower lip; and these are the veins called algelic â€” and there are two veins that are left in the tongue. May the veins that are punctured in the arms be visible; for one of them is cephalic, and it should be called the wild vine; and the people call it "the head vein", and it is deaf, and it is a migratory vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and another branch of the cephalic; and they name that vein to the people "the vein of all the body", and the basilica is the vein that is stopped in the domestic rib, and it is called "citillar", and they name that one to the common people "the belly vein"; and the funis of the arm, and it is stopped over the fire, and it is that one in which it is punctured, and it is that one that appears on the foot for apparent manifestation; and the salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest called, and it is in the two branches.
And in the foot and the leg there are three veins; one of them is that it is stopped behind the curve of the wild vine of the shin; the second is sophena, and its location is behind the leg of the domestic; and the sciatic vein, and its location is behind the wild vine of the shin; and in the leg there are other veins similar to those.
The inflammation of the veins that are close to the ears is an ancient and wandering, sharp, and old ulceration of the head.
And the quality of that is secondly what I recommend to you: it is to scrape the head of the patient, and to rub the head of the patient on the occipital bone in the place where the veins are thick with good friction; then strongly bind the patient's head with a band where the two and their locations are close to the ears, and also close to the ears; and ask for that, and if you feel pain in those places, here is what to do.
Then take the cutting lancet, and that which is incisive, and introduce it behind the vein in the groove where the pus comes out to the bone. And then raise your hand over the vein and groove above and incise the vein at the incisive point. And let the length of the incision be the thickness of two fingers or about that; and make it as deep as you wish.
And then apply strength to the pulse and leave it inside until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, they give the beginning of those and their cautery.
Of the two veins and arteries that are at the temples, the benefit of phlebotomy is ancient and good and helps to remove excess sharp fluids from the head.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those is as follows: press the patient's arm where the two veins appear at the feeling point, and demonstrate their pulse to you; then you will know.
And then you raise the skin above the vein at the parts indicated to you, and insert the phlebotomy needle behind it, and lift the vein up; and insert it there as you did in the other veins; and let the blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then loosen the bandage of the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place it on that and the pulse and apply strength to it above the tight one, and leave it inside until it is healed.
And it is preceded by their recollection, and of those who have already begun, and the attraction at the beginning of the free act.
And the purpose of venipuncture of the front vein is to approach the central venipuncture of the head and to treat ancient facial abscesses, emigration, and fetid ulcers.
And the quality of this venipuncture is as I recommended to you; that is, the patient should lean their neck on a pillow with an opening where the vein appears; and then take the instrument called the fossor, which is shaped like this:
Then place the puncture at the top of the fossor over that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in the manner of the patient, and let the blood flow according to the amount you want; and then remove the perforation from the patient and strengthen the area where it was healed.
And some veins are opened laterally, but not that the venipuncture should be of acute extremity as with other venipunctures, in front of the lower extremity, and open that one according to the transverse, where the bone is thin and easily pierced by the venipuncture when it is subtle.
When the swelling of the two veins that are at the lacrimal of both eyes due to a scald on the eye and inflammation in the eye, and to the diseases of the face,
and the quality of the lancet is that the patient should strongly press their neck against a board, and then use the lancet on those, and you should be standing over their head.
and the incision should be made transversely along the length a little way from the lancet, where there is no flesh; and if the lancet is sharp, then the end of it is broken.
And then run water from the sanctuary as much as is necessary, and place your hand over those wounds, and press them with a cloth, and then remove those.
When the lancet of the nose vein is compared to acute fever and strong salt, and to the diseases of the face and emigration and inflammation that occur on the face, and especially when it is old.
And the quality of the patient's nose is that he strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand, and takes a fine needle long and places it in the middle of the second straight part of the nostril, where the vein does not appear here, and where the sinus begins to flow soon.
Then gently move your hand with the fine needle according to your need and place it along the sinus, where it is restored better.
The benefit of the fine needle in the treatment of leprosy and other diseases and inflammations and malignant ulcers, as in hydrophobia.
And the quality of the fine needle in those cases is that the patient strongly bends his neck and brings his own nose to your left hand; and the artist is over the head of the patient, and the patient is lying on a mattress.
Then the fine needle punctures the vein longwise with the fine needle gradually; and then extracts blood according to a certain quantity or as needed, and then does the same for the other vein.
And then remove the ligament and strengthen both veins at the narrowest part to prevent the patient from fainting, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
The juice of the wound of veins, which is similar to small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums and bad ulcers and fissures, and bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
The quality of the wound of those is that it causes the patient to faint, and strengthens the neck of the ulcer with a band, and then revolves the lips of the ulcer and looks at both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; and the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of those, and that which is more is that in the circumference of those there are small black veins; and then incise each from the beginning.
However, if there is doubt about it, and you do not know which of those is, then you should look at the incision of the larger of those, and the most obvious sign of those.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips.
And from the two veins that are on the tongue, the tongue is approached with the lancet of the cephalic at pre-determined points that are in the gullet, to the patient's uvula, and to other mouth abnormalities.
And the quality of puncturing those is that it follows the patient's breath between your hands, holding their tongue, and looking behind the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then puncture each; and beware that your hand is not in lancet those, because behind those are arteries.
And your veins that are punctured in the code are in all men, and the lancet of theirs is done in two ways, or they put a small, sharp knife to subtility declining; or they cut with a scalpel, and remove the skin, and this is the form of it:
if there are signs of it, and it is understood to be appropriate to open the concave veins that are full and proceeding from apparent gross ones, and those that contain large masses of blood.
And this foot massage is of lesser extent and more subtle extremity, and it is understood to be appropriate for the massage of thin veins that contain small amounts of blood.
After the completion of the massage of the great vein, which is one of three veins: it extracts the blood from the patient's body and neck, and from that which causes the chest and stomach.
And it is understood to the massager, when performing that massage, to be careful with that one, where there is an artery, and if it is off and adjusted in the puncture of the foot massage, it will cut that artery and cause blood flow, so that he does not perform that massage with a sharp object, before slicing with the illness.
And if the basilica does not appear as expected, then let go of that one and move to the other, or surround some part of it; or use forceps in place of the fingers at the end of the arm, where it is manifest; and remove it with the forceps as we have said.
And if you want to use the forceps in that place, then first loosen the structure of the arm where you are touching the area between the elbow and the shoulder, and place your hand over it; then straighten the arm and remove the vein with the curved section of the forceps as we have said; and be careful not to cause percussion in any part of the area of the artery.
And when you see, with strength, the ligament, inflate in the place where you have placed your hand, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid it.
And if you see the blood flowing in the forceps as thin as infant's urine, and the blood is very fine, then know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then take and place your hand over that for a long time; and remove that hand, and if the blood is abscised, because many veins are abscised, then strengthen the arm and let go of that.
And guard the patient from the cold, and be careful not to harm them during this time of healing.
However, if the abscess is not drained, and there are times when you must not present medicine to it, then insert the artery, which appears to you; as the extremity of it is contracted, and the abscess is drained; or take a sharp instrument, and make a hole in that place, and take one thread and strengthen it over the location of the vein, and the tissue and powder inside the other day.
And if the abscess is drained, it is good; and if not, then cure that from which the powder of the abscessed place flows out.
And the drainage of the abscess from that place is difficult due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of the arm tissue.
However, from the dark vein, the fleubotomy is very useful in extracting the pus from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; because it is composed of a ram from the basilica and a ram from the cephalic, as we have said.
And approach the veinophobic person who is most afraid of the venipuncture of them, because they have a nerve; and then adjust the needle for the venipuncture and pierce the nerve, it will cause them great pain, and it is difficult to heal them, and often they are not healed completely. And this nerve appears as a twitching sensation; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not shown, then approach the veinophobic person with the needle that you usually use for the venipuncture, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then pierce the vein in its length.
The complication of the venipuncture of the cephalic vein is that it draws the blood to the head and causes the symptoms of the headaches.
And approach this properly, if you want the venipuncture to be done with an olive or a walnut; because it is the safest of all veins, because it does not touch the artery or nerve.
However, it is often found that an abscess forms in some men, when they are not lance beared in the first percussion, but do not notice it until later.
The first of these is the one you know that lance bearing is not administered except for conservation of health and hope of it, and caution against the coming of diseases, and that lance bearing should be done in one of the veins that are in the codex, such as: cephalic, fusca, and basilica; and that lance bearing should be done at the beginning of primaveyra, before breakfast in primaveyra and autumn, and in winter, at dinner, when it becomes significant signs of replenishment.
And perform a lumbar puncture after three hours have passed since the first symptom appeared.
After lumbar puncture is performed, when it causes convenience and necessity to that, or of night or of day, in every hour and at all times.
And it is not recommended to perform a lumbar puncture until the age of 14, and women should not be performed unless they are pregnant in the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly who have passed 60 years should not be performed.
And if someone wants to be lumbar puncture for any reason, it is recommended that their intestines be empty before the lumbar puncture with a lemon juice, so that the veins do not draw excess fluid in the lumbar puncture of the intestines, which are pure, and do not delay the main members.
And they should not be lumbar punctured the drunk and hungover, nor escape from illness or intoxication until they have recovered from it, nor hydrocephalus, and more that lumbar puncture is feared abdominal pain and vomiting, and abdominal distention, and multiplication of gout and work and exercise of breakfasts or vigils and all cause that dissolves the virtue, whether physical or animal.
And then consider the evacuation of humors that cause this, if the abdomen is large, with food and drink, and with medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then proceed with bathing and if there is no cause that prevents it, or if it is exercised by some exercise so that the abdomen is evacuated.
And place the catheter in its chest, around the time of noon, as we have said.
And perforate that the chest of that person is kept in that day from all animal misfortunes, as we have said, including anguish, irritation, fear, and all physical accidents, as well as labor and superfluous pain and joy and similar things to them.
And at its side make present the causes in the use of which it usually occurs to men with aromaticity and odor and with baths and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the catheter on a cushion that is put out or that of the one who should be catheterized.
And then gently pull out his arm, and wipe it with a cloth held by the assistant or two or three nurses; and then strongly tie the bandage around it and wrap those cloths around it.
And if the constriction is cold, as it is not equal, or the constriction is excessive, then forbid the flow of the sanctum; or if it is a softening, and then forbid the heart from beating.
And then loosen the constriction, so that the one who should be the assistant wipes his hands together between their fingers that the veins are inflamed, and declare it to the senses.
And then the assistant places his finger on the patient's wrist, slightly to the side of the vein, where the phlebotomy is to be done, so that the vein flows a little, and the percussion is set aside because of the veins that are located like a string fugitive from the phlebotomy, and those that are full of venosity and when the assistant presses on that area, the assistant should press against it, and the assistant should not touch the vein, and if he does, that is strict.
And therefore, for this reason that the foot-doctor should be stopped and considered in all these causes.
And then, if the vein is punctured in a certain place, then do so; but if not, repeat that action in another place near that spot, or over the patient's bed, if the spot is not infected.
And if the spot is infected, or the patient becomes feverish, then leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the bandage, because that would cause more infection or it would not absorb the pus.
And then repeat the foot-doctoring if necessary.
And if the puncture is small and bleeds slightly, and you fear that it will not bleed enough, then repeat the foot-doctoring in that place again, straight and adjusted to the puncture, and apply that action over the patient's bed, because the spot becomes infected in some people due to lack of blood.
If you see that it has already swollen, do not touch it, as it may cause some reason for you; and place some part of the oil bandage on it, which would help the body to heal. It is best in this case to use oil and other oils.
Similarly, administer oil bandages in all phlebotomy to the one that draws blood from the veins, and do this tyrian alfadoc and sagzenea when placed on the one of those over the area, which would make the swelling subside and turn when it is large.
And if a large abscess forms in the place of phlebotomy, which is caused by vegetable matters, and especially at that one that has not been bled but only with the vegetable matter, or in the puncture of the vein a little, and then you cover it, and place on the area sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and strengthen it for an hour, which dissolves.
And cover that area with a bandage from that incision or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenness in that area, do not perform the procedure; and if you wish, place some lotion of myrrh and of mint dissolved, or some lotion of sulfur or of chamomile, or a similar substance.
And move the swollen and elevated parts to be incised with the lancet of the basicilica.
And place your hand on that area, and if you feel softness, place your compression on that area; then that elevation is bad and bad; and therefore guard yourself that you place something over that area of the substance we have mentioned, which will draw out the blood from the vein.
And apply a styptic substance to that area, so that the area is hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And cover that area with bandages for all people according to the amount of its virtue and according to the color it turns after it leaves the wound, as it appears.
When the bone is black, leave it inside until it is roasted; and similarly, if you see it swollen, leave it inside until it is thinned; and similarly, if it is sharp, leave it inside until its sharpness is dulled.
And if there is one who is tall and strong and needs extraction of bone in a difficult way, then the fleam (a tool used for bloodletting) should be amplified and the bledsomer should be left-handed.
And in the one who is weak, do the opposite of what was done before, and extract it in easy ways, and let the bleeding be slow.
The best thing that is administered in fleam bloodletting of vein is that it be transverse section, not puncture.
And this method of fleam bloodletting is saved from bone fracture and from infection of nerves, and it is more praised and safer than second latitude and length.
And when syncope occurs during bloodletting, and let you cure that by a small amount of drink in the form of milk or of simple oxide; and extract it from the bone in three or four ways.
If there is a complication of the complexion, then take the leech to infuse in a tincture of myrrh or in a tincture of honey aromatized with such spices as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in an aromatic tincture and a certain odorant.
If the leech causes sincopation and this is due to the issue of a certain spice, then take in beurre an egg yolk of carn and an aromatic tincture with a subtle odor; use an aromatic oil, and let it lie on the patient's chest.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of sincopation for evacuation.
And whoever wants to move their arm and dissolve their second spice, take the leech according to the quantity of its strength, which evacuates the spice little by little, according to the quantity of its strength in consecutive days.
When someone wants to perform surgery on their arm, and the second bone is very thin, and their chest is strong, then do that procedure around 7 or 9 hours after the first phlebotomy.
When someone wants to shoot the second bone of their chest in the opposite direction of the part where they lean, that should be done on the second or third day.
When that chest in which the second bone has already been shot and is sharp and causes fever, it should be pierced with a needle in a vein, and then a large amount of blood should be drawn from it, and the opening should be enlarged to avoid syncope, so that all the conditions of phlebotomy are preserved; and that you place your hand on the side of the chest, over the heart of the second bone, so that it does not die in a syncopic state, which is due to ignorance and negligence of the phlebotomist.
And do not do when you want to remove the arm and evacuate the second vein, as it has already been closed at the opening of the vein and is difficult to remove from the bone, which should be done with great force and bent slightly, because that is very bad.
When performing a bloodletting procedure, it is important to use a sharp lancet that is coagulated from the sanctum in the orifice of the vein; or pause on that of tyrian alfarsia, or sagzena, and compress it gently until the sanctum is released.
And if the vein is inflamed, leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if you need to evacuate the sanctum again, and there is no excuse, then sign that location or in the other arm in another vein.
The vein called "funis del bras" is bloodlet in the location of the femoral or popliteal, when they are not enlarged or obscured, which is composed of those.
The quality of the bloodletting from that vein is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the phlebotomist's arm becomes red and the vein appears clearly.
And then place a strong bandage over the affected area of the mouth; and then use a forceps second to the transverse small one, not horizontally or according to the length.
And then use a wide opening and your forceps to grasp the joint above the mouth.
And if it is forbidden to let the bile flow, then you should immerse the patient in water and let the bile flow into the water until you achieve your purpose.
However, if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing the patient in water and instead place the body of the bile in cold water in winter time.
And the forceps for this vein is safer than all other veins, since it has not been previously punctured or nerves.
And the forceps for the back of the patient's hand is similar to the malformations of the foot.
And the quality of this forceps is that you should apply pressure to the patient's hand or your own hand, rather than immersing it in water, until the vein is inflamed and is clearly visible; then use a transverse forceps; and if you insert it, then you will not see anything in return.
And do not leave your hand on the patient's mouth, as it would press their exposed nerves.
And then repeat the hand movement in the lower abdomen and let the blood flow out of it, as if you do not repeat this in the lower abdomen, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited to flow.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary amount, then you place your hand on the vein or salt, so that it does not become solidified constantly; and similarly, make sure you do it in every straight direction.
The risk of the patient's mouth being pressed by your hand is similar to that of a snake bite.
Do the same in the patient's mouth as you did in the other one.
The risk of the vein being punctured in the patient's mouth is similar to those that are in the part behind the neck, as well as its risks of the uterus and menstrual retention, and the risks of ulcers and old joints and hips, and their similarities to other risks.
And the quality of the fleam used on the patient is that the patient should insert their own foot into the water and make the incision through which the veins can be seen; and tie over the joint of the foot with a bandage; and the location of the vein should be apparent from the red spot, and from there it branches out in the surface of the foot.
And then use the fleam to make the widest incision possible, under the cushion and away from the patient's chest, where the vein should be most apparent and least harmful.
And if you make the incision on the surface of the foot, then be careful not to cut the nerves that are located on the surface of the foot, and pause your fleam at the place where you would like to insert it, as if you wanted to inscribe it.
And make sure the fleam is sharp.
But if the discharge of pus is prohibited, then you should wash the foot in the water and let the pus run out through the incision where it can be drained.
If the flue-bottle manufacturer errs in the first vein, then repeat the flue-bottle procedure on him with a small one, as the location is sal; and do not fear his malice, but guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, make the shoe of the other foot equally.
And from the sciatic vein, the location is as we have said, place the calf bone behind the shinbone of the wild beast's leg.
And the joint of the flue-bottle procedure of it is at the hip when it is through the careful cauterization.
And the quality of the flue-bottle procedure of it is that the patient enters into a bath, and he quickly and strongly rubs the cushion of his leg from the side of the wide entrance above the calf below four such a long subtle band, which does not appear otherwise.
And then when it appears, then repeat the flue-bottle procedure on that second one each one according to what is possible and according to the transverse, and it is better; or inscribe that by beginning or cut off that by sectioning, as the location of it is sal.
And it is often seen in men who are not well; and if you find that, and it does not appear to be the cause of all, then blow some air into one part of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot, which is called the auricular and annular.
And be careful of the nerves, and pour out as much of the sanctified substance as you wish.
Then remove the restriction and place your hand over the location of the blowing, strengthen the location, which is usually healed.
From wind and the qualities of using those.
Winds are from corn, or from earth, or from air.
And wind is made in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of sanctified substance, and the other is by scarification.
And this wind that is by scarification is done in two ways: one of them is by fire or by using fire.
And the winds that are administered by scarification and extraction of sanctified substance are four locations on the body, of which the first location where winds are placed is the navel, and it is the last part of the head; and the second location of it is two parts of the neck; and winds below the jaw after the mouth; and winds of two spoons; and winds of an alohoster, and it is on the tip of the coccyx; and winds of two forceps, and they are from two bones; and winds of two cavilhas; and winds of two cuoyssas.
And do not extract the pus from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and for that reason, no virtue is obtained for those, as it would be if it were done by phlebotomy; nor does it cause any harm that ventozacio should be made with fire or with hot water in some bad condition made for filling before the whole body is completely evacuated.
However, if the necessity for ventozacio is caused by illness or continuity, administer it at all hours of the day and at the end of the month, and in the middle of the day and at some time during that period.
And therefore when it occurs in any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the thigh or calf of the leg, then command that a bandage be applied, especially if it has not passed for two or three hours.
And it is customary to apply a bandage to the neck because when that reaches gravity in the head and causes a swelling of the veins, but rather than that, it should be an evacuation of all the body.
And this bandage is in the location of the neck incision of the cephalic.
And it is not appropriate to use that which is of fragile complexity, or in which there is catarrh, because it gives great harm.
And for that reason, do not use those which are old, and in the heads of which there are illnesses.
But rather than that, it is customary to make the bandage continuous over the wound; and for that reason, do not command the bandager to place his hand at all on the bandage, lest there be a generation of oblivion.
May swelling of the alcohol be in the place of fleam for the femoral vein and the basilic: and for that reason, it is compared to asthma, and to the constriction of the lung and the cut of the instrument of the lung, and to coughing, and to inflation.
And cover that the swelling of the alcohol is small, because if it is placed under, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the swelling of the alcohol compares to accidental headache, and obtunding, and prefocus, and to pain in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of fleam for the basilic.
And cover that commands the swelling-maker not to press his hand during incision so that it does not pierce the artery and cause bleeding.
And the swelling under the jaw compares to alcohol in the mouth, and to corruption of the gum, and to similar things to those that are in the mouth, and it is in the place of fleam for the vein that is in the upper lip.
When the ventilation that is made on the two spoons is placed under the cap, which is made for the retention of heat.
And the ventilation of the two spoons is taken from the needles that are used in the fleubotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, which attracts all those small veins that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the larger veins where the attraction to the three veins occurs.
And command the ventilator that he does not proceed in incision, because the area is exposed to flesh, and then leaves his nerves and arteries.
And there is a ventilator that is blown over the buttocks and placed on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on the ulcers that are left.
And it is recommended that you command the ventilator to be a large one, and of iron, because the area requires strong drying; and it is necessary for the thin ventilation to be used and to be incised during the incision.
When the patient's bed is covered with cushions that are too soft, it tends to make the spine curve, which resembles the old pains of the ribs and the spine; and it provokes menstrual pain, and it resembles a backache and sciatica; and it takes the place of flebotomy for those who have phlebitis, and it causes hemorrhoids, and it takes the place of cautery for those who have sciatica.
However, a soft bed makes the whole body weak and causes hypocapnia in many people.
And of the cushions, the hard ones are preferred to the soft ones for the backs of many beds.
The quality of the position of the cushions is that they are placed at the beginning of the bed and are gradually increased in number, and do not prolong the position of the cushions, but rather change them frequently, and keep them evenly, so that the humors can come to the place for the occurrence equally. And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the place already red and swollen, and that the pain of the spine appears.
And then, you should shave and repeatedly clean the area in small parts, and then consider the position of the body.
Because that man who has thin flesh and many moles, you should shave a wide area and not just the mole, so that the area is not ulcerated.
And command the ventilator to enlarge the shaving area and apply a small amount, and at the same time clean the area.
And if the area is swollen, then shave two strips, because in the first strip the incision for the tendon and its fluid are found. And in the second strip, the examination of the acquired fluid from the extraction of the swollen area.
And if the tendon is dirty, then make a thorough shaving of the clean strip to obtain the end.
And ultimately, when we want to extract the tendon in small parts or a small amount, we need a shaving.
And if we want to extract a large tendon, make a large shaving; and if we know that the tendon is large, then shave in preparation.
And the term for incision in which the depth of the wound is only as deep as the spine.
And if the person whose wound is thick, hard, black, and their pores are straight, then it is recommended that the locations of the bowels be made more gentle, open, and resolved; if it is in summer time, use olive oil of aloe, or olive oil of violet, or olive oil of damask roses, or olive oil of chamomile; and if it is in winter time, use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lily, or olive oil of camamilla, or of sanc, and similar.
And if the excess is thick and freezing, then use oil of amarnthus, or oil of balsamita, or oil of aloe, or oil of anethi, and similar.
And if the intestine is of wide pores of tender flesh, then it is recommended to prohibit oil, and recommend that for these locations of the bowels be washed with warm water of salt, or with cold water of violet, or with water of damask roses, or similar.
And if the patient's skin is of moist nature, wash his armpits with warm water or with water mixed with myrtle and bay leaves and similar to those.
And if the patient's skin is of thick nature, wash his armpits with warm water or with water mixed with sage, lavender, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it is recommended that the armpit be cleaned immediately after washing; having washed it, it is recommended to apply it immediately after washing for an hour or two, and it is recommended to sleep near the armpit.
What should be done before performing a bloodletting on a patient who needs to have his armpits cleaned?
If the person who is to be bled or the one who is to perform the bloodletting is angry and has inflamed skin, it is recommended to take cooling causes, such as vinegar with roses, warm water with salt and lemon, and secanabin, julep, and similar things.
Pause a their wounds with a clean cloth, and meat of chickens seasoned with herbs, and cooked vegetables, and similar foods.
From that which has been fried, take away the skin and gristle, or the skin of dried apricots, and sumac, and some fragrant spice between old and new; and it is recommended that they use little bread and eat, and place their food on a clean cloth and canebir, and pickers, and small birds, and dove.
And it is recommended that on the day of wind and flu, the bread should be larger than the food.
And it is recommended that bread be given to some men of Tyrian alpharac, or medicaments of musk, which is musked, or alcelita for wind or flu or similar, so that the main members are comforted and that the sick person is weakened; and do not let them take that scalfatz.
When the incisions made are placed over the skin, muscle, and abdomen, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the groin, where these members do not usually undergo incision.
And it is not sought for those but for the purpose of drawing out blood from a limb, such as a puncture over the breast in case of bleeding from the wound of the nose; and we use that which dissolves the viscous blood from the surface of the member, such as a pad on the abdomen and umbilicus; because that rarefies the member and relieves the pain that resolves the viscosity.
And it is placed over the ribs when they are injured or pierced, because by the power of the draw it quickly removes the injury and eradicates the piercing from its place.
And similarly, when it is placed over the skin and muscle in those who are confined.
And these incisions are administered with suction only; and some wounds are administered with heat.
Some baths are administered full of warm water in the illnesses of the mule.
And that is to fill the windpipe and make it larger, so is the warm water alone or water in which certain herbs have been boiled that are suitable for it.
The form of the windpipe administered with fire: its width is two fingers, according to what we have formed; and the amount of the remedy is the length of one palm; and it is on the side of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of it, the tube should be small according to the amount that enters into it a needle.
It should be made of lead or citron, of large margins, lion, equal and sharp so that it does not damage the member because of its position on it.
And it should be at the end of it a crossbar of lead or iron, where the candle is placed to the fire.
And this windpipe should be much larger than the one we have recommended; and the less of it according to the illnesses and the state of the one who uses it.
And the breasts of infants are softer than those of young men and large-breasted women.
And the quality of applying this hot cloth to the member is that it extends the muscle with hot charcoal from a small candle of wax, and place it on the edge of the longitudinal incision in the middle of the wound, so that the fire is lit around the part that was not burned, so as not to burn the patient's body.
And then place the cloth on the patient's member, and say the spell over it, until they have applied the hot cloths and do not need to open the mouth anymore, so that the steam can pass through that opening, at which point the cloth will soon dissolve.
And then apply the second muscle according to its method, and repeat that if necessary.
In the hot cloth that is administered in the illness of pleurisy, which has no longitudinal incision or opening, and is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed on the member only.
This is the shape of it: And this windmill, the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a large amount of water.
Chapter 97.
Blood-letting is not administered in most members, but only in those members in which it is impossible to position windmills, such as the mouth, gums, and similar parts; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the nose and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found blood-letting devices that are in the waters of polluted rivers.
And then lay them down in the water of the polluted river, before they become famished, and that no cause is in their stomachs; and then evacuate the body at the beginning with bleeding and with windmills; and then wash the patient's member before it becomes red; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and cased.
If it is possible to see the wound directly, it is better to do so.
If not, then wash the wound with clear water and apply a compress; and dress and express it.
And if the wound is prolonged, place it in the cavity of the arm, and let that water run out, then you insert a cloth in cold water into that opening where the blood has been collected.
And if the wound is multiplied, then powder it with orpiment or vinegar and similar substances to stanching agents until the wound has stopped bleeding; or place the most roasted beans on the wound, and leave them there until the beans stick to the wound, and then the wound stops bleeding.
And if necessary, change the dressings of the wounds when possible.
And if the wounds are not allowed to be suspended, then wash the wound with recent blood or insert a needle into the wound where it is possible to see some blood; and then place the dressings there, so that those dressings will absorb any blood as soon as it appears.
And when you want them to cough, sprinkle some powdered aloe, salt, or ash on those parts, and they will soon cough.
And here begins the text of the fourth section: of restoration. This chapter is necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and accidental displacement in the bones.
Oh son, be wise and know that many foolish doctors and laypeople, and those who sometimes do not follow the books of the Ancients or read one letter from them.
And for this reason this method of the sciences in our land is hidden; and I have not done it before, but I am obligated to do so now; and I have not admitted anything else, but rather by the length of reading the books of the Ancients and studying their understanding, until I extracted the science of those.
And then direct yourself to experiment and study in the length of your life.
And I have already described all of this in this chapter, which contains the main science and on which the best experiment has been passed; so that it can be made clear to you and relieved from the occupation of elongation; and it is made clear at the end of clarification; and it is shown in the end of declaration; and it is formed into several forms of instruments that are administered in that, as it is done by addition of declaration, such as has been done in two previous chapters.
Chapter One.
Summary and collections from the fact of bone fractures, from those that must be mentioned before we begin to remember the injuries and varieties of each limb. Let us therefore say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to which the artist is referred, according to the truth of those; so that you and those who promptly know or learn this noble art from others.
And so it is said that when such things as fractures or dislocations or twists or injuries occur to a person, it is customary to apply a splint or bandage, or whatever is appropriate, unless there is some cause that prevents it, such as debility of strength, or the person is very old or infirm, or it is a time of great heat, or of great cold.
And then be content with eating fresh herbs and small pieces of poultry and crabs; and avoid large pieces of meat and filling up on foods that fill the veins with blood, unless you are sure of not developing an abscess, or if you fear the spread of matter to the member.
And then return the patient to their usual diet and routine first.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is customary to feed the patient on nutritious foods that are moist and heavy and have viscosity, such as bread made from wheat and water, and rice, and caps, and peas, and bellies of cows, and hens, and fresh fish, and large and similar foods, and this diet is made by coagulation of fracture more gently and longer.
When bones are fractured in men who have them in their first vulnerability and in the elderly, it is not possible for them to remain continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their members.
However, nature adjusts and amends the broken bone from any part of its body, similar to how glue adheres and strengthens that which is ensemps conglutinatz and liatz, until venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, just like fire at the beginning, until some cause does not prevent it from its works.
And for this reason it is necessary to place the cushions of the patient, cushions in which there is gravity and viscosity and weight, just as we have said.
And you know that the types of fractures are different according to the diversity of the members, because a fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the skull; and the fracture of the rib is different from the fracture of the shoulder; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I have remembered the memory of all types of fracture, explained in its own distinct chapter.
Great variety of fractures in itself. And the species of bone fracture are varied in their own ways; because some fractures are made arcuate, others happen at the stars; and some fractures are made according to the length of the bone: and some fractures of the skull, ribs, and additions proceed and do not proceed, as it is made in the pen when it is prepared to write, and the fracture is a large and disruptive one in the head, and the fracture is a small fissure.
And for each type, there is a proper torture in the restoration of it according to what will come from its own distinct memory in its own places.
Large fragment of bone fracture. And for that, it is known as a bone fracture: the swelling of the affected area, and the presence of a prominence or lump at the touch, and its location when you feel it with your hand.
Therefore, if there is no swelling or lump apparent in the location and it is not felt with gentle touch when you touch the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there may be swelling or a small fissure, in which case you should gently press on the affected area and apply compression to all; place something over it of the medicines of which you have memory appropriate for that moment; and keep it straight with subtle pressure.
And you should know that the location when it is curved and not split into two or another, as it remains entirely on the surface of the body, then place something over it from your hour to correcting it with caution post-asterma.
And if an abscess occurs, leave it open for several days until it stops, and then dress it with the best method of elevation and compression that you can.
And know that the repair of the bone and its healing is slower than the healing of the flesh in which the fracture occurred.
And then strengthen it when the memory of it returns.
If the bone is fractured, it is necessary to extend this member by two parts, whether it is the arm or the leg; or if the limb is small, use your hand; or use two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And place your hand in the position where you place the limb according to its natural shape, while the parts of the fractured member are extended, then press that you make them return to their places according to each method that you can in their locations.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that you do not harm the patient during your operation or their injury; and press according to your ability that you apply the bone to another as companions according to the best forms.
And if in that hour you touch your hand on that place, and if you see any other cause here, rectify that and equalize it with the amount of your skill.
And if you excessively extend or compress, as foolish doctors do who move quickly and cause abscesses to occur due to their operation, or cause contractions in the member as we have seen due to their quick movements.
And the quality of the fracture of the limb is as I have recommended; since you know that broken limbs vary in their location, size, and shape.
And for those that are small, like the arm and the finger and similar to these, it is recommended that the wrapping be made of very fine cloth.
But for those that are large, like the cushion or the chest, it is recommended that the wrapping be made of thick and durable cloth, because the looseness of the thick cloth connects the limb strongly and equally to the fracture from all sides, without any gap.
And then, as soon as possible, begin your equalization of the location, place a suitable bandage over that fracture, with three or four layers, depending on how much the limb has swollen; and strengthen your hand a little by holding the bandage.
And then go to the most accessible part of the location of the fracture, and strengthen it so that your grip does not break the location of the fracture. And then gently extend your tongue into the area of the fracture, gradually softening the structure little by little, until you feel a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the other affected area over the fracture, and gradually move the bandages towards the part behind the fracture; and your operation should be in the structure of the bandage and in the softening of the second one that we have mentioned in the first bandage.
And then place a cloth or sheet between the bandages that is equal to the twist of the fracture, if there is twisting in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place a cloth or bandage on the other bandage, and gradually cover these sharp-edged bandages as soon as possible, if there is inflammation or pus in the area; and then place the cloth over that which secretes the pus and supports the inflammation; and leave it there for several days; and then strengthen the bandages on that area.
And if the splints of the canna leaf, well formed and skillfully made; or of wood; or of ramps of palm; and let the width of each splint be according to this form and figure:
However, make sure that the splint placed over that fracture is thicker and longer than the others, and the length of the splint should be according to its size and position on the member; and strengthen the other end with another band according to your first stricture; and place the band above it decently as we have said about the stricture, and let your stricture be according to the location of the fracture, and the longer it is from the fracture, the looser the stricture.
And make sure that the threads are made of strong and fine silk; and they should be of gold; and if the threads are thick, then as I have seen in the operation of sewing up wounds with thick cords of silk, twisting the threads together, and this is a great error when catgut is used to make the stricture equal.
And fine needles are not suitable for this purpose, as you will not be able to accurately place those that you want, and there should not be any gap between one and the other of the same length.
And if the patient is lying on the ends of the stakes near the structure in those places, then place a cloth or woollen blanket over them to prevent any harm from that.
Some fractures are caused by injuries, and accidents can disrupt the chain, and you will find memory in that one in the second chapter's singularity.
And you should know that not all broken bones are straight on the first day; this is because the bone, when large, does not allow for resting on the stakes for less than five days or seven or more, depending on your confidence in the risk of an abscess occurring.
And this is the method of the ancients for which they restored these plasters, which are placed over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Hand cream for the treatment of fracture splints, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, which is not suitable for cold or wet: and you should take powder from ground flour, and the middle of the flour that you have to apply to the movement of the bone in the parts of the mill.
And if there is such a thing, do not use that album of honey, but apply the comfortable condition to the non-essential or subtle part; and then use that.
Another way to treat fractures and dislocations and sprains: recipe of asafetida, of lapdanum, of acacia, of enula, and of migrach, which is made from milkweed salt, of all the ana drac. x; of mirra and aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; all their trissatz and crumbled and mixed with water or honey if the condition of the patient is scalded; and then use this splint, which is made of good composition and restores the broken bones more easily, and confers to many men.
Another remedy for fractures and sprains: Take equal parts of mallow, mint, aloe, and Armenian bole, and mix them together.
Grind all the ingredients in a large mortar with contraction, and their crumbs, and their powders in water or egg white, and administer it.
Remedy for joints and bones separated from their places, and painful accidents in those areas, and fissures and fractures: Take a piece of linen cloth and soak it in warm water and oil, and place it on the affected area.
This remedy does not have the virtue of healing, but rather prevents and expels pain from abscesses.
Another remedy that heals fractures: Take willow bark and wild poppy leaves, grind them all together, and make a poultice from them.
Remedy for applying to the healing of fractured bones and when you want to resolve a recent abscess: Take equal parts of mallow root, camomile, violet flowers, flour of ers, and all mixed together, grind them all and their powders in water, if the limb is not scalded.
If it is scalded, then apply a wet, humid cloth or use a wet cloth from it.
Another method of plaster is more effective for the recovery of the member: take herbs such as althea and seeds of lily, balm, melissa, majorana, flowers of viol, camomile, all cut in parts and equal; all this is thrashed and mixed with soft water or soft water or warm water, according to the quality of the member and its color.
If you do not have Ypocras in your freezer, then apply a wax and oil cream on the affected member to recover it, not any other cause; and recommend that it be applied between roughness and fineness.
If it is seen that it should be applied on the affected member to recover it and its causes in which drying is small in heat as with milk, like oil and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Hand plaster that relieves injury and pain: recipe equal parts of mugwort, sage, hair from an unshorn man or animal skin, aloe, salt; three parts of honey, beeswax, and oil, and make a plaster.
The amount should be determined based on the size of the wound and applied appropriately, considering whether pain, swelling, or bone fracture does not occur, and if it is not suitable for its location, do not apply for several days. And if pain, swelling, or inflammation occurs at the location, then apply or remove it in that hour, and leave the plaster on it.
Take a cloth and sea sponge, soak it in warm seawater, and let it cool in cold water; then wash the wound until the swelling subsides and the pain is relieved; then rest the member for an hour; then place a cloth soaked in hot wine and olive oil or rose oil on it, and leave it there for a night until you are sure of the abscess, and that the inflammation of the member has subsided, and that the pain of it has remained.
And then gently repeat that delicate structure and apply a small and not too strong plaster for your primary constraint, and gently enter that which is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and the pain and the inflammation and all the accidents have already been healed from everything, and if you need to apply plaster and constraint, then repeat what you did at the beginning equally.
And if no harm occurs to the member of those that we have said, then do not remove it for three days or four or five or six; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days after you appear by the removal of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it settles on the coagulation of the flesh over that.
And then adjust in the constraint more than in your primary constraint, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, after it is preceded by the remembrance of him.
But if you see that the location of the fracture has already dried up and become more extenuated than it should, then know that that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that; and so soothe that with a wet cloth throughout all the time that you removed that; and this is all in three days; and gradually increase the constraint, and for this operation bring the nourishment to the member, and it is healed more easily.
When those who claim to be folk healers of the broken limb of a member in another way when it is not restored to its original position, according to their own method, and if it is restored according to its tortuosity, that is an error according to their operation, and great fear results, and if that were done correctly, it would increase the ancient ones in their freedom and they would be able to do that work.
I have never seen anyone of them do that, so it is reasonable that they should not do that.
Chapter two: Of fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are different, and their shapes are diverse, and their causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of space, which affects the entire bone, which is located behind the bone, as if it were in the bone, and for that reason this type is called ascial; or the space enters a part of the bone, and enters the flesh of it and does not pass through the inside of it to the back of it; and this type of fracture is called absolute elevation.
And the pain from these two fractures is great or little, and the fracture is contracted or atrophied; and the cause of it is percussion with a pointed object or a blow on stone, and similarly.
And this fracture is so deep that it approaches the periosteum which is under the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the pain from these two fractures is great or little.
And the fracture is such that it occurs within the bone, in the thinness of the hair, and for this reason, this special fracture is called capillary.
And the fracture is such that it occurs by a blow or percussion of stone, and similarly, which causes some bone fragment to enter into the cracks, and it is made in the concave location as happens to the ribs when they are hit and broken, and the fragments enter into the cracks.
And this is more commonly done in the bones of humans, as in their skulls.
And all these special fractures are stable, as if they were separate stones. And I would like to return everything to its place.
And I would like to detect all these special fractures over those and for investigation of their causes and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And a special type of fracture is known by the fact that it is discovered on the bone, and it is removed, and it is rubbed on the injury, where the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, one should consider the symptoms of the patient at the beginning, and if you see through the symptoms that indicate clearly by manifest signs such as vomiting from cholera, extension, loss of understanding, abscess of the mouth, fainting, acute fever, and swelling of the limbs and pain in those, and similar to their symptoms in the major dispositions, these are not cured.
And if you see symptoms that do not correspond to a cure, then you should begin the treatment of it.
When the cause is that it comes to your leg in the beginning as it is swollen and that is in the days of winter, then you should study in the bone of the horn during the day number fourteen in all dispositions.
And if it is in the days of summer, then you should study the bone during the day number seven, having that which is left of the bone be corrupted by the pancreas, and that accidents occur to the accidents that have been mentioned.
And if the fracture has already reached the pancreas covering the brain, and it is small and dark, then you should incise the cut and dark part, according to what I will tell you.
And if you raise the head of the patient swollen, and uncover the bone according to custom and your ability according to the figure of the swelling, and that it be lighter on the patient.
And if an accident occurs to you in the detection of the bone, flow of pus or abscess cautiously, then you should pause at that place and apply what I will tell you, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and make a pressure on the swelling until it is sedated, and be sure of flow of pus; and afterwards begin in the circumference of the bone and in its removal.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incisor, and this is the form of it: And then administer another incisor, slightly wider than the other; and this is the form of it:
And then administer the wider incisor.
And you should have different incisors of various widths, some wider than others; and some shorter than the others and they should be in the back of their sharpness of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that you do not damage the head and it does not break that one.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then drill around it, giving that you administer the incisors with the shallow taravels, which are called non-deepening taravels.
And these are not called anything except that those do not pause the end of the bone at which you approach it, so that the taravel is rounded extremity or margin on that which is left the sharp edge similar to the margin or a small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing the density of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these needles a large number of those that are suitable for the size of each bone, until it is present in all tests of the brain, with its sharp end, the quantity in length and brevity is according to the quantity of this test.
And this is the form of three types of needles: The quality of piercing through the circumference of the broken bone is that you place the needle on the bone and rotate it according to what you know that the bone has already penetrated; and then move the needle to another location, and place that which is between all the thickness of the ray or around it.
And then insert the needle that is between each layer of the bone, and make it as thin as possible above that in order to elevate, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for the damage that has appeared at that, as thin needles and forceps.
And be careful that the needle does not touch any cause of the brain.
And when you have circled the bone perforations, and if it is continued with the same instrument, and that extracted, cover it with a razor that is rough and unequal to that in the sharpness of the other similar instrument, but rather more sharp and subtle than the others.
And if there is any fragment of the small bones and sharp ones, then take that which you have from the instruments; and apply it to cure the wound with linen and find those that we have mentioned.
And the other way of operation is long and difficult, which Guilielmus and the author say is great; and this is the word about it: it is necessary for you to begin by discovering the part of the bone in which the fracture is most violent and most manifest, before you have discovered that part and placed behind it the end of this slow and light saw, of which this is the form:
And if the lens-shaped fragment does not penetrate any cause, and the sharp fragment is in two places ahead in length, as sometimes; then the lens-shaped fragment should be adjusted to the bone at the face of the sharp fragment incising into the bone.
And then approach the incision with a small, sharp knife, and insert it entirely into the bone to facilitate the turning of the bone as needed, and be sure that the pericardium does not occur in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the physician was the most powerful of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly,
Then if there is any cause of attachment to the pericardium at certain places of the bone, insert that into the end of the incisor that lens-shaped, and remove that from it with ease, which is removed from its harm and its fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the pericardium, and that which is cut or stopped on the bone is the surface of it, and in its roughness and subtle scratches, then cover that roughness and remove those scratches with a razor sharp for those you have prepared the number, of different quantities so that it is possible to administer them in all places the most convenient of them and the most correct of those second that in which you lost your operation that bone broken and the figure of it.
And if you administer the remedy in your reason, which you have used to cure the bones at the beginning of those razors, and then use it close to the most subtle part of it, do not cease to do so until you reach administering the most thinnest of all those.
In each of the other small fractures and thin fracture, if you administer the remedy according to that which you have lost for its correction.
And it is not caused by all those who have studied in that art. And it is based on what we have shown in great fractures.
And if the skin is pulled when you remove the bones, then you should take cloth of the second amount of the wound, and submerge it in rose oil, and place that over the orifices of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled, and submerge it in warm oil and rose oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do so as gently as possible without pressing the wound; and then administer a broad bandage, not stretching it more than the amount of the wound.
And leave that patient to this cure for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess's healing; and then remove it and administer medicines that are too moist, such as linseed and flour of eggs, and powder of myrrh and aristolochia, and similar ones to those.
And you should make those medicines into powder that is ground over the surface, if they are dry; and generally, administer all the medicine of its property that is to remove and not bite.
And guard yourself that the wound in your cure is not contaminated; and it is not in the silence of gum or another; nor do you let it add virulence to it; because when it is adjusted on the brain's membrane, it corrupts that and poisons that, and accides on the patient with that malicious evil.
And accides in the cavity of the head, as it is modified there the bone and more when it is spread on that cure, and it is blackened on its surface; and therefore consider now if it accides on the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is paralytic for all of them.
If there is no black magic involved in the medicine that is placed above, and it is due to the effect of that medicine that causes the black magic, then you should take a piece of honey and four parts of roasted oil, and place those lines on a cloth, and place that over the cipher; and cure that with the specifics of cure that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
You should know that the nose is not broken into two parts equally close together, or one of those some wavy, because in it there are two bones, and the part that remains is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and does not affect it except for its curvature and tortuosity and sinusitis.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you should introduce the same small bone into its own nose, and equal that fracture with the other intact bone, and with the other deformed bone, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your own convenience, and remember not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not permit vision in that area, then cover it with a small piece of cotton.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then do the same thing.
And cover it with a bandage for the restoration of the fracture on the first day after the injury, if possible; otherwise, later apply the seventh or tenth degree of the cauterizing agent.
And insert a piece of cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two small pieces, if the fracture is in two parts, and let them fill the nostril completely.
And say to the ancient healers that the pieces should be wrapped in bread, and moved around every day, but not seen by me; having covered the cloth with a piece of honey-sweetened powdered molasses; and later remove it when the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And some wool should be placed in the nose, instead of water, to prevent it from being suffocated by a cloth that covers the lion's fur; and if the fracture of the nose is very painful, the patient should not be prohibited from breathing.
This cause is not necessary for you; if you want to do it, do it, and if you want to, make wounds.
And if another wool causes an abscess, apply the nose with a cerate or a poultice of bread and rose oil, or diachylon.
If an abscess does not occur, then cover the wound with flour of starch and powdered oak bark mixed with egg white; and place your hand over the lion's fur, and do not let the nose be exposed to any cause.
If the bones of the nose are broken or crushed due to a small fracture or comminution, then cover them with those, and remove those with instruments that are suitable for those; and place this laceration, and cure it with what envelops and consolidates, and with what ointment is appropriate.
If there is a pain in the nose, then apply warm compresses and administer steam through a nozzle until it is completely healed.
Chapter 4.
About the restoration of the jaw when it is dislocated.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture does not cause pain, if the fracture is only slightly deformed and not completely broken into two and curved to the parts inside, then it is considered healed.
Therefore, if the fracture is in the middle, then introduce your finger into the patient's mouth on the left side of the jaw; similarly, if the fracture is on the right side, then introduce the same finger into the right side of the patient's mouth; and push it against the deformation of the fracture to facilitate the parts deformed, with your other hand on the other side of the deformed part of the bone; and adjust it accordingly.
If the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two, then apply traction to the two parts in a straight line until it is possible to realign them.
And if the teeth are dislodged and disrupted, then use those that you hope will remain in place, such as gold or silver or cedar; and place them on the broken jaw, and place them on the doubled cloth, and place a large sheet of cloth decently made, or a weight equal to the length of the jaw; and hold it above second that you have equipped the jaw with and that is appropriate for application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and find peace, and place the soup of lions in their mouth.
And if you suspect that the figure has been altered in some way, then take and remove it on the third day; and correct what is already altered from it and apply that with powder of moli, album of hoo, or powder of cinnamon, before you have removed the plaster from it, and place a lion's wool over the application.
And then with this annex and adjust that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave that, until it is healed and strong the fracture; for this fracture is stretched in three days.
And if another complication occurs, such as an abscess that needs to be lanced, then administer the same medication that we have mentioned for other complications during the patient's recovery, and that abscess will remain there.
And if the fracture is severe, consider whether the broken bone is dislocated or not. If it is, then carefully apply that medication that is suitable for removing those from the instruments.
And if the orifices of the wound are narrow, then carefully enlarge them with a bodkin according to your need.
And if you have managed to remove those fragments and the wound does not close again, then carefully enlarge the orifices of the wound; otherwise, place one of the appropriate ointments on it and cover it until it is healed.
Chapter V.
Of the restoration of the wishbone when it is broken.
Certain complications cause the wishbone to break at the point where it connects with the shoulder muscle, and that fracture occurs in one of three ways.
When it is broken, or separated, or separated into two parts other than those that are natural; and it is better for its restoration; or it is such that there are accidents in its natural parts, and it is difficult for its restoration; or it is such that the fracture is extensive.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is extensive, is that you make two assistants present, so that one holds the helper and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with the rods called introquets, in the form of a second rib, and not in its eminence or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then cover it with a cloth or wool, and its size according to the quantity of your need; extend and elevate the clavicle and tie the cloth under your hand until the fracture is aligned as desired.
If you cannot pull the tip of the wishbone to the parts forward, so that it reaches the prone, then have the patient lie on their back, and place a large cushion under their neck.
The assistant then stretches the muscle of the patient under the parts forward until the bone of the wishbone is raised to its position in the prone, and then you correct the fracture and equal it with those called the ties.
However, if you feel tags of the wishbone and their mauvasses, then do so on that and remove those tags to facilitate.
And if it is held in the bone, then you invent an incision of it with one of the scissors that you have prepared for this, because you have placed the instrument after the wishbone, which serves the ciphaque; and this instrument is a staff or iron of which this is the form of it:
And it is similar to a hook of which this is the concavity; and its width according to that which you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the softness of it.
The length of it should be second to what is possible in the operation; there should be two extremities, one wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the bone from the thigh is wide, and it is certain of pus, then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitches.
And if the disruption is narrow, or you fear pus, then fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the amount of the wound's incision.
And if pus occurs, then pour in dressing that is warm and oiled and wet, and place it over that.
And even if the bone above the broken bone is not fractured; and so that you can see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you replace the splint, then you should straighten it again and strengthen the joint.
And then place the patient's pillow on their shoulder, and place another pillow under their arm to support the patient's arm from the side of that person, and thus elevate the fracture of the sternum at the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is supported by the shoulder of that person.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is a wound or abscess in the place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen the surface of the patient at that place, adjust it in the stricture and restore it, and leave it until it is restored and the fracture of the sternum has coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some treatments are made in months of that time in some people.
Chapter 6.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
A splint is broken at the side of the patient, not broken by the patient but its edges.
And when the patient's side is broken - and it is broken in the middle of the patient - and it is not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the patient and reduce it according to the natural figure in every possible way of engineering that is possible.
And place your hand over the powder of lime and honey; and place pulverized cloth on it; and place a thin layer of table salt according to the quantity of the splint or more than one.
But if the layer is concave at any of the places of the splint, then level that concavity with honey, and place the layer according to equality.
And apply strength above with blood and a bandage to the construction of the splint until it is not displaced from its place.
Consider the bandage in each day; and all the while it is softening, apply another bandage and strengthen it and straighten the limb if it remains in its place.
Place the patient on their left side.
The splint is restored in 10 days or in 25 days.
When this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and you know that it is safe from the bones of which the beginning was not feared nor its dissolution.
If you proceed from the location of the bone and place it under the skin, then you cut on it, hold it, and do as we said in the fracture of the furcula of sadacio of abscess caut if something happens here.
Chapter VII.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the chest.
The chest is broken in some places of its middle and that ends badly; but the extremities of it remain unaffected and are not crushed or comminuted.
And when the patient's knee is broken, it tilts towards the sides and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting, and severe pain; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of it is to place the patient on their back, and place a cushion between their shoulder blades; and apply pressure to the muscles of the knee, and adjust the ribs of the patient to be in line with each other, and gently perform the operation of the knee and its equilibrium according to all possible methods that are appropriate and suitable for it, until the shape of the bone returns as it was.
And then place a poultice and bandage over the affected area, and place a soft cloth or a calf's bladder and similar materials on top of it, so that you can wrap it in cloth; and gently perform the operation on the broken bone so that it is not bruised; and apply some pressure to the wound as it becomes less painful, and strengthen the fracture appropriately; and consider the wound throughout the time, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
If necessary, to prevent the dissolution of that part of the corrosion or prolapse, pain, abscess that has occurred in that place, then you should take and remove that one and eradicate the ointment and correct what has happened due to that hand's method of healing for that person; and then return the ointment, if necessary, within the time it takes for them to be healed.
Chapter VIII.
On the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
You should know that the fracture of the ribs does not occur in places as small as they are, but only in places where they meet and divide; and the extremities of those parts do not occur in those contractions except for those that are cartilaginous. And you should not be deceived by the appearance of that person, but rather by the investigation of that person and the said ones.
And the restoration should be as follows: that it equals the fracture according to the possible method, until it is covered by the skin, and then apply ointment and strengthen the broken bone with this one, if necessary.
If the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the parts underneath, then the patient experiences severe pain and puncture, as if with a puncture that occurs in someone who has coughed, and because of this, the bones push the bandage; and they experience difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is difficult to cure.
And the ancients were skilled in that method with great skill.
And they said: cover the patient's abdomen with something that generates inflation and warmth, so that the stomach is full and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the parts in front.
We should not do that to avoid causing an abscess, if it does not occur; and if it has already occurred, then we should help with that.
And they said to him that he should be placed above the wound and that something strong should be applied; and this is similar to reasoning, but it is feared that the wound will draw excess fluid to the area due to weakness.
And they say to the patient: cover that place with wool that has already been submerged in heated oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is full, which should be equal to the amount you would use for the second application; and then cure the patient with the care of pleurisy of food and medicine.
And if the patient experiences severe constraint that they have not suffered before, and the bones puncture the bandage at the puncture site, place it over the patient, then cover the area, reveal the broken rib, and place your hand over the instrument that contains the cyst, the memory of which is preceded, and cut the bones to facilitate its removal.
And then adjust the lips of the wound, if it is large, with gauze, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
And if abscesses form in the wound, then you should cover and insert powders into heated oil and place it over the area, and cure the patient with that which covers the abscess formed.
And let him lie on his left side while he is being treated until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
Of the restoration of a fracture of the sacrum of the back and neck.
Some injuries often lead to fractures in the neck bones and their ligaments, as well as in the sacrum of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider the following: if their bones are already softened, stupefied, and dead and cannot move them, extend them, or strengthen them, and when you press on them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then know that they are not healed, and in these conditions, it is mortal.
And if they feel pain in them when pressed with your fingers or pricked with a needle, then know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover.
And if you see similar conditions in the neck bones and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider their feet.
When you see that it has already been softened, if you notice that those things happen in the thighs, and when it is on its back, it becomes stiff and cannot defecate or urinate, and some people lie on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and therefore do not treat it.
If none of those things happen, the cause is better and less serious.
The treatment of it is to perforate the abscess that you place on the spine, which is covered with warm oil or a few drops of honey; place some of those people on top of it during the day to sedate the abscess.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters on it, and strengthen it with a bandage; command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the part where the pain occurs until it is healed.
And if the tissue of the bone is separated or any other cause that is already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and put that bone; and adjust the edges of the wound, with stitches if it is large; and cure it with some flesh of the animal's blood, until it is healed.
If the back of the leg bones is broken, and it is at the end of the spine, then enter your left hand into the anus, and equalize the broken bones on the other hand as much as possible; and place a bandage and splint on it, if necessary, and strengthen that one.
And if you feel shattered bones in it, then perform surgery on that one, and stop that one, and cure the wound with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the restoration of the womb.
The bones of the womb are broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is only communication at the ends of those and they are inserted in length and decline to the parts of the bed; and the patient experiences pain in that location and puncture, and the cushion is surprised when the fracture occurs.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that one so that it is above the fracture, which is the figure of it.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of it, then you should equalize it with the second one that you have at hand for equality, to enter as much as it is assembled to its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long or that already declines to the parts below, then you should make the patient lie on their belly between the time when it is prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And then when you have equalized it, place your hand on the plaster, and place your other hand on that star of wood or of codeine, and strengthen for stricture on the one that you do not fear puncturing of fracture or removal of the splint.
And equalize the concavity with that which places it inside when it takes the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if abscess occurs, then you should cease from extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and place your hand on that which sedates it according to what is preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen that which has cover.
And if there are broken bones or they are crushed, then you should treat them.
Chapter 11.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the arm.
Arm is what is between the ribs and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, one of which is that you grip it at the level of the meaty part of the shoulder according to this form:
And if it is tied in two ends of two bands, and then lifted up from the place.
And the patient should lie on a bed; and then push out the broken arm through the meaty part of the shoulder until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place where the curve of the bone is attached.
And then suspended above that some heavy weight, or the servant extends it to the parts behind; and then the doctor should place it at the two ends of the fracture together, until the fracture returns according to its shape.
And the other handmaid is that the patient should be placed on their back and support their head with a cloth; then command two ministers to hold one under the fracture and the other behind them; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then press on the fracture with the cloth and on the other side with another cloth, and each of the two ministers extend their parts.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then cover that the middle of the cloth over the knee and the other behind the fracture towards the back.
Similarly, if the fracture is towards the back, then cover that the cloth be placed on that place and on the back.
Equal to that in difficulty and work, and when it is applied according to what is covered and how it is applied, then press on that if there is no pus.
If a boil occurs, leave the stricture inside for seven days, and place a cloth soaked in warm water and oil over it until the boil is ready to be lanced, and then you should do that.
The method of lancing that boil is to place a poultice on the wound, and then wrap it in clean cloth; and then adjust your arm over that assistant, and place your hand on their muscle.
And then wrap the cloth over the assistant's arm to prevent it from being in the way of the broken bone, if there is no other cause for that.
And then use splints.
And then place that splint that is placed farther and stronger than the other splints; and between each splint, leave a space equal to the width of the broken bone, and the length of the splints should be according to the fracture plus three digits of each part.
And then place your hand on the stricture that I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is necessary that your structure on the location of the fracture be more straight. And when the fracture becomes longer, the structure is less.
And if you see the position of the bones and the structure as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its proper position, then do so.
And if you fear abscess, then leave the structure and bones as we have said on day seven.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days to prevent it from occurring in the improper location or inflammation; or it is prohibited for food to arrive at the member by disposition of superfluity of structure; and therefore, correct everything as we have said.
But if you are sure that no cause of this occurs, then do not release the ligament for three days or more.
And let the patient's head be on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant completely covered in wool equally, and consider at all hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken member is not delayed nor dissolved, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct everything according to your skill.
And pause the patient's food according to the order we have given, unless the food is delicate at the beginning until it is digested; and later cover that food from him.
It is customary for the helper and the pillow of the patient to be changed every ten days; and later cover that they are removed, washed, and administered with drugs that correct that one.
And if the fracture is not healed, then you do not remove that bandage and those splints within a day or within two months.
Chapter XII.
Of the restoration of the arm fracture.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the radius and ulna; the first is small, and that one is the one that is placed on top, and the second is large and that one is the one that is placed below, from the part that is left on top.
And if the larger bone is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if they are broken together.
When the small intestine is pierced above, its restoration would be difficult, and its healing would be more difficult.
And when the large intestine is pierced below its fracture, its healing would be bad, and its healing would be difficult.
And it is even worse when two bones are pierced.
Therefore, if the bone that is pierced by the small intestine above, it is convenient for the doctor to facilitate its healing by placing a small extension to prevent further damage.
But if the large intestine is that which is pierced, then it is necessary to place an extension with more force.
And if both intestines are pierced at the same time, then it is necessary to place an extension with more force.
And it is necessary to place the hand figure of the patient over the restoration of the intestine and the extension of the intestine extended on a cushion, and the patient's arm should be above all others, and the ear should be lower than all others, and the patient should lie on a cushion laid down.
And place a cushion under their head or back, to prevent the patient from moving too much.
And the assistant extends their arm from the side furthest from the patient's head or chest, and another assistant does the same on the other side.
And the doctor straightens the bones that can be reduced to their best possible position.
And if there are splinters in the fracture of the bone, then carefully remove all of them from their place with your skill.
And if there is a separate splinter that has penetrated the skin but does not give you hope of restoring it, then remove it and follow the method we mentioned above.
But if the fracture is in a place that is difficult to reach, you have already treated something similar, and therefore take care of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your treatment, then line the wound with a cloth made of rose oil and white wax, and apply it gently between thinness and subtlety, and place a strong cloth over that subtle structure until the abscess has drained; and then remove the cloth and apply an ointment prepared from powdered myrrh and clay, and place bandages on it.
And you know that the number of ribs in the arm is in the major positions, or if it is a fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your hand more strongly and more forcefully over the location of the fracture, and when you apply pressure to the parts above the fracture or the parts below it, place your hand a little softer as it is preceded by the remembrance of the fracture at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft cloths, not hard or rough, and the best one is the one that is strengthened to be just between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the member and the limb close to these days. And if any cause occurs of which correction is necessary, as it has already occurred to the member, and then make sure that you put the member in cold water before that problem stops.
And do not keep the member compressed until it recovers, and then return the pressure.
And if the contraction has already softened and the bone has been replaced and is similar to those, then with your skill, correct all of that.
And if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, then gradually loosen that one a little and let it heal for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it.
If the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then do not let it be dislodged for about 20 days or around those times.
And then suspend the hand of the patient over them for their skill in moving and make them sleep on their back.
And you should know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or if it is well-healed, it is restored in 28 days, and all of this depends on the condition of the complications and the disposition of the skill.
Chapter 13.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the palm of the hand and those mentioned.
When pressing on the patient's abdomen and the knots of the mentioned tart, be aware that this may cause a fracture, and do not force it unless absolutely necessary.
And when the patient has a fracture or is in danger, make sure they lie flat and evenly, and place your hand over their chest to prevent them from moving.
And then the assistant extends the broken bones and the doctor sets them with good alignment.
And make sure to apply a poultice and bandage, but be careful not to cause an abscess; and place this above the area according to its size, and you have already covered it with cloth.
However, if the tart is in the parts of the abdomen, then make it similar to a poultice of cloth, and command the patient to hold this against their abdomen; make sure it is well pressed.
And the poultice of cloth should be in the one that is lifted, so that the belly is applied to the abdomen; and press it according to what is necessary.
If the fracture is at the parts of the forearm, then place your hand on the other side of the part and the palm, so that the wound is exposed and straight; and then place the structure, as if it were rolled up in a bandage between the said arm and the body.
And if the fracture occurs in any of the knuckles of the said hand, then if it is possible, apply it as second best, place your hand on the palm and if you wish, place a small straight piece under it so that the fracture is elevated and not crushed.
If the fracture is in any of the other said parts, such as the middle, or the index, or the ear, or the ring finger, then apply it as second best, place your hand on the said finger and if you wish, place all the others continuously, which is better; or place over that small piece, as we have said in the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and place that, the position of abscess cauterization and oppose â€” at the said operation â€” to that which covers when any cause of those occurs, according to what is repeated about it.
Chapter XIV.
Of the repair of the fracture of the bone in the thigh.
The bones of the thigh are broken and it is declared at second sight that they have been converted to the first part and the most inferior.
And the repair of it is done as follows: one bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient lies on their back and on their face.
And the assistant then extends the bandage to its full length along the part of the bone where the fracture is.
But if it is necessary to extend to the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back of the knee along the part of the bone where the fracture is, so that the extension can be in front, and the other bandage under the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is extended to the bottom of the thigh, then the bandage should be placed at the back of the knee and the extension to the parts behind.
And the doctor should gently massage the swollen joints until they return to their natural shape and the bone is joined by good union; then cover with an ointment and bandage, unless the member becomes abscessed. However, if the abscess occurs in the joint, then leave it for several days until the abscess opens, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be made as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it twice or three times, and then remove any excess; and then place the pillow under the calf and the back of the thigh.
And introduce a long, thin cloth between the thigh and the pillow near the knee, and bring the ends of the cloth from the most upper part of the two sides, and then roll it over the pillow and the thigh to cover any excess of the bandage.
And then place your hand on the thigh in the location of the fracture, and place a plate over the bones of the pillow.
And then fill the empty spaces between the chest and the cushion with many cloths, to prevent the constriction from being dislodged.
And then begin the constriction strongly from above over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and the more you approach the edge of the fracture location, your constriction should be smaller and looser and wetter.
And then extend two extremities of the sheet to the parts where it enters the cavity of the foot, and strengthen both extremities of the other part to prevent the cloth from being dislodged from its location.
And then lay the constriction over that, so that it does not cause harm to the member with corrosion or abscess or inflammation and similar things to those; and if any of those causes occurs, then count yourself as dislodged from it, and rectify what has happened immediately, according to what we have said before.
But if in the bone there is an opening of the bone that puts it, then try to equalize it according to what is possible for you; and if not, perform on it and dislodge it, and cure that which is preceded by the remembrance within which it should be healed.
Some of the splints are strengthened to hold this fracture of the rib cage or others that are adjusted to its ribs, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But in the restoration of it in such a way that no injury occurs to the patient's leg; and if it is restored alone, another thing should be applied to the other cushion, as soon as necessary for it to rest.
And you should know that the rib cage is strengthened in ten days or a few more or a few months, and all of this depends on the diversity of the conditions and the other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder blade.
You should know that the fracture of the shoulder blade occurs in various ways, but it does not affect the surrounding splints.
But if it does affect the fracture, then it is only a crack or tear in its parts, and that is called a sprain or sprains, and over that all is based on the sensation.
And the restoration of it should be equal to what was broken from its parts due to the aforementioned enterocut, and it should be attached and joined according to what is possible for equality, ease, and convenience.
Then place a bandage over that round stone, if necessary for that one; and strengthen the structure above it in a suitable manner.
Then consider all the dispositions that we have mentioned in other fractures, such as an abscess and similar to those that would be placed on the whole accident according to what is suitable for it to be healed.
Chapter XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the ribs.
You know that in the ribs there are two bones, one of which is large and is called the rib; and the other is thin and is called the cartilage.
And depending on the type of fracture that occurs in those two bones of the arm, and for that reason, the restoration of it is made in a similar manner to the restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
If both bones are broken at once, the cushion becomes useless in all parts.
And if the most delicate bone is broken, the cushion becomes useless to the teeth.
And if the largest bone is broken, it is usually due to one of those causes that you cannot prevent.
Then administer extension and equality and ligation of the splints according to that balance.
However, if the bone fracture of the leg is not healing due to severe swelling, then the extension should be less and looser, and it will benefit your skill.
And in the leg there is sometimes an operation on the arm, and it is when you balance the splints and complete the entire operation, then you will take weights of iron that are placed next to the causes that are placed in soldiers, and they are made entirely of palm leaves; they are of those that are small and not large, and it should be the longest of those according to the length of the leg, and the deepest inside.
And then wrap each in a cloth of two folds according to its length, and place one on the part of the bed on one side and the other on the other side, and let the end enter the lowest part of the foot.
And then place the three folds of the cloth in three places of the bed's extremities and at the middle, because with this structure the bed is prohibited from tilting to the right and left side, and it is good for stability.
And already a small board of wood according to the length of the bed has been administered; and it is placed on the bed to prevent it from moving.
And especially be careful that you do this in fracture, and when it is properly placed.
And then consider the bed in each day and study that which is behind for study, and you guard it from abscess and inflammation or other similar causes; and if something happens to those, then pause at the bed until it is healed.
Chapter 17.
Of the fracture of the talus and bones of the foot and their types.
The talus does not suffer from fracture in all cases; rather, the bones of the foot sometimes suffer fracture in some ways; and the toes do not suffer fracture, but only an injury in their position.
And if the bones of the foot suffer fracture and sometimes those bones are lifted up from among them, then the patient should be placed on the prepared ground as if walking.
And then place one foot on that which is lifted from those bones, and step on them, and press, and equalize them until they return to their places.
And then place a poultice and a bandage on top, and place a small table under the foot of the patient with two ends.
And then strengthen that bandage to the foot structure below, because you have wrapped it with cloth and other causes of which it is in need.
And if the patient has passed three or four days, then you should remove the bandage, where you found the bones level, or fractured or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is with cautions.
But if he says they are fractured, then you should restore those, and level them as they were before, and recommend to you in the restoration of those from the method of the hand. Then place the second plaster along the length of the fracture, and put a little cotton on it; then move the foot to this table that is recommended to you, and strengthen that with a proper bandage.
But if that which is fractured from the bones is two or three or more, then you should place on each part of the length covered with cloth lion, and strengthen the table at the lowest part of the foot, and be standing on one of the caps of the table facing the belly of the foot so that it has a good retention.
And it is convenient for you that you do not forget to consider all the causes that have been told to you in other fractures of accidents that we have said; and pause at all accidents with that which covers.
Chapter 18.
Of the fracture of the jaw of the woman and the bone of the little finger and the vertebra of the man.
When the jaw of the woman is fractured, then perform that surgery in a clean place, and lean it against the side of her back, and hold it behind.
And then the midwife should put her hand in the jaw of the woman, and do it in the same way; and the woman should be gently struck, and her back raised little by little, until everything is aligned and the fractured bone returns to its place.
And then place powders on her back, and when she wants to urinate, facilitate the back and collect the urine, and reduce and return that second in the way it was before, and then return to its first powder.
And do this for seven days or around those, until it is restored.
And if you want, take one sheep's bladder and strengthen it on the neck of the woman with a catheter; and introduce the whole bladder into her jaw, and then blow through the catheter until the bladder is inflated inside the jaw, because the fracture returns.
And then it should be filled with warmth and bedding for several days after the operation until it is healed.
And when the bones of a man or woman are fractured, then administer in the restoration and needle insertion into that which we have recommended for the bone of the thigh.
And that which is drained should not be hidden in these nearby fractures and that it does not happen, mainly to the one who has some study and uses and understands this my free writing; because that fracture means to you in the greater dispositions via dreyturiera in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand be.
And when the man's leg is fractured, take guarguamela of oak, and put the fracture in that; and then place your hand on it wrapped in cloth, and wrap it, and then lay it for three days or around those, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the restoration of bone fractures when they are infected.
It is convenient for the one who has suffered a fracture, especially if the bone is large and similar to the bone of the thigh or of the calf, or a similar bone, that you take precautions and use a saw as soon as the conditions for amputation are present, as we have said above.
And if the fracture occurs in a clean manner, you should take precautions to retain it in place, unless you powder it with three-grain size dust, if there is another cause.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not prolong it, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs carefully, you should leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, before the abscess disappears, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day, as you will cause more harmful accidents.
But if the broken bone is significantly above the knee, uncover it and reduce it by puncturing it, equalizing it with your hands at the least extension and the most pain.
If the extension is not to your preparation and the equilibrium of it is in your hands, then reduce that to your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight feet, and its width according to the quantity of the wound; and for that reason it is necessary for the doctor who uses those three or four according to the quantity that is needed in the cure in all cases of fracture.
And if it is broken, and is in the place where it is greasy so that it does not bend the handle over it at the time of the operation.
And if it is sharp at the end where there is margin in its extremities; and if it is under it to the largest tendons, and from the top of it into the parts.
And this is the form of it:
And it is called in Greek "labre volentz atelarem", so it is a greasy palette.
For that reason, cover it with a pad placed at the end of it raised above the extremity of the prominent bone.
And insert him into a bed where he returns his bones, and it is equal to some balance.
And then try to equalize the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of it is thin, and you do not take that tool for good reason, then you should insert the extremity of that bone into where the tool has power over that.
But if you cannot reduce all the bones to that position, then insert that tool which has been recommended for it from the scissors that we have mentioned; or saw that tool in some way that is possible for you.
And then remove those that are in the bones of roughness and small scratches.
And when the bones are reduced, and the reduction causes the patient great pain, then you should know that the bones have not returned to their natural position; and therefore do what you consult with the patient greatly.
When your restoration is completed, which you do to the bones, then submerge a cloth in vinegar that is black and properly if it is in summer, and do not place it on the wound or any other cause in which it may be oil, so that it does not cause further damage and corruption.
And at the appropriate time during the bone's healing process, administer splints and leave the wound uncovered to allow the formation of new tissue, using bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be very careful not to strain the wound on the fracture, as this is what the wise doctors have advised against, and they would cause more harm by making it worse or causing it to rot or become infected, which could lead to further complications. And if the fracture is loose, soft, and different from other fractures, it should be handled differently.
And if the wound is large or bad, and you are concerned about the possible complications mentioned earlier, and there is pain in the area, then do not place splints on it, but rather use a hard cloth bandage instead of splints and strap it firmly to the area.
And when the wound begins to close after one or two days, remove the cloth that was placed over it and apply ointment, using those that we usually use to treat wounds, such as quadrifarmacon and similar ones.
And it is advisable for you to remove the bandage and consider the pain at each hour during the day and night until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a way that the pain flows from it to the parts ahead to facilitate healing.
If the pain lasts for several days and is not consolidated or abscinded from it, then know that this is a sign of small wounds, so ask about the pain to test them. And of those small wounds, those that remain separated and are remanded and extracted, those that do not separate and put the member and make it painful, perforate them to incise those that are possible for you.
And if the pain is zuchem or eluchen, it is a sign of some kind of corruption and putrefaction, then ensure that you place one of those that are appropriate for the cure of which the previous description in its own chapter.
And of that in which you should follow the best advice and you make present your pessary: when the large ones are cut, emerge over the member as if they were the bones of the body and the helper and similar to those of the large members, and do not assume attraction of it, nor its extraction, which may occur after several days; having left that inside for a while, because strong leu will come after about 20 or 30 days; and then cure the pain if you see it, and if not, leave it.
Chapter 20
On the treatment of nodes that occur at the site of a certain fracture.
Swellings often occur at the site of a fracture healing, and especially near joints, and they are caused by the shape of the limb; and this greatly prevents the limb from performing its natural function.
Therefore, consider if the swelling is recent and administer in those medicines that have stopped bleeding, such as aloes, and senna, and mirabilis, and serpentaria, and acrasia, and similar to those; and take some or all of them, and apply them to the swelling on a cloth, and place it on the swelling, and tightly bind it over it for good compression.
And loosen the bandage that does not cause pain for several days; and remove it and apply another, until the swelling has subsided; or strengthen it over the flat disc of lead, which has the property of returning everything that is inflamed in the limbs.
If the bone has already become hard and strained, and it is necessary to cause pain to that part, then cut it through the most suitable part of it, and scrape off the excess and eminent, or remove that part with a sharp tool before it becomes calcified; and cure that part before it becomes healed.
Chapter 21.
When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its natural position, but it is not as subtle and smooth as before.
When the broken bone is restored and placed back in its natural position, but it is not as subtle and smooth as before, this is due to many causes: one of which is the lack of solution of the ligament and the cord of that part made not according to its time; or because there is too much stricture of the ligaments before the nutrient can run to the member; or because there is too much excessive embrocation; or because there is too much superfluous movement not in its proper time; or because there is weakness in the body of the patient and because of the debility of that part.
The treatment for this is to apply heat to the patient and make their heart beat faster until the pulse becomes multiple; and administer a bath, and apply a mustard plaster and liniment on them.
Then place a bandage on the member, so that the bandage attracts the necessary nourishment, or continue with the application of warm water to remove the impurity, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
The treatment of broken bones that have been healed incorrectly and prevented from being operated on due to the cold.
When an injury occurs to a member that has already been healed, it is necessary to remove the disfigurement and elevation of the broken bone and swelling, and to shape the member in the form of the limb, but if the member is not prohibited from its natural operation, then do not receive the word of that person who exists that the member is newly broken.
But if it has already been done by foolish doctors and healers who have done this in our world, and this operation is very reprehensible because it causes great fear of the disease which is fatal.
If the cramps and stiffness are recent, then apply a poultice made of water mixed with softening herbs such as althea roots and chamomile, and melilot, and similar ones; and make this into a poultre using dill that is well prepared. Or use a poultice made of ground chamomile petals and mixed with honey or oil of camomile, and apply it to the affected area. Or use a poustained by the addition of figs crushed and mixed with butter, and similar to those used for medicines called consolidation.
Some remedies are dissolved in an abundant amount of water and applied to the most humid parts of the body, and administered for the movement of the limb at all parts in all hours.
If the twisting has already become severe and is hardened and turned into stone and causes the need for cure by iron, then apply the pus under the affected part and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and scrape off any excess from the joint with a fine saw, and administer relief in that place due to the worry and study.
Chapter 23.
Of speech in dislocation.
Dislocation is an injury to one of the joints of the body, which prevents movement, and distorts the figure of the member, and causes severe pain and great injuries on the patient.
Therefore, when an injury occurs in dislocation, it is advisable to reduce it as soon as possible, and not delay the reduction, because if it is delayed, the limb becomes inflamed and very painful, and that is why it is difficult to reduce dislocation.
And to avoid this, it is not advisable to be too fat or tense during the inflammation stage, because sudden movements cause spasms and slow pain.
When this happens, it is advisable to approach the patient's bedside, and wait until the inflammation subsides; then apply heat to the member with hot water and oil, and then reduce it with ease.
And the entire limb should be treated with that which the memory of what will return to its place.
And I have already ordered the capital letters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the shoulder, it enters into the part that was previously behind.
Chapter 24:
About the cure of dislocation of the jaw below.
If the lower jaws are not tart; and the dislocation of the other is made in one of two ways: that they are remapped to their places by a little removal, and they are slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated and closed, until they are mollified at the part of the joint where the saliva of the patient flows and which cannot hold it nor close his mouth, and his tongue is wrapped in his palate.
When the dislocation of it is slight, then return it to its place in the best positions if possible.
If the dislocation is complete and closed, then it should be administered reduction of it gradually, and not delayed at all.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the surgeon should insert his fingers in the patient's mouth, on one side of the jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or if the dislocation is on both sides, he should insert his two fingers in the middle, and the other parts of the patient's mouth should be held by others, and commanded the patient to stop biting and let go of each part; and the surgeon should equalize the jaw and push it back into place before it returns to its original position.
If the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer euphoria with warm water and oil, until the reduction of both is made without delaying the reduction of both.
And then when they are realigned and the mouth is closed and not molded, then place a dressing of cloth over those wounds, and make it with cera and oiled; and apply a bandage to facilitate the healing of the wounds.
And let the patient lie on their back, and let the head of the patient be between two pillows, so that it does not tilt to the right or left; and do not force any cause; having the proper view, then open the jaw, wait until the pain is relieved and the jaw is unlocked, then open that which you want.
And that should be administered with ease, and do not force the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, and swallowing until the jaw is unlocked and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two jaws when they are dislocated in some hour and are not converted to their proper places, then use hot compresses, frequent baths, and constant soda, and the stomach of the patient should be strengthened, and frequently vomiting pure bile.
And when you see that, then know that it is a bad sign; and frequently hot compresses will kill that person in a few days.
Chapter 25.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated from the shoulder due to its connection with the chest; and some fractures are dislocated at the front part, and that is felt.
And its restoration is that the patient jumps on their own two feet and extends their arms. Then cut the wound with your strong hand, as it will return.
Then place a poultice and powders on that wound and strengthen it.
If the extremity of that which is bent and connected with it, is not dislocated on any day; then cover it and reduce and bandage it according to what we have said and according to what is in your equipment.
Then place a poultice, powders, and compression on that wound, and command the patient to adhere to rest and quiet until it is healed.
And in this particular treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its original location.
Chapter 26.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
You should know that the muscle is not dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the shoulder joint.
And the second way is when it is dislocated above the muscle, and this is done sharply; and it is not dislocated at the back joints by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front joints by the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and deformed and stuck at the shoulder joints, and more often in those in which the flesh is thin, usually it is pushed out easily; but in those in which there are thick muscles, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And many people suffer from trauma or injury, and the muscle of which is inflamed with abscess, and it is affected by this because it has already been dislocated.
Then, proceed carefully as you are overwhelmed by the patient's condition, and continue with their treatment.
It is known as dislocation when the parts behind the tilt are separated; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find differences between them; and at the top of the concave part of the muscle, behind the tilt, you touch the tip of the muscle like a hook, and the patient cannot reduce their hand to its usual position, nor move it at all.
If it is dislocated, you should press or elevate it, and you should carefully touch the affected area, and do not hide it.
This dislocation is called "reduction" when it is fresh and the patient is young.
The reduction of this is that the practitioner elevates the hand of the patient above the parts behind the tilt; and then places their fingers behind the tilt of the patient, and strengthens the joint in its usual position, and the practitioner elevates the hand of the patient, and extends it in its place; and then pauses there as it returns naturally.
If the pain does not subside by what we have said, and since it is known that the dislocation occurred at the beginning, for several days, let the patient be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and melts, such as if they have high-pitched voices, fenugreek, and mallow in water, and let them be administered.
Then let the patient be placed on their back and supported under their chest with a cushion that is even between elevation and restriction, and let the doctor place their hand on the patient's shoulder, elevate the head of the muscle by virtue, and pull the hand of the patient to prevent it from being dislocated again, and another servant hold the head of the patient, so that it does not become dislocated again, because at this point it returns to its place.
And if you wish, reduce it by this method: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and stand on the side of the patient, and insert their muscle behind the tilting of the patient and elevate the tilting of the patient to the parts above until the patient is suspended in air, and another servant pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below their belly. If the patient is heavy, then first check if another cause is suspected, so that great harm may not occur, because dislocation often returns quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: place a long board on the ground, shaped like a mortar, which is not too thick or thin, and place it under the patient; then cover the patient's head with a lion cloth, and the patient should stand along the length of the board, and extend the hand of the other part to the parts behind the other part; and strengthen the joint of the other part, because the joint returns to its place at speed.
And if it is difficult to reduce it by all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a stick of the length of two arms, and its width should be four spans, and its thickness should be narrowed at the end of the handle in the shape of a button:
And then place a lion's head cloth over their head to prevent them from moving.
And then place your hand or arm on the patient's chest, extend it over their body parts, and tie the cloth on their arm and hand.
And then place one arm on a ladder according to the latitude, extend your hand over their body parts, and the other person should hold the other side, as the joint will enter soon.
And when the instrument of the patient is completed according to each possible method, and then cover the area around their head with a wool blanket of equal quantity; and apply prepared plaster made of ground barley and albumen over all the muscle, as it should be turned over, and place a bandage under their head, and leave them, and do not move their hand for seven days.
And cover the patient's food with a few cloths, until their member is comfortable, as it is better for their healing.
And if the wound is given more closeness to the seventh or fifth rib and is exercised with a movement; then if it is stopped and not softened, it has already been healed.
And if the joint is dislocated by moisture that has occurred to it or by another cause, then as stated in the chapter on cautery, apply a pointed cautery three times at that point.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the bandage and splint are reduced over that place some more, and it is not healed and catheterized and cannot raise that arm to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of that joint, which are at the top of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and you know that the joint will never be healed in that place.
Of the dislocation of that which is made from the chest and the breastbone or the parts behind, reduction is made by impulse and extension by the most, until it returns.
And apply the other remedy in that area, and cure it while it is healing.
And if the healing of the limb is delayed and movement is slow, then use wet bandages to help it heal and return to its original state.
Chapter 27.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
You should know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and also returns with difficulty; and if it is dislocated at all parts, especially at the part facing the back, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you where it is located behind the skin or behind the touch, according to some figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the shoulder dislocated, if it is not straight, that is a clear sign, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch its own muscle.
And when you see the wound, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible until it comes to the abscess cauterization, because if you see the abscess cauterization, the reduction is difficult, and not always healed; and especially when it is at the parts behind, because it is worse than all other species of dislocation, and more pain, and more bandages away from that to death.
And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of the patient be extended in two ways, and the arm of the patient be expanded, and the hands of the doctor are on the back and under the patient, and he pushes the joint towards the toes of his hands, or at the base of his palm where it returns to its place.
But if the dislocation is at the joints, then return it by bending the hand against the back of the hand, until it hits the base of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and forceful movement.
And it is that two assistants extend the arm, and another two assistants hold him so that he does not remain unconscious from the extension.
And then rotate the arm through its entire range of motion, so that it is wrapped in a folded cloth or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint at his hand, apply some oil to it so that it is one of those causes that help in the lubrication of the joint and facilitate its return.
And then the reduction of that cavity which is placed on that pad where there is sterility and execution of an albuminous solution of honey, and it is extracted from the stricture descent, and the arm is suspended from the neck, and it is left for a certain time.
And then it is released; and if the joint is formed in its place, then you release the ligament of it and leave that.
And if you see that the joint is not strong, then you repeat the plaster and the ligament, and leave that for a certain time until it is extracted; and then release it.
But if there is an accident to the joint during reduction, and its position is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compresses, until it is removed; or pause on the joint immobilized, that is a greasy bandage; and then it is tied, and left over the bone for a day and night. And then leave that, and put that in the bath; and when it is over, then you friction the joint with cooled friction, and then repeat on the immobilized one, that is a roller of movement, a week, and the second, and the third. When inserting the instrument of bath, enter gently.
And if you wish, place your hand on the wound of a freshly slaughtered cow and cover it with salt; then make some incisions, as that wound is moist and reduce it to its proper state.
Chapter 28.
Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is at the joint that is between the arm and the chest.
The shoulder is dislocated in some ways, and the reduction of this dislocation is difficult, but it is important to act quickly when it occurs, so that the joint does not become inflamed or something happens to the inflammation in the joint.
And the reduction of this dislocation is that you place the joint of the shoulder of the patient on a table and the assistant extends the arm of that person, and the doctor places his hand or his palm on the edge of the joint, and pushes it back to its proper place.
However, if the palm is already open at the belly of the patient, then place the patient's back on a table and extend and reduce it; and if the dislocation is previous, then the position of the patient should be inherently on the table, so that the surgeon can be near the joint.
And if he returns soon, it is good; and if not, then apply this ointment to the abscess and leave that; and do not repeat it, because otherwise, it will not be softened or healed before the days pass.
However, if the joint is still tortuous; and the patient does not know any cause, but the back is softened and cannot be strengthened; then you should know that the nerves are cut or torn, and you should not engage in it, but strengthen it with a pointed cautery at the joint and strongly apply this to it.
And when the abscess has returned, then place it on the ointment that we have recommended, and leave it and strengthen it for several days; and afterwards, it should be removed and left alone, and the back should be exercised.
If the patient's movement is obstructed and they are experiencing some gravity, then apply a cold water catheter and some friction to their back, until they are relieved.
Chapter 29.
On the treatment of the aforementioned dislocations.
Sometimes these dislocations occur at any part.
And when one of these joints is dislocated at the back of the hand or in the abdomen, then grasp the joint and push the dislocation towards the elbows, until it returns.
And then support the head of the joint, and suspend the weight of that arm to the side where it is dislocated, and leave it like that for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is equal to the other side on that day.
And when it is not ready, apply the second method to that joint, and do not cease to slide it in the day and exercise its movement, and apply it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And if the patient's abdomen is dislocated, and it is attached to that part, and then perform the first surgical operation on it before it is healed.
And if it is dislocated in other parts, do the same.
Chapter 30.
Of the cure of dislocation of the dorsal vertebrae.
When a complete dislocation occurs in one of the dorsal or neck vertebrae, and it remains motionless, then in that case there is no cure, as death approaches the patient.
And in such cases, the patient's bowel movements are not under their control, and they cannot retain it; and the muscles of those members or the ribs of that area or the ribs of that area or one of those, or if a vertebra remains motionless, then the muscles are softened and the removal is made in four directions.
Then it is already removed to the back parts and is called a lumbar hernia.
When the cure of that person is that you usually consider if the frigidity has occurred from childhood, because in that case neither the cure nor the healing of that is possible for all.
In those that are seen for castration or percussion or similar to those, as the ancients said about the methods of cure in prolix speech, of which the most returns with profit; however, I have already opened and exposed that from which few are exempt due to its proximity to the understanding and exposure, which he has exposed and formed with various instruments of that, by which he will show this and explain it.
And of those, there is not cured except that which occurs in the back properly, which he recommends.
And that the patient be extended on his face with his arms stretched out equally close to the wall, and be stretched out after that instrument is moistened so that the chest of that is not exposed.
And then place a stick straight under them, resting their back on the ground at the end of the bed around their head, and another stick in front of their feet on the other end of the bed.
The assistant should hold the stick, and not be stationary in the pit; and another assistant should hold the other one according to that form.
And then cover their head with a cloth and leave the Lion's tongue firm; and extend the end of the Lion's tongue to the stick that should be under their head, and tie it there; and then strengthen the other leather strap over their ankles and knees, and should their belly; and then adjust all the leathers and tie them on the other stick that should be under their feet.
And then the assistant should extend the leather strap to the part of the stick, and not remain lying on both sticks and their places where they have been placed, but rather not be stationary as we have said.
And the doctor places his hands on the strong back between the shoulder blades, or on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table until he returns.
If he does not return by this method, then take a table with a length or width of three elbows, and hollow out in the wall where we said that the patient should lie between the end of the table. And then place the edge of the table on the back, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and carefully pushes until the back is compressed and he returns to his place.
And if you want, open the back that is rolled on the mat; and it is that you should be on your knees with the patient's head in the back of the two poles, the length of which is an arm, and the patient's head in the back of the other pole; and the length between each pole should be a palm, and it has been made in each pole through which the back turns, and each one should be firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not bend.
And there should be another rod, in which the other end is a handle, and it should be rolled in the two openings of the two rods.
And at the end of it is a hole in which the rod is formed, its length being one palm, and that which is rolled is similar to this.
And then strengthen the ropes that you have tied in the chest of the patient in the hole, and the ropes that you have tied on the thighs of the patient in the handle, which should be used to hold the feet of the patient.
And then each rope should be turned and a minister who turns the rope with his hand, as we have said before.
And after the spine is turned and the area is covered, then cover it with dry earth, and stop; and then place a flat board of the width of three fingers or about those, and the length of which is the amount that covers the wound, and on the side of the spine.
And then tie a bandage around the area that we have called, and use the patient as a source of subtle nourishment until they are healed.
And if there is any imminence in the location at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that moisturize and clean the area for a long time, which we have recommended; and it is already administered in that location, plaster of lead.
And some vertebrae may have imminence at the back of the spine, and it is used for that dislocation; and that bone which has already immined for that reason, so that it does not cover that it should be made into a pompholyx, because this medicine will do you great harm.
Chapter 31.
Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
You should know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle do not only end in dislocation, but also in those that occur in other small removals and concavities.
And the joint of the wide is dislocated in four ways, either at the parts behind, or at the parts forward, or at the parts above, or at the parts behind.
And it is mostly dislocated at the parts behind, and rarely at the parts above or at the parts behind.
And when the dislocation of the patient to the parts behind is great, when you adjust the pillow for the healthy person, it is longer and the healthy person's knee is more bent than the other, and the sick person cannot bend their own knee, and this is where the pus from an abscess enters, so that the head of the pillow has already reached here.
And when the sickness to which the dislocation happens is at the parts forward, it is because the accidents of the patient are opposite to this accident.
And when the sickness to which the dislocation happens is at the parts above, it is because the pillow is spread out too much, but it does not bend that part where there is pain in the knee, and if it is perforated to go out and cannot be placed above that part; and the urine of the patient is retained and the sore on the patient is an abscess, and you must place the patient's side on the bed.
And if the person to whom the dislocation occurred in the parts behind is unable to extend their elbow, nor can they bend the elbow of the other that bends towards them, and the cushion under them is shorter than the other, and the bending is softened, and the head of the cushion is placed at that location.
The reduction of these special cases of this dislocation is that you consider, in this case, if the dislocation is old and ancient, that it has already been reduced by someone else, then follow its arrangement, but not entirely; and therefore do not expect that in this case it should be done improperly.
In the case of the person whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four types of dislocations, you should turn the joint and extend it to the parts behind and to the parts in front, and to the right and left, which will return it and not require any other treatment.
If it does not return in this way, then expect that you prepare a strong cautery and extend the cushion of the part behind the patient's elbow, or at his hands, or on the bandage that is placed over the cushion above the elbow; and another minister should extend the hand of the patient above the fingers of the elbow, and hold another minister to clean the end of the bandage.
And if the extension is from the shoulder to the sternum, or from the back to the waist.
And if the extension is of all those in one movement while the patient is raised to his own side and remains hanging.
This type of extension is specific to all four.
And if the dislocation returns to what we have said, it is good; otherwise, it is necessary for every special case to say what is appropriate for its own cure.
In the reduction of its own dislocation, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is to the parts below, place the patient on his own side; and place your hand on the rim of the cushion in that place where the head of the cushion and the place that is left are near each other; and extend the band to the part of the angle to the most distant part of the sternum.
And another assistant should strongly grasp the patient's arms, and press the large part of the patient's cushion and extend to the parts below by forceful extension, so that it returns to its own place.
And this special position is the least painful cure for which this member is reduced compared to other positions.
However, if it is not possible to maintain this position of treatment for the entire time, then hold the patient's feet together with a strong rope, lighter than others, above their knees and below their hips.
And the length of each rope should be equal to four fingers, and the patient's bed should be extended by two fingers more than the other.
And the patient should be suspended from the top of the bed, and in the middle; and the length of it from the ground should be equal to two fists.
And command a strong young man to reduce the head of the cushion, and another young man should be suspended with the patient, and the other young man should press the cushion with force, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
However, in the proper reduction, when dislocation occurs at the shoulder joint, then have the patient lie on their back as recommended; and tighten the ligaments over the patient's shoulder properly and over their chest.
And then place two cushions under them, one under their feet and the other under their head; and then adjust the cushion under their chest on top of which they are covered with blankets, so that the patient is not suffocated by the cushion being between their thighs, so that the extension to the parts behind is not pulled.
And then each assistant extends their part, and the doctor places their hand on the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is to the parts behind, then it is important that the cushion is extended wider, and according to this method narrative about the patient; and the doctor places the palm of their hand on the long axis of the injured person, and with the other hand they pull that, and with that grip they extend the part behind to the part of the dislocation.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, it is not recommended that the patient be extended to the other parts and raised on the ground; having covered them with a hard cause, as mentioned earlier, if the hip joint of the patient is dislocated forward, as we have said about the bedding of the patient between two pillows; and it is on their face and the limbs are extended, as mentioned earlier, there is no harm.
And it should be applied with compression on the table over the area where the joint is.
Therefore, when the reduction is completed as mentioned earlier, and the assistant of the reduction of the patient does not leave you, and you extend two pillows from the patient, and when you see that they are equal, and the patient extends their other pillow and expands that side, then you know that the member, as mentioned earlier, has returned to its place; and then you adjust two cushions and press and extend the bend as if the limb is not damaged in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then remove the bandage and apply it again, and place one cushion under the other.
If you see those joints correctly in the right position, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softness, then return and apply that, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then remove that, and make that walk in the ward every day until she is comfortable.
Chapter 32.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways, either at the front parts, or at the back parts, or behind and in front; but it is not dislocated at the inner parts.
And the sign of dislocation of it is that you command the patient to place their cushion on the side; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all the patient's limbs is done by placing the patient on their side, unless they can already support themselves; place your hand on their face, and hold their foot between your legs; and then make them grasp your hands with their palms, and bring those hands to the back of their neck for strength, and another minister extends their leg inside so that the intestine returns to its place.
And then, when lifting the patient, their bed should adhere to the cushion that does not labor.
And then, place that plaster on it and make the bed adhere to the cushion, and apply those same plasters to one bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the patient's bed for walking for several days, until they are healed and comfortable.
But if the reduction of the patient to you is excused, then in the treatment of the hand previously mentioned cure, apply strong extension to the tendons of which.
Chapter thirty-three.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle sometimes becomes swollen due to small removal, and sometimes it is dislocated in the complement, and the dislocation of it is made at the joints or at the bones.
And the symptom of its dislocation is that sometimes the ankle swells due to the part where it is dislocated.
The cure of its removal is a difficult task, and it is that it should be extended with ease to the hands and return within a short time.
In its treatment when it is dislocated in the complement, one should do as follows: have the patient lie on his back, and hold a strong and capable man behind him at the joint of the ankle.
Then you should place your left hand on the uppermost part of the foot, and your right hand on the lower part of the leg in the location of the hollow.
Then pull the foot towards your right hand, and hold it with your left hand for two joints, and extend your left hand; and push the foot downwards against the ground three times.
And make two incisions according to what we have counted.
And place the patient's chest on the clean incision, and you go to the cavity.
Therefore, return in one incision or in two according to this method, and if you see the foot equal, it is good; otherwise, repeat the operation, until it returns.
But if you are prohibited from reducing the patient in this way, then have the patient lie on their side on the ground, and place a support under them, and place a pillow between their thighs, and you have already covered them with a cloth so that they do not descend.
And the assistant of the patient holds their limbs, and another assistant extends the foot to their hands or to the cloth that lies on the back of the foot; and the assistant extends each one against the extension of their own part, and the pillow is extended between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the thing of the patient is not thrown away from its extension.
And the doctor should then align the dislocation at its proper place, and another servant should hold the clean cushion at the parts behind, where the dislocation returns to its ease.
And when the dislocation returns and is declared to you as being healthy from its reduction, then pause to apply a strong bandage around it, and tie the foot to the bed.
And be careful not to trample or harm the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over that part does not cause pain and strengthens it greatly.
And leave it like that for two or three days; if the bandage becomes soft, remove it.
And then remove it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days. But if it is necessary to walk after removing that space, do not do so safely until the dislocation has completely dissolved and been corrupted, and then that which does not require treatment.
And if an abscess occurs in that place, then be careful to administer the same cure as described earlier, in another location for treatment and ointment, until it is healed.
Chapter thirty-four.
Of the treatment of the aforementioned gout in the feet.
That which is dislocated should be extended slightly more than its normal range of motion; and this is not difficult, but rather easier.
If the dislocation is in one of the joints of the back of the foot, then cover the patient's foot with a cloth or on a table, and be present there as if you were going to do it.
Then approach the patient's foot, and place your hand on what is close to the joints, and gently push that part of the foot back into its proper position until you see it return to its normal position without appearing in the prominent location.
Then place a table that covers the entire foot of the patient underneath it, which has two lids, and apply strong pressure to the structure in a decent and firm manner for three days; and then remove that and let it rest for several days until it is strong and its recovery is assured.
Chapter thirty-five
Of the special types of dislocation that can be caused by injury or fracture or any other means.
When any of these causes occurs, and you perform surgery on the treatment of that and its restoration, unsuccessful procedures can lead to death.
And for that reason, do not presume to treat it, but rather the one that is known in the art, with long use, mercy and pity, late, not hot, or presumptuous; and that uses in the beginning of medicines that give way to abscesses cautiously, and leave the patient to divine judgment, only to the one to whom you hope for salvation from perdition, but rather for relief from the disease, and in which some hope appears. And then try to do something about it as soon as possible in the beginning of the cause, giving way to abscess cautiously.
And then if the member returns as soon as you want, then administer a regimen that gives way to abscess cautiously and cures the injury with the remedy that is suitable for it from the drying agents.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the stable bones that are separated, then pierce their membranes, and do what we have said in the simple cases of that in the places of those.
And guard and avoid the second of that tool in the ways of fear according to what my preaching has preceded you; because that is better for you to do your own Creator, and more enduring to your glory, and more salutations to your own body as you will see those in your time. This ends the words of Albucasis perfectly from which God may not be blessed. Amen.
