O, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of medical science, through the completion of which you will reach its end, and by its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I complete for you this treatise, which pertains to my surgical operations.
For our operation of the hand is proscribed in our region and in our time, being wholly forbidden; yet the science of it is well known, and its secrets have been revealed. It has not been abandoned but only some small descriptions appear in the books of the Ancients, which correct most of the errors and hesitations that are closed within them, weakening the understanding of it and prolonging the art.
And it is evident to me that I should vivify that part of this treatise in the manner of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it may include the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, with the addition of their declarations and preparation, which is necessary.
More the cause why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must be trained in the science of anatomy which Galen knew well enough to understand the youth of the members and their forms, as well as their conjunction and separation; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and sinews, their number, and their strength; and of the veins pulsating and quiet ones, and the places of their movement.
And for this Hippocrates says that in name is good, but more in the short work, and especially in the art of the hand.
More we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we said about anatomy will be unlikely to fall into error through which many men have died, as I have seen too many of those. For some are formed in this science and stray from that other science and its experiments.
For I have seen a foolish and experienced doctor who incurred an apostematose in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that great blood flowed until the woman died amid her greatest pains.
And there was another doctor who almost extracted a stone from a man who had been suffering from it for some time, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient over which it lay, he would die.
And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had a fracture in the thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the realigning, and then the letting it rest for a few days and commanding us to release the ligament; and thus remain so until the thigh and foot recover, and thereby proceed to recovery.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and tranquility and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain that, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the member while the malaise persisted.
And there was another doctor who perforated an oncous abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which the evil increased in him to the detriment of his lord.
The cause is that the pain arises purely from melancholic humors, but does not affect all parts, rather it affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
And for this reason, my sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in its major dispositions.
And I have already existed in all parts of this book where the operation involves error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak against you and dishonor you.
And therefore take your arms with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and place your arms around what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you do not falter: for more remains to your glory, and more in the world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gaulia already has been dissected in some monastic schools: Do not treat evil illnesses, so that bad doctors are not named,
And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on suction cups, and on blisters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of a twisted neck and similar; chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
First, I will describe the qualities of the metals used in the cautery and its components, and in what condition the cautery should not be used.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery metal and its components is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. For me, a little from their sermons will suffice, as I fear lengthiness.
And thus it is said that a cautery is applied to all composition universally which is of flesh or bone material, except for two compositions, which are compositions of bone material.
In the composition of bones and tendons, which are of flesh material, they dry up; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not convenient in illness which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness of bones and tendons, which are of flesh material, be healed by what is hot and dry.
And he who says the opposite argues that by cautery, one is cured in all bone and tendon illnesses that come in men's bodies, for when you compare the body of man to the humidity of the fire composition, you find the body dry.
And I say according to the saying of that person, who has already experienced this several times and discovered it.
But I do not claim to have experienced this as much as those who are well versed and exercised in the Capitol of cautery through prolonged practice, and who have known the diversity of human composition and the disposition of illnesses in their various forms, and the causes of these, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of these.
In other complications, you need not fear, and especially in the wet and painful conditions, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and do not differ in using cautery in such cases.
Understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the burning medicine, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no great harm to other members.
Yet the action of the burning medicine reaches those members from which it was taken, and strongly brings to the diseased member a difficulty in healing that is hard to cure and quickly worsens it.
Yet the fire, by its subtlety and goodness of substance, does not cause anything but to superfluously consume. We are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art on the truth of causes; and for this reason, I am excused for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not read at your leisure in this pause, and you have a secret hidden about fire, concerning the quality of its operation in bodies and the nature of its expulsion by which you expel diseases, then I would use a philosophical demonstration in your presence, which would be acute for your understanding.
And be wise, sons, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, and fissures, which do not suffer delay for fear of those that come from evil intent, which are greater than minor damage entering through time.
And thus do not doubt in your own cases, sons, that they consider only the common people and the foolish doctors, for it is not always convenient to use a cautery for that illness that is cured by it, and they pause that consequence.
And the reason is not thus because they consider it so; for a cautery is not other than in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause of the wind and pains.
Yet, however, excessive use of cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its sovereign power.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of the illness, the virtue of the person, and what is prepared within the body from the accumulation of superfluities in it, and what is acquired by the person through food and similar causes; but if the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidity, like a dental cautery for pain and similar to that one, it is possible that that pain will not return, but this is done in small amounts.
It is more common to say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying of a surgeon, not what we understand by it, for I believe that it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except cautery.
The cause is the opposite; and I understand that cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when we administer the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and at the end of the illness, one administers cautery, which benefits that. And here it is that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to understanding which I understand of the common and most foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they would not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cauterization does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated, for I have tried this and found that only in some bodies does it work where others do not. A gold cautery is good and better than iron, as they would say; yet when you make a cauterization with fire made of gold, it has been shown to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want by the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive heat; and if you adjust over the flame, the gold melts due to the fire, and some sheets are cast into the fire so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
And for this, you should make the cauterization with iron more lightly and more precisely in accordance with the operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have arranged those of the foot within it, so that I delay the request of the patient for what he wants.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of swelling and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the regions of the neck and ears that flow, as well as much drowsiness, toothache, and migraine, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, such as paralytic, swelling, apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient, their age, and their habit.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a leaning bench and have his hands rest on his own foot.
And then place the razor from your palm near the throat between his heels. More importantly, since the middle location has been reached, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery, the form of which is as follows:
And then place the heated cautery over the marked place with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and examine the place, and if you see any part of the bone being uncovered by a drop of oil, as much as a grain of wheat, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another of them, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little salt, dissolve it in that [solution], and leave it there for three days.
And then place it over the inflamed wound edge and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with ointment of tetrafarmachon until it is healed.
And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the condyle should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the bone's surface is cauterized.
And then scrape what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly into the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphécatii petit. And they consider that from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And the wound should be kept open for a long time, and then healed before it consolidates.
But I do not see these two types of cautery in all cases, except in some people out of fear; leave that one, I advise you, when it is for the better health, as the head is affected by solution due to the continuity of the body, just as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Chapter two.
Of the cautery for the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head of the patient, and this has been prolonged in the illness, and if the patient uses towels, pillows, head purges, plasters, poultices, cats (a method of applying a hot compress), gualinas (a type of fomentation), and semblants (a form of application or treatment), and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition due to any of these causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold and there is no great distress, then leave that cautery and use another one. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the seam has split. Incise the seam and the quantity of the mouth which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place called vas, — and this is the location where suction is applied. And move your hand here, but do not uncover the mouth, for the patient experiences great pain different from that of all other head cauterizations.
And I say this cauterization in its place, for know that the cauterization on the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that which cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it.
Top of the head.
On the cauterization for new migraines.
When there is a sharp pain in the part of the head or a dull pain between the ears, the head should be treated with medicines that penetrate deeply, and then another treatment should be administered, which I have described in the deviations of diseases; and if this does not help, cauterization can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicinal cautery or with iron.
May a cautery in medicine burn be that you take a small piece of aloes, heat it, and separate its ends from both sides. Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet slightly inside where you make the incision, and let the needle be hidden.
Then strengthen over the place stopped by descending compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove the aloes, and let the wound remain for two or three days, and place your hand under it submerged in water until the area heals.
Then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do what some medicines require, which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be performed according to this manner: heat it with fire of which this is the form:
and it is called a key clamp, for the head of it is shaped like a key with some curvature, and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered, and turn the small iron bit slowly and quickly.
And if the amount that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its size, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not adhered, so that no flow of blood comes.
And then soak it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place something warm over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if you burn it, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this new migraine properly.
Capitol quart.
Of the cauterization for old migraine.
When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the treatment is not effective for the pain, and sometimes due to the disease it is insufficient what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you should ignite the surgical cautery when it is white-hot. Place a line on the location of the pain that corresponds to its size, or mark that place; then lift your hand for a moment and strongly hold that area to avoid injuring the artery and penetrate into the bone.
But you must guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is used for chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not attached and the nerves, which supply it, are not affected, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of sand from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for him who ignores what he does and is not studious and hesitates; and leaves the operation to the beginning.
And I will recall the regulation of the flow of sand in the accident of the artery according to its manner, in this place of this free text.
And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this cautery is better and more appropriate.
Capitol V.
Of the cautery treatment for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is cured by causes of laceration and another treatment which I have described in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
Then place the puncta near the beginning, and extend it around the entire ear as if a wheel were turned, or in the circumference of any part if the pain is in that part. Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear gradually until you have touched the location where the pain is felt.
And if the cautery of these puncta covers the entire ear, and you then withdraw it, and proceed to cure the areas between as they are healed.
Capitol VI.
Of the cautery treatment for tortura.
The pain which is cured by cautery is not anything other than due to the vein through phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of the illnesses.
Avoid cautery for the part that suffers from dryness or spasms of the nerve.
When you cure that kind of pain by cauterization, drainage, and therapies, and you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you cauterize the illness, you should use three cautery strokes: the first along the ear ridge, the second a small touch on its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected part, for mollification occurs only in the area that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to cauterize that part along the straight line of the outer ear, a little above the corner of the head, and on the temple, another, the length of which should be according to the length of the side of the face. Then place your hand over the cautery until the quantity of the affected part of the ear is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front here. But more subtle is that when you see only a slight reddening; and note with a knife for superfluous grittiness a slight amount.
And then cure the area where it is shown treated until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat that area with four cauteries: mainly on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum. And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
And already it has been cauteryed on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then you should treat with what you are proceeding.
Capitol VIII.
Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Cover that they be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the servant millifying.
And then place your hand on the head of the patient and hold it over the heart described in the treatise on plasters.
And hold it there for several minutes, as this is the way of cautery. And do so according to that method and order which I have already said.
And therefore if for those good herbs it is; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the back part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And place your hand between each cautery and carefully control the cautery as it is applied.
And if you add more substance to the sore and it is tolerable, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have greater addition, then cauterize that area over the two horns.
And cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form above.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery treatment of piles and the mollification of the entire body.
Cover that you proceed in mollification of the head with stones and as we have said; and near the head of the patient, and carefully apply the cautery in the middle location of the head, and with cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of mollification of the body for more of those and the pains are tolerable and the illness is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where the spine meets it, and lift your hand. And then cure that which is within until it is healed, and use an olive cautery.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No is it cauterized the epileptic, but rather the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning, both on one side and on the other, which we have described in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer garglers and chewables to the servant to modify, in advance of this for several days, with improvement of the food.
And then roast the head of the patient, and carefully cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery at the back of the head, and over each horn of the head cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those points as I said, while keeping a gentle and soothing touch on the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use the olive cautery as previously described.
And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol. xi.
Of the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are humid and grossly flame-like, then cauterize those areas with the cautery we have mentioned while maintaining a paralytic touch.
And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity resolving into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then have them drink what purifies their brain according to what was described in the division.
And place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a tortora mark on it over the circle, and then pause that one in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be laid down, and held from all sides.
And then apply a liniment; it is more worthy to rub on the skin before sheep. And heat it over the fire for a tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied. And then place it in the middle of his head in a circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
And do this for the patient once in every week, and use the other regimen until he is healed; or if you wish, apply a cautery making small points according to his condition. Otherwise, keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
And then apply that poultice on the affected area using oil or pieces of linen.
Chapter XII.
On the application of water cautery descending on the heel.
When you have declared the beginning of fever in the body by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies his head, and keep away all humidity from it.
And make that syrup in wine for a few days.
Then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that with two cauteries on the temples if the beginning of jaundice of fever is in two bodies, or on one side if the beginning of the fever is in one body.
Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left uncovered; let the cautery be in that place along the width of the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, and caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cautery applied on the neck leaving two bones thoroughly produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cautery of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently present in the veins and arteries which are visibly located on the head, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have described in the chapter on starting water flow in the feet, and cauterize the middle of the head with one cautery, and place two cauteries on the neck leaving two temples, and place two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add cautery, then cauterize that area along the entire length of the foot on the outer side of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cautery for nasal odor.
When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the sick man the chicory roots for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the arm with a cauterizer made of iron and another of olive wood. Then cauterize the arm with a cauterizer made of iron and another on both eyebrows, leaving the hair a little.
And be careful with the eyebrow so you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the iron cauterizer.
Capitol. XV.
Of the cauterizer for softening the eyelids of women.
When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cauterizer made of this lunar cauterizer; and this is its form:
And if you cauterize that on both eyebrows a little with two cauterizers in total, making them long from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the extent of the sore.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the extent that the inner part of the eyelid is touched.
Chapter XVI.
Of the cautery for the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and fistula.
When the skin of the fistula is converted to the inner parts, one must puncture the fistula. The cautery for this can be performed in two ways: either by using a cautery or by applying a burning medicine.
If the cautery is to be made with fire, command the patient before performing it that he let his skin be cleaned as those which are bathed, until they are prolonged and equalized; and if you puncture him, note the place of its birth. Then strengthen the fistulas with a bandage so that they do not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
Then when they are born and equalized, place the head of the patient on your lap, and put a hand over the eyelids of the patient to test, marking the mark in the shape of a leaf of mistletoe, which is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
Then place a cold cloth in the bile or mucus of the eye over the eyelid.
Then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows.
Then apply the cautery over the marked figure, marking it little by little in rings, as the surface is burned until it appears like a leaf of laurel, entirely apparent and proper.
The sign of the patient's recovery from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted, and the skin around it elevated due to the puncture of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the cold cloth between the time the scar is healed. And after, cure that which was ointed until it is healed.
And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area as you did first.
And if the skin is on the eyelid, then apply the cautery to it until it is raised to its natural place and equalized, so that the skin does not remain loose.
And if the cautery is medicinal and burns this, then command the patient to extend the skin until it is stretched and equalized, and then make it of linen cloth in the shape of a hawthorn leaf.
And then take known soap and fresh lard, or if not available, and mix these ingredients well, prepare this with moderation so that it is not heavily mixed; then spread this over the linen cloth which is made in the shape of a hawthorn leaf, and place that on one side or both sides; and place the other side carefully in a pot of honey, and the patient's head be in the middle.
And place it over the medicine and press it slightly but do not let the patient feel the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in it as from fire.
And therefore, to perceive when the atrobo bites, let the medicine go and place it as you just said; therefore, when the biting ceases, put back the medicine and wash it with all water; then consider if the eyelid has already been raised; if it is washed like this, apply the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the place of the medicine where you have not pressed the medicine and ensure that your operation is equalized and contracted with all.
And then place it on the edge of the cut so that the bond of adhesion is eradicated, and then cure that with an ointment or something else so that it is healed.
And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with vigilant diligence so that the entire area does not fall prey to the medicine. If the eyelid becomes soft over a few days or if any part of the skin swells in the area, then reapply your medicine to that part where the eyelid has softened, and do so precisely as you did at the beginning, and frequently apply it until it is healed.
And this is the form of lung leaf.
And know that the lungs of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your operation is made.
And the way to the intestine shall not be obstructed for him who is studied in this art.
Capitol. xvii.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the lung.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the ailments and do not align your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have some minister hold the head between their laps in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
And then place the cautery on the lung over the area of the humor or the mucus pocket.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
which is convex, thus in the form of a cane or a hooked pin, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, penetrate into the other end. And if you wish, let it be shaped like a needle.
However, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the heated cautery over it, and let your hand hold the cautery near the root of the nose, so that your hand does not err or hit the patient, and then place the cautery on the hairs of the nose and destroy that.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the socket, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment while it heals.
And if it has passed ten days and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the socket is revealed and is scraped as needed in your chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula which some earlier doctors said: Identify the location of the fistula and do it there, then place your hand gently on it, so that the melted lead does not enter the wound; cover over the wound as if in a thin layer, ensuring the melted lead adheres only to the location of the fistula and heals it through miraculous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said regarding the cautery and healing, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a draught through the nose and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the cautery for the foot wound.
Small cuts often occur in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
So when you treat those cracks, follow what we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment. Then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let its cavity be according to the thinness of the blade.
Then place that hot cautery in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the cautery for fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess is found in the uvula or on the palate or around the teeth and soon develops, and soon breaks, and soon becomes old, and forms a fistula, then treat it without deepening the treatment. Heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, keeping your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it, and at the end do this one or two times; then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
And therefore if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the place and set the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
capitol .xx.
Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of glands.
When the glands are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, cure those with medicines and do not confine them. Then place the head of the patient on a pillow, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given below. Try to hold the cautery above the tooth, inserting it into that area with force, ensuring that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth so that the heat can reach it.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then the patient should spit out the salt water and hold it for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of cauterization for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling, or if medical treatment does not relieve the pain, then cauterization in that area can be performed according to two methods: either with a cauterizing iron made from ox horn, or with a hot fire.
Cauterization with an ox horn is done by taking a piece of ox horn and heating it at the end where the iron is placed. Then, you hold this heated piece tightly at the tip of the instrument, immerse that heated part in the ox horn, and place it firmly over the painful tooth, pressing it in quickly before it cools down.
And then repeatedly apply that several times until the heat from the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if you do, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the ox horn mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth. Hold the hot iron above the tooth until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
May however the cautery with fire be that you attend to the tip of flax or iron, and in its core some coarse material and the acuity of the fire not reach the mouth of the malaise.
And then shape the cautery in the form it will take, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside to ensure the cautery is well lubricated; and do this several times to prevent the pain from intensifying on that day or the next.
And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the malaise opens its mouth wide and keeps it open for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize wherever you will stop according to what is possible.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol.xxii.
On the cautery treatment for extrophy.
When prolapses are caused by phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion with medicines, and you have slightly digested those with the medicine, then you apply the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end, place the cautery over the abscess for one minute, and another if necessary until it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days, placing it over the hot border until what the fire has consumed is healed.
And then dress it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol. xxiii.
Of the cautery for hoarseness and for the constriction of the larynx.
When the moisture of the wind affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is due to a complex coldness, then it should be known that the patient must be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and soon cauterize the root of the gallbladder in the compressed area.
And be sure not to apply the cautery to the gallbladder or burn the vein of the liver, but only a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the rear part of the spine. The cautery for the liver should be applied according to the previous method.
And soon cure it with what was previously mentioned until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold moisture, and the liver has no fever or consumption, and it is an old lung disease, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula in the compressed areas below the breast and above the navel; and with another cautery in the middle of the abdomen between the two breasts; and apply the cautery to the liver according to the form previously described.
And if you wish, let your cautery puncture with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And let the puncture into the veins at those; and then cure that with what you apply when it is healed.
And let the cautery having three tines; and with one puncture, you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
Of the cautery for titillium, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not stabilized in the hour of its return, you must maintain its dislocation until it naturally returns, and then by a slight movement it is relocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. When first reducing the dislocation, make sure the patient lies on their back or on their side; and lift the codena which is in the inner part of the titillium towards the outer parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner parts.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain where one head penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will come when of two heads of cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
And then place on the cautery for a while some salt, and then make the patient adhere to tranquility, and the limb should not be moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and heat is applied there, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh cautery or with pointed cauteries, that the joint may be confirmed and the humidity broken up and the patient healed.
Capitol. XXVI.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by humid vapors that extract from its composition and multiply there, and if you continue the methods of cure and do not relieve it, then the patient will be on their back, extend their limbs and things, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: at one cautery place the foot with the size of a finger's breadth using aawl cautery, and at two cauteries place the sides of the cautery, forming the figure of a triangular cautery; and leave space between those not tightly placed to prevent suppuration.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cautery be as follows: If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and let this be a cauterization according to the circle's shape as follows:
And let the stomach be cauterized with puncture at that which is scared by this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a point according to the quantity you want tentatively, and then cauterize that with the cautery in the points; and cure that with the cure that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of cautery of the sore foot.
When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has altered its normal structure through superfluous egress, and if the patient does not respond to the treatment we have said, then you should ensure that the foot is brought back over its ankle, and test with three cauteries according to this form and quantity placed on the foot below the hipbones, one along the length of the body.
And let the space be the one between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be placed along the length of the body in a straight line.
And do not move your hand while applying the cautery.
And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the cautery tip, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise their thighs.
And it is possible that you may use this cautery with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are required.
And guard thee that thou dost not burn too much in the cauterization, so that the subtlety of all the cord be burned and the whole body be affected, for here the cord is subtle; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the perforation of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess on the sole and you want to know whether the abscess is in the flesh of the sole or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the sole, the patient will experience a severe swelling and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the sole, then the pain will be acute and often so severe that it exhausts even the doctors with its treatment.
Then make sure the patient is lying on his back; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised. Then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, as described in the other page preceding this one. And cauterize there and within until the entire chain be burned, until it reaches the cyst, until in healthy flesh.
And then treat that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
And you must use only that cautery of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in most of which maladies they have known defects; but this I have experimented several times to be hot during this operation, yet I leave that to your discretion, and it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers.
They said that the ancient cautery for ulcers should be made according to this manner, and it is this: you take from the residue of aristology a long strip of parchment, which is found, and is of the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula to the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclining towards the side where the beard ends, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the seventh, inclining slightly towards the back sides; and another cauterize in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back sides; and one cauterize in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries at the sides of the foot, leaving the cautery in the space between the two shoulders.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery, but rather at the edge of the blade.
And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery of iron resembling a ray and burn that, and place that in that place which is between the ribs, until we perceive that to that apostema that healthy tissue has grown, as we have said regarding the apostema of the thigh.
In this perforation, there is no fear of burning, for it soon happens in the place where the fistula is formed, which does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery of the ulcer.
When you treat the illness of the ulcer, as we have said in the division regarding treatment, and your treatment does not align with it, the application of the cautery to the ulcer is according to three ways, all of which are correct. The first way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the ulcer, following the shape of the cautery iron, the shape of which has been described previously.
And the distance between each cautery should be as wide as one finger or a little more, and the method of applying the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery iron.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient's foot be placed on its side.
And another way to cauterize, so that you ignite the cautery having two embers, which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the center of the back the head receives the heat from the left side of the malady.
And your elevation is with that by which you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two embers, ignite them, in that space where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
And then extract the cautery; and so he makes four cauterizations.
And if you do, cauterize with the cautery having three embers.
And then you cure the cautery after it has lain too long to cool from burning for too many days, for this is more conducive than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol.xxxi.
Of the cautery for hydrocele.
Cautery is not used for hydrocele but for the parts properly affected.
When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of cure that we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, when you must apply the cautery, use four cauteries around the swelling, one on the stomach, another on the flanks, another on the ileum, and two between the spinal vertebrae, and one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And allow the cautery to remain until it blisters for a long time.
And do not evacuate the bad humor near the cautery where it comes, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be hastened by the healing aid.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and full of yellow water, you should cauterize the feet on the inner side of the foot between the great toe and the ring finger, and lift your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand further, and do not return it completely, as the yellow water may flow back.
The cautery should be done in this manner: Then make two cautery marks on each thigh, and on each side of the thigh, place a cautery mark at the knife-cut extremity. The cautery should be done according to the length of the thigh: then place one mark on the outer side and the other midway down the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cautery marks.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that any water exudes from it.
And then treat the remaining causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is caused by cold and humidity penetrating into the intestines, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment without adding anything, and sometimes the patient suffers from the exhibition of a virtue, so cauterize that part with a large cautery over their own stomach according to what was mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach. Use the cautery of the circle and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine fibres, use a subtle clavil cautery; or use a cautery on aloes, either large or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerate it, then cauterize that part over the pentenburg and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries on the stomach near the inguinal region; these are the perfect cure for the youth of which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for old hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not perform your own cure, then cauterize three times on the tip of the pus spot below the two small triangular parts, and with a cauterizer above the navel going down by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cauterizer as previously described; and with one cauterizer on the side, and another on the armpit with a clavilh cauterizer. Leave the cauterizer open for some time, and cure the patient until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment for the area near the excision of the stone.
When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that is similar to a brand. Then insert the ignited cautery into that incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the skin and the vein until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are formed in the parts of the body.
When nature does not obey the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
When there is some fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, full of corrupted health and humidity, therefore what is most worthy that you probe is to try with a fine needle, and then know the quantity of the depth of it by the front said needle.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned through once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the region of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this except when the fistula is in a fleshly location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are severed from it, and the wound remains long, then you may know that it is entirely healed.
And if the materials are not from the wound, then you may know that it is penetrating or in the pus of the wound, or comes from those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts are painful due to inflammation or excessive moisture, and thus the patient's discomfort is reduced, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery, applying the cautery to each wart using the method previously described.
And after applying the cautery for a short while, pause for a small break, as three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and moisture, such that the patient retains urine, then cauterize that part on the side of the bladder where the skin of the pubis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the foot; and cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a cautery on the knee according to how it is processed.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the cautery of the womb.
When there is venous congestion and moisture in the womb, and for this reason conception is forbidden, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the induction is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to these conditions, then it is necessary to cauterize that area with three cauteries around the umbilical circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries, and use a knee cautery.
Capitol of the day.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When moist phlegm infiltrates the region of the ankle, and causes conditions due to displacement of its place, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them. And the place of the dislocation is applied to the side of the ankle.
Then, cauterize the ankle with a hot cautery in a circular manner, as you will have marked the circuit of the region as it is rotated, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
And the cautery mentioned above is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive wood cauteries.
And the cautery should be applied according to the strength of the pain in the entire limb; and then care for that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol forty.
Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
When pain is felt in the sciatic region and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said, and you do not apply any other treatment, as this is outdated. Instead, treat the patient with pills made from bitter substances or artificial ones that resemble them; and then cauterize the area.
The method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
Follow two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize the area over the width of the foot with three triangular cauterizations according to this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cauterization be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of the location on the head of the sciatic area because it is four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended down the leg.
But if it is extended down the leg, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area around which you will encircle the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the shin, a little bit of the upper part should be included.
And if using a surgical cautery, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the circumference of the affected area.
And if the pain extends to the area near the ankle bones, then cauterize there where you encircle with a cautery for three or four points, or more if needed.
And if the pain extends to the area near the heel, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are above the patient harmfully or contraction.
And I have seen several cases where they cauterized the cyst and ended with the cautery, and the fire inflated between the tumor and the skin, burning and corrupting all the skin. And then follows a severe abdominal cramp, and often death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery in the cautery of water: this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an os bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, make another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a finger's breadth; and may those circles be open in two parts; and let the length of those lines be one finger's width or two, and make at those iron margins decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, then placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the mat. And therefore cauterize that part with three round cautery marks in one go.
And leave that [area] for three days; then apply a plaster with a bandage and leave the wound open for many days; and cure that by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have used this type of cautery rarely because of the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few things that regard it.
But for those who have suffered from good cautery, you find that the location heals well.
Better medicines that adhere are that you make two circles having an armula perforated with a hole through which the smoke of the iron-smelting furnace passes; let the length of the walls where they will stick be as wide as two or three fingers.
And if the space which is between each one of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand over the part of the water; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that water be as hot as little fire, and have that water for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and adjustment of it — for that empty space bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all the foot with cold water.
And then let that be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the adjustment fades, and let this be for some days, after which the redness will pass; this is the end of the treatment.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or abdomen, make an incision in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way of water cauda, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the fire not extinct from both parts one, three pieces and pause in a new bowl of which the part left is perforated by a small tube, according to the quantity that enters into it.
And pause the bottom of the bowl in another boiling bowl, and place it over that alkali and live fire of water from which they take out one digit, and when you understand them with your hand by good compression, let the bowl that contains the sharp water remain in the part left to the boiled bowl.
And then adjust all that water, and place it over another live fire and fresh alkali, for which it will have strong acuity, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
And of some medicines, those which are heated wide, thus with terebinth and honey and have been tested to ensure they are mixed.
And Gualia relates of an ancient man the operation and cure for pain and sciatica, magnificently describing it well, saying there is no need for another cure, and that he was cured in one instance as recommended, for he immersed himself in hot and cold baths as instructed.
And it should be near the willow tree, and if there is no willow leaf, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few gray threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and should be pressed.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient senses relief from the application.
And then place it in hot water; when the patient's body is warm, insert it into the soil, for the pain subsides and the patient is cured.
And you should know that no such use of cautery in these medicines is made except near the body's evacuation.
When making a slit in the sinew vein, it is seared; this will heal better. And the cautery is done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and on the stone.
And then take a slit in the dry sinew and flame it inside, making it char; then place it over the wool until it is extended. And then repeat this, and do not cease to do so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Capitol. xlii.
On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Sometimes pain in the two [limbs] is caused by multiple reasons, such as inflammation or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infusion of wet and irritating material.
And the cautery should not be used except in this single instance where it is applied due to the infusion of wet and irritating material.
Therefore, open, and place pills that are similar in size to the inflamed area over both sides where the pain is located, three lines wide according to the width of the area. Then apply cautery or more, according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate and the virtue of the area.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four lancet-cauteries according to this form.
Capitol. xliv.
On the cautery at the beginning of gilbositat.
Small fevers for this illness in small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they stumble in walking and show elevation and movement in their structure.
You find in the lower vertebra of the back and of the neck that it is beginning to overcome the other vertebra.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form: place the cautery over the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
Then cover the area thoroughly until it is healed with what we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in cases of inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol XLIV.
Of the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured by a method of treatment and not by alleviating the pain, but rather by cautery.
And you cautery the area near the joint of the foot with a cautery for evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and you observe this, then cautery the area over each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then cauterize that area but do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, only around the tip of the needle.
And if the pains penetrate into the groin and testicles, then apply the cautery which we have mentioned in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the thighs and it is called sciatica, then puncture along the course of the femoral nerves as they run, puncturing at those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the course of the femoral nerves over each finger and over the little finger.
And if the pains remain for several days in the knees or muscles, then cauterize all parts of those areas.
And if you do not evacuate the rheumatism with proper regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done properly and inflammation is reduced, then this cautery will be sufficient, God help us.
Capitol. xlv.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the inguinal region and the intestines are prolapsing through the mesh of the hernia, and this begins to approach, then when you command the patient to stop eating on that day and use mild remedies so that the opening of their abdomen decreases.
And then place the patient between your arms over their abdomen, and command them to hold their legs together until the mesh appears or the intestine is visible.
And then return those to your arms and test the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the extremity of which is similar in size to the breadth of the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
until it is well heated and begins to emit sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and keep it there until you can feel the bone in the middle of the foot; and repeat this on another side if you have not felt the bone in the first attempt.
Observe wisely the reaction of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine too much, lest it lead to death or another great mischief for the patient.
Be mindful that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and age.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days by applying something between until the wound from the fire heals.
And then care for that as with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lie on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you provide nourishment to the patient according to the length of time for the wound's healing, and that the intestine does not come out with the great effort to heal.
And then when you want to lift it after 10 days, properly apply a dressing, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let it rest from work and the replenishment of food and drink, as well as loud voices. For when it uses this regimen for complete healing, it will be healthy.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if you do not want them to tear again, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size. And what is extracted from the codena should be treated like the tender part of it; then care for that as we have said, and it is not fastened.
And some first ones have said that the rupture should be seared using a triangular cautery in this manner, rather than with forceps.
And it is paused line that lies for the width in the laceration and passes above the rupture, and another line from below; and then place your hand on a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cautery for the hernia.
When pain in certain members persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then it is necessary to cautery with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire member according to its size and degree of inflammation, its strength and urgency, and the location of the hernia and its pain.
If the patient is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, such pains are punctured at a member near to that member where they are located, so that you may achieve the cure with the cautery before the malady is healed.
Capitol forty-seven.
Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, especially when the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, when you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and similar to that cured as we have said in the division. Do not use this method here or there, nor fear that the corruption might encompass his entire body and all its complexities; then cauterize the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the forehead, leave the second space between them, extend the brow toward the end of the hairline; two on the corners; and one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
And finish your hand with a small pressure from the cautery near the opening of the mouth, so that the expulsion of thick vapors is alleviated; then cauterize on the cheek as necessary.
And if leprosy is already extended over the patient and manifestly appears, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on both cheeks, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the sacrum, one on the spine, and two on the hips, and one on each hip, and two on the knees, and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on the soles of his feet; cauterize that on all joints of his fingers and of his feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on his arteries.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the os of the pentenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since the body of the patient is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints as directed by the tools used.
And place the cautery in flour mixed with honey and other remedies until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
On the cautery for stupefaction.
When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the wound slightly. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And sometimes certain spots are cauterized to alleviate pain in the feet and the spine, and to relieve the tension of the nerves that run through that member.
But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol. xliv.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are morphew.
When ulcers are old and do not respond to any of the medical ointments, then cauterize over that with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder in it until the white and the color of it are changed.
And then cure that which is sprinkled with flour of erthumbs and lentils in fine oil and leaves of rosemary, and with pigeon droppings or hen droppings, using a part of each, all mixed together. Then place a cloth over it until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the groin.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of the tumor as it is revolved.
And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle location; but to me it is not visible, for I fear it might be ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is more proper to cauterize it in the circuit of the tumor with a circular cautery as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this happens either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, which may be old age in decrepitude, with little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the adenitis; then cauterize in the circuit of the adenitis with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place it in the middle of the area where the needle will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that area, do so that the arm may be relieved; and then cure that which needs to heal.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corroding.
Corrodent is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrodent in a place where it will receive a cautery with fire, then heat the cautery with a few strong and large coals as is suitable for that place where the corrodent is.
And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corruption and do not leave any cause of it.
And let that be for three days, and place a hot oil mixture over the cauterized areas until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is gone.
And let it heal by applying ointment to the flesh producing wounds.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then cauterize again the area that is rotten in the corrupted areas.
And when the wound is medicated several times with acute medicine, for there it is used instead of cauterization. But nevertheless, cauterization with fire is more beneficial than light ointments.
And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the Cautioning of Wounds and Other Similar Cases.
Motes viewed around the sides of the bad foot that suffers, which is called clau, and this is a large cause, entered, which affects the foot; in these, cauterization is according to two manners, so it is cauterization by fire and cauterization by water caudata.
Cauterization by fire is that you heat the concave cauterizer resembling a turning pin, which is made of iron according to the quantity it can contain for all parts, and should have thin edges.
And then place that heated instrument on the foot, and quickly move your hand with the cauterizer in a circuit around the foot while the cauterizer reaches the depth of the foot. And let it be there for three days until it begins to scab. And then apply a poultice to it with wild trios of mallows salted, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that it will be eradicated from its root.
And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it is healed.
If they are not reducible, and many edemas occur in the surface of the body, especially in the thighs and feet, then when you need to apply cauterization with water, take a quannaula of copper or iron or nail, place it on the clavicle; then put some water in the quannaula, raise your hand, and move it with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the margin of the quannaula against the base of the clavicle, and you will find the water coming out through the slit of the quannaula; wait for the patient a little while after the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove it, as the clavicle will be eroded.
And thus do it for those and nearby each other where you come over all of which they have in their body.
And then cure those boils where the roots of the claws have been eradicated by applying ointments that cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or from another similar cause, then you should cautery that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and one over its stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the illness is cured.
Capitol.
Of the cautery for accidents in the body.
When in the body abscesses are formed and pustules develop, which are made of corrupt gross materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the fistula should be cauteryed with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an iron from erythronium; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they are not believed, and when the superfluity is ruptured, they heal from those.
Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation by flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery treatment for flux due to an injury by an arrow wound.
Often times, flux from an arrow wound that is incised either at the site of the plague which then perforates, or at the incision for apothecary or cautery of the member, then swelling occurs, and it is difficult to remedy this.
Then, when such a case occurs, hold your hand over the orifices of the arrow wound, and place it there until the flux of the blood has stopped, then remove it so that it does not reappear.
And place the olive cautery sticks, some large and small, in the fire for a moment, and then blow on them until they are dry.
And then take one small or large [piece], according to the place and wound where the artery is broken, over that vein press forcefully as you have just cauterized the one you said, and keep the cautery between so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move as just said and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among those in the fire, and therefore continue to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restricted.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, or cause another illness to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the bleeding without one of four methods: either with a cautery as just said, or with extraction when not extracted, in which case the ends of the artery are burned and the bleeding is restricted, or by using vinegar or salt for strong constriction, or by placing them over medicines whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; and they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constrictive manner.
More importantly, he who administers proper restraint to the patient with ligaments and straps or by position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not conferees but tar.
More importantly, if one has to do so for someone and the doctor or medicine is not present, then open slowly with the finger indicating over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the sore was situated from the upper part of the wound, and over the archery let the finger not be remooved; and over the archery let water fregated with a strong refrigerating fume be applied before the sore is healed and swelled; and more often apply a cauterization or necessity of medicine.
Of incision and perforation and vents and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one seeking this may be relieved, concerning what he has requested.
And before you begin this, know, sons, that in this chapter the fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery shall be great.
And because you must be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation are encountered which may threaten life; you should apply the sprinkling of the vein or incision over the abscess or pustule or puncture of exsufflation or purification of the wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of the pus and their like. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the greater part of them, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in which there is a position, for at times positions of patients may seem favorable but are actually harmful. And some of them go to their illness and are seemingly better, but die due to the severity of what they find in their illness, and from the length of their illness, and in their illness is fear which means death.
And of those which give to you their account and testimony, you expecting from that health, and their illness is pernicious.
And therefore you must ensure that you consent to only those who come to you, of which this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume any cause over it but rather certainty which verifies what you should do, and to which through succession commendable praise can be achieved.
And use in the cure of all your patients where prognosis and indication lead to health, for in that you will gain assistance in the acquisition of fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not take away your direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter separately distinguished into chapters as preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be alleviated.
Capitol first.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother's body strengthens the child's head, it causes pain.
And sometimes appears due to hidden causes that are unknown.
But I do not see this illness in adults; and for all those I see, death is certain, and thus it has been left to me to work on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and its head was always swollen until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of its head, and more so as the moisture increased, leading to its death.
And this moisture is either added between the membrane and the bone, or added to the bone itself.
When the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut into the middle location of the lump making a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be two fingerbreadths so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
And so if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here make two cracks in this manner:
And if the humidity leaves the bone, a sign of this is that you see the edges of the lump open from all sides and the water oozes out when you compress it with your hand on the inside parts; this is not what you want to hide. And cut into the middle location of the lump making three cracks in this manner:
And extract all the humidity by the incision; strengthen the cracks with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over it; remove the bandage and heal the wound with cloths and ointments, strengthening the lump with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food with little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And there is another way of making an incision, which you consider according to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so as what is most convenient for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and try to let blood flow from the wound, for it would harm the patient through this flow of blood by evacuating humidity.
Chapter II.
When an abscess or wound is found in the heels or the feet, and it is customary to treat this without incising the two arteries, then the delayed cure in this case is the incision of those arteries.
And when you want to incise where the disease reaches its head, then rub the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tie the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is at the vein; and the places above these over which the auricles are pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
And then touch over the artery with your finger, and incise each part sharply with a blade penetrating into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the blade between the artery and leave it there, cutting it at the incisions on the parts above.
And the length of the incision should be two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the wound is closed with a pulsating outflow, which flows through frequent spurts.
And if the artery does not appear in the incision, then measure from the auricle the width of three digits, and then touch it with your finger, and insert it into the mouth.
And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and much lighter or heavier in its flow, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the filling of the artery of the limb.
And then consider the fracture, and therefore if there is any cause on the bone from the fracture, then incise this so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the fracture with feather down and cloth lint, and then cure that by applying ointments until it is healed.
Capitol III.
Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute headache occurs due to unpleasant humidity and the quality of the blood in the temples, or is very severe and resembles those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and if this does not bring relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the surgeon raises the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then strengthen the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you insert the needle there easily until you reach the artery; and then heat it in oil and extract that from the superficial parts until you remove that from the needle and discover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
More if the artery is fine, then envelop it at the extremity of the needle, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of the thread are long and contracted, and will not permit the flow of blood, for if not incised, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the wound one. in three.
And if the artery is large, then divide it into two locations with a single strong ligature or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the healing of the wound.
And then cut the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or soon after.
And if you wish, sear it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where the extremities are cut; it will serve in place of that operation.
And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is from a heated condition; for a cautery is of those causes that help in resolving humidity, and therefore it is better for recovery.
And then remove the ligatures that you placed at the site of the cut, and let them rest on the properly prepared powder, and soon after apply medicinal powders to promote healing and with oils until it is healed.
And if while working another time you encounter flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cloth, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then place your hand on the location until the bleeding stops, and apply the area with water of strong refrigeration until the acute condition subsides, and strengthen according to what is needed.
And that which is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with tentative marks, and place hot coals over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of it is elongated, which are not completely cauterized by all of this.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two knives is essential. But if the acute pain is such that two knives are better, for if sharp like two knives it affects each wound quickly without cutting the flesh hastily.
Therefore, when there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire at those places and the flesh is incised slightly.
And this method is better in all works and more slight.
And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitulum quartum.
Of the cure for bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears of the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are on the side of the head are inflamed, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become thin, moistened as if the skin is known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, they use anti-inflammatory remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and they number that cure among the passing things.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two digits: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal glands, and the third from the other part.
And guard yourself from the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three digits adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them on those which absorb the blood.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the temple part into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the capsule which is over the bone, and then do this of the middle incision into the second incision. Then cut into this muscle and insert it into the first incision; or use another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then hold the flap of the sharp part, detach the adjacent flesh, and keep the edge inside the bone. Push that into the middle crack, and cut away all vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tendon appears, and then do this in the middle crack between the other crack.
And when the bleeding has ceased in equal quantity, squeeze the locations of the ankles to stop any remaining bleeding.
And then place your hand over any gouty fissure of old skin, and place it above those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day after the ligation, administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and then apply an ointment of basilicum mixed with olive oil to other areas where the sores have healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and the phlegm descending from inside the head.
When there is an acute and continuous catarrh with phlegm from the feet of the gouty person being small and weak, and their general condition showing debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated along with the skin in that area, and in the prefrontal region of the head there is sharp pain and subsequent extreme tension, then you can perceive from these occurrences that the materials and catarrh do not come from the small veins within the body.
And the best cure in such cases is this: command the gouty person to rub their forehead, and then incise a small fissure along the middle of the forehead, about the width (starting from the left temple between the right temple; and make the incision into the bone; extend your hand to the wrinkles of the temples, which are prominent, and should be well incised), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then place between the two lips of the fissure a piece of lint or a clean cloth. Strengthen on top with powders infused in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you lift this and see that the abscess has already diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure it with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to shrivel, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make an ointment and administer it to these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Chapter VI.
Of the cure for that which affects the ears.
All cause that affects the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and flint, or it is from plant, such as mustard or vetch, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water and mixed wine, or something like them, or some beast.
And when the ear is pierced in the ear or another cause seeming like those causes that do not fit nor cause in the ear, and pause the ear in the sun, and if you touch the ear, then it distills in that certain cause of violated oil or sesame, and then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear circuit, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (a type of medication) are applied to these causes.
And if it is not cured, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
And if it is cured with the gesti, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with the fine onci of little duplication.
And if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that only the cannula is open. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
If it is not successfully reduced in this manner, then take some damp cloth or previously prepared bandage with which the thighs are tied a sufficient quantity, place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then properly wrap around that area carefully. And then insert that into the canal of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And so, if it is not successfully reduced by all the causes we have recounted, then you incise that area where an abscess or spasm is likely to occur.
And the way to incise that is to begin by sacking the patient at the point of the femoral vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a cut between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the rim of the ear, pressing the gray tissue into the well-packed location. And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and if the heel is damaged, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, when the crack is in that position, give it speed and cure it while it is still healthy.
And if the cause settles in the ear is one of the wax that accumulates and is swollen, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your attempt, then take thin subtle suction according to this method: And administer to him the extraction of that wax which has settled in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already become moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it there using tweezers or with a gentle gesture, as we have described, for this makes the extraction easier.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal where the illness uses coughing to condition its onset, and fills the ear with a certain amount of old wax, and pour this wax over the ear in which the water is, and if by this it is washed out, that is good; but if not, then take threads of flax or woolen yarn according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire for a little while, and have the patient insert one of those threads into the canal of his ear and draw out a piece of that portion and strike it with another stone over the stone which is against the ear. Do not stop applying the pere until all the water has been expelled.
Do not stop applying the pere until all the water has been expelled. And once all the water has been expelled, try taking a piece of paper or cloth, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the paper is burned.
And put another piece of cloth and do this as many times as needed until all the water has been expelled, then squeeze it with a cannula as previously described.
In the extraction of a small foreign body entering that ear, do this more carefully and as it seems fit. Treat it as we have described in the division. But if it is a large object causing immediate symptoms, then perform the extraction quickly and with precision, for the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have described in the division and in the tractatus de distillationibus, and if your treatment does not take effect, then you should look into the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that by means of a worm-gatherer or fine hook, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open. I introduce the thin end into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can endure; and then suction it out strongly, performing this several times until all the worms are expelled.
But if it does not obey to your suction, then open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And your effusion should be such that you apply medicinal oils to the ear with this instrument, which is in the form shown here: And make it of silver or copper, stretch it out, in which there is a small tube, and a flat surface above.
And so they should be pushed to be in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above while pressing with your hand to apply a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the pain feels the oil inside.
And what is infused into the ear should be slightly heated over a fire. And make sure that the medicine you distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Sometimes children suffer from abscesses in the ears of their unperforated parents, and this occurrence happens in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the meat of the ear due to a wound or without any clear cause; sometimes these abscesses form in front of the auricle which does not close properly, and sometimes they form in the outer parts.
And that which happens in the region of the loins, which does not affect the surface, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
And in that where you can see the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if you see an apparent abscess, open that thin layer under which this is the form of it:
If the extremity of it where it has small breadth, where one part is acute and the other not; and the layer be of two lion heads wide so that it does not irritate the ear.
And if the abscess is in hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of it, then you have those thin oncises and cut there with great facility until all the flesh is exposed.
And if the abscess is in the region of the ear, then take a thin lion's claw and heat that piece of metal slightly, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And so, if you sense an accumulation of fluid that the patient finds difficult to expel due to its weight, relieve the pressure on it by facilitating its expulsion; and be careful not to damage the nerves of the ear.
And then place a cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the sore; or that you dip it in water and powderize it over the dried triac and use it; and if you see the ear already healed, then scrape away the sore and replace it with another part which you wrap in cerote made from olive oil, until the swelling is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
But if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, as described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol Viii.
For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Eyelids that sometimes become moist, and at other times dry.
Then take those flax or linen cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after they have dried.
But if there is pain from a flux of venous blood, then burn those with a thin cautery under the surface.
And the best cautery is applied near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are burned with fire, those juices are consumed and do not return.
Capitulum ix.
Care for the inflammation of the eyelids caused by venous blood.
Spots appear on the eyelids and are sometimes accompanied by swelling and hardness, which is why they are called inflammation.
And this is an addition of large humidity in the eyelid below and above.
And the operation in this case is to consider whether the enlargement is present in it where appears from the eyelid and is spread to all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a incision there for the width, and then probe it from all parts with a tool to facilitate the discharge, and then suspend it and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the enlargement is decreasing inside the eyelid, you should probe the inner surface, then lift the eyelid and suspend the enlargement with a tool, or one you will choose for an incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is lengthened by an incision, then do not note any cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a dressing until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the cure of excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is caused by gray matter that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and particularly in children, it worsens their conditions and may even lead to their death; hence they cannot look at the brightness of the sun, as tears congregate in their eyes.
And for this reason, they often weep on their own faces all the time, and sleep with tears on their cheeks; only their eyelids are wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the apparent precursor of excision is evident in the wound; and when you press the area with hot compresses, you can feel the excision within.
And some method of operation is in that the patient rests his head on a hot cloth, then places another cloth over it and wraps them both tightly. A circle is drawn according to the size containing all the parts, then places this over the circle and applies hot compresses around it so that excision increases at the center of the circle. Then, in the middle of this wetness, incises along a line, ensuring the crack is not larger than that made in a ventral celiotomy.
More in the preceding part where you cut the cord entirely until you reach the artery, for in later stages you process the artery through a fissure according to the form of whitish greasiness.
Therefore, remove those from the cloths which you have wrapped around your thumbs and spread between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And be careful that you do not press too hard at the fissure, so that you do not miss the pus and drain it out.
More if no pus appears at your artery in the beginning of the fissure, then press slightly at the fissure with your finger as you process the artery; and then remove those as we have said; and soon immerse cloths in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
And then apply salt and place it over the cavity of the fissure to prevent what is removed from that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that area, then cure it by applying flax linens until it is healed.
Capitol.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye, after making incisions, the natural skins are loosened and hardened, then those noxious qualities of the eye become signs of illness such as constant tearing, softening of the eyelids, and inflammation until this is a cause for destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously mentioned in the Capitol on cautery; by surgical incision and suturing; or by cannulas as I will say.
And thus cover that you place the head of the eye in your right hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it converts, well; otherwise, insert a needle into that part where the thread from the incision is located on the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the skins are born — near the skins, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then convert it.
And then in the inner part of the eyelid, place the skins fittingly moistened with drops from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and extract the fluid and place the skin covered with fine dust of cotton or cloth, and then cover the eyelid with a tent, as shown in the figure of a leaf of myrtle.
But more importantly, I see that the figure should be according to the amount of excision of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, and those among them who need a large portion of the eyelid excised according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
And then place the drops along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and incise it completely, and then suture the two edges with gut or fine wool thread, and clean the exudate, and apply what remains of the threads over two eyebrows for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you are done.
And after that, leave the stitches of the wounds between three and four days, and then cure this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without stitches, and cure it by what dries and tightens it. For when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the dressing to the wound and add to it; but stitches are better. Therefore say this to the ancients of Taxanir.
But if it is necessary to stimulate the patient, and it is for good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of applying it is to figure the eyelid as a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid by three unciae, arranging and gathering it according to this form:
But if this is not possible, take the unciae, and since this is not feasible, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland. Adjust the threads equally between the ties, and then lift your hand for elevation evenly, lifting the entire codena over which it was marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
If an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, drain the abscess with a cloth and keep it clean, and apply ointment.
And in some cases on the eyelid, where its skin should be removed, then use the incision method as we have said before; but suture in a few places that are more artificial.
To cauterize with a cautery is done in this manner: And you remove the eyelid and split the figure that is inside as I have recounted; then, by art, make two cautery rods or two thin sticks whose length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of theirs is similar to the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add some subtlety over what you have removed from the eyelid of the wound, and tighten the canals of each part with strong stricture, and leave it for a few days, so that due to the stricture the pus will die and be rejected and will fall out by itself.
But if it is delayed, then cut the thread of the wound, and proceed to cure the sore as it heals.
Then, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not pricked.
And this is the way of two canals which you will make according to this form: and has neither more nor less in the length and width.
Capitol. xii.
For the elevation of painful skin in the wound, use an awl when the skin is hard.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins in the wound, for the operation in it you should take a thin awl and place it on that fine fiber of each thin hair, and then adjust the ends of it with nuts in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the threads be equal to the width of one palm.
And then make another thin thread and place it briefly under the one you·t want, using its ends.
And then place the patient's head in a warm bed, and keep it close to the sun so that your work is effective; for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the cut in the tightened skin, adjusting it as needed, and make that penetration deep into the eyelid, ensuring that you remove the one above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upward and insert the other one under it, with the skin being one or two or three layers, but not more.
And then pull your hand through that so the skin is tightened under the eyelid with the natural skin.
Otherwise, if the skin is not tightened with the cauterized thread, pull the cauterized thread to the sides with the needle you have made, so that in doing so the cauterized thread from the wound will remain.
And then close the wound, for when you have tied the thread, and cut the hemp, clamp the wound, and leave it open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that place, or let it grow for some time until it lengthens somewhat, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of eyelid inflammation that occurs above.
When there is eyelid inflammation, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts in its upper or lower part, due to poor healing of a wound or a section or a cautery, it is called lupine. This inflammation can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of a wound or sections or cauteries, or resembling them in nature.
For the method of the operation, you should cut through the consolidation and separate the eyelid layers. Place a strip of linen between them and ligate them until they are healed.
And you must use the cure for those causes which dry up and constrict; for if you do this it will result in a worse affliction than none at all.
Use for those causes that soften, such as fenugreek, and soak in water in which it is steeped or seed of lily, or unguent of aquilaria, which is liquefied by some oil, immerse the hand in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you puncture only where it is not consolidated, according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but a slight correction of abscesses that do not return to the form of the area as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
On the cure of abscesses that occur in the eyelid.
This abscess that occurs in the eyelid is called an orbital abscess; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More accidentally it is caused by wound or by cut or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the way of performing the operation is that you take a needle on which you make a double thread, and place that in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad blade. And therefore, if you restore the figure of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the divided figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they meet, they form the figure.
And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
And then hold the flesh there with forceps at the amount that is the length of its sharp point, what we call the palpebra.
And then adjust the separated parts with thread; and cure those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until it is healed.
And if you incise for a fissure or suture or cautery, then make the incision in a flat fissure on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And then separate with the scalpel between two layers as we have said.
In the end of the discourse on the cure of incision when it is above or below, let it run in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of diverse spots.
And the skilled artisans always prepare everything in any manner that is possible for them to do so as they return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and the patient according to their needs from the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, they try to secure the eyelid above by fixing it to the tarsal plate, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural functions. Therefore, you should insert a needle through the edge of the lid, let the eyelid, and elevate or extend it over the tarsal plate.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine needle, which should not be of great sharpness, having an obtuse tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. You should remove the fluid to prevent it from impairing the vision.
And let your incision be such that it releases the adhesion with ease, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then place salt water in the eye, with which you wash it; or use distilled water dissolved with zinc.
And then separate between the eyelid and the sore of the eye, and place over the sore infused wool in honey album, and for the third day use conservative treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh of the lacrimal glands.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervosa, resembling a thin hard fiber; the other is non-nervosa, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is divided and the moisture is not inserted into it.
And both species do not begin until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of the eyelid.
The way to act in the incision of the eyelid is that the patient rests his head in a tilting position, then opens the eyes, and lifts the eyelid with your hand. Then collect the eyelid with little moisture and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it either a hair of horse or bull or cow, or one that resembles them, or strong silk, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread; and extend it to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the liquid of the nail which cures the pupil. And then follow it with the skin into the depth of the wound.
And then incise the wound in the socket of the tear duct with a subtle spatula or small forceps, and let the flesh of the tear duct remain so that due to the incision, it will not cause continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail with the sole of the toe stretched or with thread, as we have said, and then scraped off with a lion's spatula, which is the form of this:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Near the incision make a small cut on the skin with salted iron or steel made of tin, and leave that in for another day; and cure that which is within so that it heals.
If the ulcer is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then spots of this kind of ulcer are cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as described in the division.
If you want to incise it, then open the ulcer of the malady and take fine pus from the sharp blade according to this form: with subtlety. And if you see that it is rarified and congested and embedded in that rash, then distill from your mouth into the cut of iron made of tin or of rusty iron or of salted steel, and plug the cut with another day.
And repeatedly perform the operation while all that is of it is removed, otherwise if a counter-boil forms in the cut, then you leave it, and cure the beginning of the boil while it heals.
And then continue your operation where it reasonably should be healed.
The eyelid, if noted for great pain, should be suspended with a needle; and incise part of it, and do not complete the incision so that it does not cut the flows of tears.
And then let the tear duct rest and dry up before it is healed.
Capitol. xvii.
Of the incision of algazardenic and what is born from flesh pressed in the wound.
In some wounds of the eye, flesh presses and grows, and is pressed over to cover the pupil, or it approaches and strengthens against the eyelids, forcing them outward and joining to the sides of the orbit.
More importantly, the operation is that the patient places his head in the proper position; then open the wounds there and collect all that flesh with appropriate incisions, using forceps or tongs; and continue to incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep the wound clean so as not to hinder your operation.
And let your incision be where you cut those or with forceps which we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers from which thread is gathered according to the form it will take near this chapter.
So when your incision is completed and the entire flesh is cauterized, then fill the wound with salted honey, or sprinkle in it a powder resembling that of corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as one would use a plaster until an abscess is assured.
And if any cause of gangrene and is seared with cauterization, and fears an abscess by cauterization, then leave the wound open and cure that abscess as one would treat that abscess, and repeatedly perform upon that area until it is healed, and similarly do for the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the wound of this kind.
But you must ensure that all healing of the wound naturally or by accident proceed through iron, and do not place your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
From the collection of salts in the wound.
Salts so veins roses which are rough in the wound and prohibit their operation, and swell the wound over a length of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which salts are applied is strong and contains no other illness than salts, then you collect that salt.
And you command the patient to place his head in cold water, and then suspend those veins at one or two ounces according to your prudence; and let that ounce be of subtle duplication according to this form:
or those two ounces gradually in one container according to this form:
And let those veins be collected with strong subtlety, by subtlety, and wash the salt hour by hour, while you observe that those veins are removed from the wound and are rotated.
And take care that you do not touch the skin at the extremities of the spine; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the green vinegar or wormwood to cause its acidity to corrode what is removed from the body.
Mais if that is not possible for you to collect all in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves its pain, and leave it for a few days until its pain is subdued and an abscess secured.
And then iterate over it according to how the patient improves.
And this is the method for extracting:
Capitulum XIX.
On the reduction of hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine according to the preceding narrative and it is not cured, then do not rely on it but instead incise over the abscess, allowing its maturity, and extract all the moisture which is within it until the bone is revealed.
And when the bone and veins within it are revealed in corruption or blackness, then you treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named "asper cap," and is made of iron, and is the round head such that when one holds the which is made pierced by sawing or finely punctured (as in the following form).
And place it over the corrupt part of the bone, and then rotate it between your tongs, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive treatments.
Then if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy flesh is cut from the diseased part and removed for 40 days, and does not regenerate and does not become suppurated and no accident happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and do it according to this manner: and you expose the bone with iron or with sharp medicine. When the bone is revealed, then take a piece according to this form:
Let the end piece be triangular, and let the stem be thickened at the extremity as you see.
And then place that on the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; extend your hand a little towards the length, and then turn your hand in the socket so that it penetrates the entire bone, and that feels the pain through the wind that exits when you move your hand.
Then restore the place with medicinal powders drying as they are given.
Then, when the flesh is dried and the place is hardened, the matter which it was exuding to the surroundings returns to its place, so this is lighter over the pain.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of sensation, then you should relax the pain, subsequently follow with scarification at the neck, and apply good suction. Then place liniment made of acatra, aloe, enses, and sarcocolla over the hernia, and strengthen the plaster with motz powder.
And the manner of powders is that you take linen cloths from lion's mane, and each cloth be folded into four parts; and make use of those hairs.
And then place them one over the other according to the quantity that it has of the powder. And then press firmly on those cloths until they are tightly bound; and repeat the cups with suction several times after scarification; and then place the cups and leave the powder straight for the day and night.
But if in the meantime the ligature becomes softened, then change it to be tight again.
And then place the ligature on the wound day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the poultice with the powder and the binding with cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the sclera.
When there is a disruption in the vitreous membrane, it bulges and protrudes like a degree of cataract, and its form resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise this, then the operation is as we have described: you introduce the needle into the rupture at one side and bring another needle with a double thread from the lacrimal part on the other side, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in place according to its position; subsequently, you incise the location of the double thread and remove the segment of the vitreous membrane within the circuit of the needle, strengthening this action.
Then remove the needle and place it over the wet wool infused with honey, allowing the thread to stay in the vitreous.
Then apply something warm to this, to comfort it while the wound heals.
In some cases, gather all the parts in a circle of cloth over the swelling, then apply a fine needle puncture under the wool, allowing the humor to drain and descend quickly.
And then strengthen as it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called ulcers is nothing but a disease that affects the skin, resembling water descending and is not the other type.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared bed and straighten them. Then take their head in your hands at two parts and lower it until you see the disease reach the extremities, ensuring it dries up and does not descend further, and keep the light nearby so that the patient can see what is being done.
And if it does not descend below, you may know that it is water.
And if the descent of the disease to healing is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient on your lap and carefully take a small spurt and apply it over the gauze, continuously moving it along the conjunctiva towards the cornea in the area (in the location of the wound), until the disease is expelled.
Then, as is forgotten, when you distill into the shoe in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have steeped fenugreek and honey.
And then treat the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol.xxii.
Of the cure for water descending into the foot.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is suitable for piercing as we declared, according to its healthiness.
Then you must tie up the thigh between your hands on a cushion and lay its foot there, with a tightstring.
Then place your left hand near the sole of the foot in which the water is; or with your right hand if the foot is on the right side.
Then with your right hand take the wick, if the foot is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the foot is on the right side.
And then place the extremity of the thumb near the crown for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye from the overflow of the tear duct.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the thumb has already reached due to swelling.
And measure the size of the thumb's passage when pressing against the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the black part, for this is the crown of the eye; you will see the pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer with the vision of the eye.
And then place the thumb in the location where the water is, and then pull it down several times. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then see that the patient under whose vision it overflowed quickly, and the thumb in his eye.
And then pause for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you pause again before pulling the thumb out so that it is not removed.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you extract the mass with ease, and roll it little by little with your hand, and return a small amount of clear salted gem water inside; and place a cloth or stopper or infused wool in olive oil and egg white over it, and ligature it with this.
May we and those who are of our time pause over it with egg white.
And if you do not extract your mass with the instrument of heat due to its hardness — which is often the case with those whose flesh is hard and tough —, then seek that you take the spuma which is named alberid, of which this is the form:
And then puncture that conjuctura, and do not bring your hand too deep into the tissue, but rather make a way to the location of the mass.
And then introduce the mass as we have said.
And you should complete your work, so prepare a bed for the patient properly made in which they lie on their back in a dark house, and prohibit all movements.
And pause in his nature for that it may be aligned with his nature, and not disturb his head to the right or left part completely.
And let the ligament be placed according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove that in the more obscure and irritating sore, and apply some cold compresses, and then return the ligament on the seventh day.
And do not do this at the time of the incisions or very soon after the infusion. Have you already decided to remove this so that the water may flow slightly freely and abundantly through regard for it.
If an abscess should occur, then remove the pus on or before the seventh day, and correct that with this to allow the abscess to heal.
Then close the wound and place your hand over the face of the wound for which it may heal properly, leaving the wound open for a few days, especially in the more obscure sore.
And then it should be gradually extracted from that hand and transferred to its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not necessary for the apprentice to have a vision on some occasions, and then you stand by during the operation.
And we have been informed of some cases where they are affected by Artach, and some say to make fire in Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drawn.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that they be known to those who are unfamiliar with them:
And they should be made of elm or iron properly, and their extremities should have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, with one point as sharp as the other.
Capitol.xxiv.
Of the treatment of flesh nothing in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various growths that are caused by certain causes gathered from heavy mucus or from polyps; this illness is called polypus and is similar to that polyp represented. And of the polyp it is fleshy, dark in color; and from it comes fleshy growths that are not dark in color.
Therefore, in that which is among these fleshy growths neither false nor cancerous, first separate the illness by pressing your fingers and place it in the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and prick the tip in those fleshy growths. And then extract it from the deep part, and carefully divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife where you can feel that all the flesh has been reached; if any part remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its removal. If a wound or abscess occurs, then pause at that which fits; if it is of malignant abscesses, then incise the wound and cauterize within where the blood has escaped and all cavities are exposed.
And then set it on the nose near the incision and apply either honey or grease. If the nose is already opened and there is a process of humidity in the palate, then you can see that it is already healed.
If the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you can see that inside there is no flesh but pus will remain bones of the nose which have not been reached by an incision.
Then when it is appropriate that you insert the juice of the plant from which there is any swelling, use nuts in its place, and pause between each nut the quantity of a finger or less, and open the patient and insert an extremity of the juice into the nose with a probe or for another reason which is within your capability.
And after he has done this, he should breathe his odorament into it so that it reaches the canals of the nose, and sit over his bowl, for too frequent actions like this make children at schools laugh, and is a light cause for him who wants to do it.
Then place the two ends of the cord, one end that ties over the nose and the other that loops in the nose, and then apply a flesh stitch at the nuts which are in the cord, doing this while you can feel that the flesh is against the nuts of the cord.
Then extract the cord, and place a pledget in the nose near the edge of the wound, and do this for three days or more until the ointment dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
Then, at the end of the cause, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you need to promote healing that dries out, use that one.
And this is the form of the instrument for nasal distillation where oils and medicines are put in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or of copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for nasal distillation should be flat and open. Insert a tube at the rear end of it, with which you will place there whatever oil or liquid you want from the secretions and extractable causes.
Chapter XXV.
From the roots to the extremities of the nose.
Nodules are observed at the roots to the extremities of the nose, and these are enlarged and palpated over several days as the swelling becomes more noticeable.
And for this reason, you should examine it at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it. And place the cautery or burning medicine over the area where it was.
But if its examination is delayed until it has enlarged, then consider whether it is solid, hard, of dark color, and with little sensation; in this case, do not touch that with a hot iron as it is an abscess; for nodules often accompany this abscess due to its great malignity on the part where it was.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not of dark color, and examination is possible throughout it, then drain the poison and cut it out without fear, and treat the area with something that dries up and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by disease or similar conditions.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you have little to rely on in that operation except skilled people.
Then, when there is any cause of those, consider whether it is fresh disease with its secretion, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure that until it is healed.
And if the lips of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you must strip each part from its visible edge until it exudes pus. Then adjust the two lips with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood and threefold tin on those. Place a piece of diafinicon plaster or another consolidated plaster over the powder, and let that mixture remain for two to three days. Remove that and replace it with another plaster, letting it dry until the roots have resolved themselves, and proceed to cure with ointment until it is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
For the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Spots appear in the internal parts of their lips, turning into hard abscesses resembling lard, and some are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, cut out the lips and openings of each of those hardnesses from all sides, and then fill the wound with three layers of cloth while the wound is tightened, and subsequently wash it with wine and treat the area with water that is astringent, until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the incision of the flesh adhered to the gums.
Great care in touching the gum where they call albulus, then withdraw that which you grasp with your finger or forceps and let the pus drain out or bleed.
Then place something warm on the area for three days or other styptic or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth aching.
When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside and between the gums there are sharp, rough edges, some are blackened and are caused by yellow or green substances that affect the gum through this corruption, causing the teeth to become loose.
And therefore make sure that you cut the patient's thigh between your hands and place the head there in hot water, wash the teeth where those edges and similar causes appear, ensuring that nothing breaks from any cause, and do this with the blackness and yellowish substances as well as others that have been changed.
Then if what remains from the beginning of the reasoning is good, well and good; otherwise, then you repeat the reasoning on those points the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth have needed various forms of extraction and different shapes according to how your operation is prepared. And so, some razors for extracting the tooth from the inside are different from those razors for extracting between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare yourself, which you will often see.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take a long time in its extraction, for no cause can substitute the natural process when extracted, for it is a substance that sublime during the process of its extraction.
More importantly, know that when the gout is forced to extract that tooth, you must firmly be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain departs from the gout and affects a healthy tooth, and you extract that one, and soon the pain does not cease until the painful and diseased tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
So you must be certified what is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with spatum in which some virtue may be contained, within which it should be dissolved from the root of the gingiva from all parts, and then those thongs or fine scissors at the beginning gradually until those concussions.
And then wet it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between thongs below which you must hold so that they do not loosen, and then draw the tooth straight according to the correct manner so as not to break it, nor give more pain to the patient.
And so, if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it well on the patient from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal as it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must wrap it with cloth and tighten it at the end of a fine rod so that it is not broken during your manipulation over it.
And ensure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard well your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the patient for the mischief that is greater than the first pain.
And guard that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their circumcision and audacity regarding the eradication of their own; for they do not administer what we have recommended; whereas false notions bring great illnesses upon men which are harder to cure, and the reasons for their failures all, or some of those, or extract that membrane from certain bones of the jaw as false notions have testified.
And after the circumcision, wash the mouth with one or two cautions of salt water.
And if there are fluxes of pus for this, as false notions might suggest, then take some saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not work, cauterize.
The form of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth should be long-tipped, short-handled, and thick, so as not to bend when those you use them.
And thus when you insert large instruments there where they are narrow, make them short and well-equipped.
And they should be made of iron from India, straight and well-equipped, and at the ends of those, there are teeth of which some enter into others and widen by strong construction, and sometimes the ends of those are in the shape of a cuckoo's bill, known as a guantia, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of fractured jawbones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured by some cause, first ensure that you place your hand firmly over the area for one or two days until the area becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs at the ends of which are shaped like the bill of a cuckoo (ciconia), the form of the tweezers:
The ends of the forceps should be made like a rasp or file inside.
And if your attempt with these forceps or tenacula does not obey you, then cut over the crack and spread all the flesh apart and insert the instrument which is named atrial, that is a small lever whose shape is this:
And briefly, the extremity is large but small at the end, and should not be twisted.
So if the crack is already open, that is good. Otherwise, help me with these other instruments, the forms of which are as follows: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some swelling:
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer extremity.
And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments which are used for the rasuration of teeth; for this young instrument is made similar to a large hook, and this is its form:
From the triangular extremity twisted or bent, which is some swelling, and not buried so that it is not twisted.
And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsmen find suitable instruments for themselves according to what the operation and various ailments signify; which are of the ailments to which the ancients would neither apply nor pause with a proper instrument due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones in the mouth are twisted, or if you must, then place the affected area on that spot and use what is convenient from the instruments and forceps we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and control the gesture of which this is the form:
And let it be some small swelling gradually, and tightly hold or maintain it in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely removed; then place the area with suitable medicines.
If there is a small abscess in the bone, first drain that abscess and its blackness, and cure it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural alignment, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and there is no possibility of extraction or separation from that tooth, then extract it. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, use an instrument similar in shape to the head of a pig, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge, to extract it.
And make your incision with the instrument you will use to extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to any other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominently exposed and needs to be smoothed, then smooth it with an Indian steel file of this shape:
And let it be all made of iron and steel; and let there be small pointed points like those of a file, on which the teeth are filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth. And then draw one there at the end, and cut that with a few razors.
And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and pries the tongue, then you must file that area where the sharpness of that fracture is stopped and leveled, so that the tongue does not pierce and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol.xxxiii.
For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When the front teeth suffer from concussion and extraction due to impact or a blow, and the patient cannot strengthen the area that is loose, and you have treated it with styptic medicines without successful results, then for those that are strong use gold foil instead of silver, for silver becomes soft and may loosen in a few days, but gold does not change over any length of time.
And let the honey be in such fineness and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and almost as much curvature of the honey between two molars, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And then insert the tendon into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with facility and wisdom so that it is not a molar.
And let your tightening be such that you hold the honey in the spaces of the teeth so that none escapes.
And then divide the excess threads of the honey with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar, so as not to injure the tongue. And then let it be held thus tightly as Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen that or those with another sinew in such a manner throughout its entire time.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these wires:
When returning one or two teeth to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, and shifting them.
And it is not done by anyone other than skilled artisans.
And sometimes it is fitting for certain causes of the bones of a cow, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol.xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases or is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and happens by a wound which already has healed.
And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, the head being in the lap; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its recession.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer and that you incise here to allow the flow of blood.
And then wash the incision tracts with wine or with vinegar or with salt water; and then place the tongue to drain; so that it may not heal again in another night.
If there is a flow of blood, place a vitreous glass over the area; if the blood continues to flow, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery suitable for this. And then proceed with other treatments as the patient recovers.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a ranula, I use the tongue.
Sometimes an abscess forms in the tongue, resembling a small boil, and the tongue's normal operation is prohibited; and greatly swells as it fills the mouth.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth fully facing the sunlight and examine the abscess.
And if you see it dark brown or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that part.
And if it has turned white, which indicates moisture, then place the probe in it and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it completely. If blood flows during your operation, then cover it with a vitreous glass for a while until the bleeding is restrained.
And then return to your work once you have brought it to completion of him, once he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of apstema from two auricles and that which is located in the glabella and other apstemas.
When I find a godata in the glabella, they are glands which are woven like godata, which accideysso on the surface and are named two auricles. When you cure them as we said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the apstema is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation; then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron due to the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will remove it or it will break on its own.
And if it is of white color, small, and the root is fine, then that should be incised.
And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already been treated and fully healed or if it has decreased somewhat; then perform the operation facing the sun, with their head in your lap, and hold their mouth open, and a servant taking between their hands the tip of their tongue, letting go of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or steel, and very fine like a knife.
So when you press on the tongue and show it to the patient, and apply pressure quickly with your thumb, then take an ounce and place that in the wound, and pull it out to the sides as far as you can. Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then apply that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull from the tunics, and then apply that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the tips of the instrument are curved, so that the opening of each one is on the straight part of the other, very sharp, which is made of iron and well tempered.
If this instrument is not at hand, then cut that slit of which this is the form: one end shall be sharp, the other end not.
And since you have cut one slit, cut the other according to this manner of incision, and nearby the incision the abscess will discharge water.
If instead there is a flow of blood, discharge water with an extract of crushed grapevine or of hollyhock leaves and similar to those causes that constrict the flow of blood, and cure that once it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other apertures besides those two ears, and cut those according to need and as said in the incision of two slits equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a brown color, little sensation, and which had already closed her groin. The woman breathed directly, and food and water intake had already been prohibited to her, and she was close to death if more water remained for one or two days.
And the abscess had already been puscing so long that there were months between when it would break through two traverses.
Then I cut into the fistula firmly and fixed it in one of its ends, and pulled that end, and drew out the large portion, and then incised that part from which the other tract originated, and then obliged the mouth of it, and controlled its tongue, and then fixed the end in the abscess.
And then I incised a large part of it, and there was not running from it anything but a little blood. Then the swelling of that woman was reduced, and she began to drink water soon, and then eat food. And I did not cease incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which continued to be prolonged as long as that lasted.
Then I shaved and cauterized the swelling of it, according to the method; and then walked around and did not know what God had done to that near me.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
When the catarr (catarrah) appears on the uvula, and it is acute and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure agreeing with it, and thus you often see that the apetema (abscess) has already passed and is subtle, then seek to make an incision where it is added round; if it is at that length, and is bloody, of a dusky color or black, and is not a centimeter, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear over the gout.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then seize the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument of which the shape process is in two, and then fix the needle in the new place, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two gouts.
And make sure you do not go beyond what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you go beyond it, you will alter its proper function.
And nearby the insertion, use that which we have described in the insertion of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
If the patient is scared by the insertion, make sure you use something to ease the cautery with fear, and the way of applying the cautery should be simply with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient in your lap, and then press the tongue of the patient with the instrument as described. Additionally, take the water we mentioned in the section on cautery and apply it to the head of the patient, ensuring that you apply it living (i.e., hot), not too thin or subtle, and fill the concavity of the instrument, which has this form:
Let the exterior part of the cavity where the medicine is applied be as wide as the width of a ray's head, and place the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient should hold it with her hand so that she secretes saliva or mucus from her mouth through the internal medicine, thus not deviating from this for any cause related to the loincloth and that it adheres to her.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube such that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this as many times as necessary to achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, then cauterize the uvula with a cloth soaked in borde, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula from the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with guarismes until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is both safe and lasting without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with what is finer than a cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikados arabic, camomile, grind them and prepare those of the herbs, adjust all those causes or some of them in one ointment, and be submerged in vinegar and boil; and let the ointment be well mixed with good paste, and in the middle of the ointment place a wick, on which is placed a hollow vessel made of reed according to this manner; make it of silver or reed.
And the extremity be inserted in the mouth of the patient where the vapor rises to the uvula over the quulka, where the uvula is somewhat obscured.
And then repeat over those spots several times where it is dry, and guard that you do not make this cure at the beginning of the onset of carbuncles, for it would too tightly constrict the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the presence of a carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a cork at the end of it, so that the opening of the patient's anus is narrowed, for the cork prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns that adhere in the wound or from a thorn prick or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound. Afterward, touch the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you may determine what is in the throat.
And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rue cloth or a chunk of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge soaked in wine, tie it firmly with thread, and make the patient swallow that, for it will reach the place where the thorns are located and be expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, then place it inside the mattress and secretly extract it; or take a pomegranate and secretly place it inside and extract it.
And if none of these causes are the ones we have said, then use an instrument of lead in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it, have its cavity where you can insert it into his throat with ease.
And lift his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
And instead, if the patient can insert honey, by his knowledge of the location of the cause, he should apply it downwards and place his hand on the instrument, doing all this according to the quantity prepared before it is forgotten.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
When the gouty blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gout spot in the foot under the sun, for you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or with fine, subtle means.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout spot in the foot. Place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout spot) and keep the patient without water for the whole day.
And then take a sponge full of water and squeeze it, opening its mouth over the gout spot, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, and pour the water again for about an hour using your hand, as soon as you feel the gouty blood coming.
If not treated as we have advised, then fumigate the patient with cypress or saffron through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may take effect.
And another method of fumigation is this: you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and into that hole you place the end of the instrument; and then proceed with the fumigation; and have the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and seal his mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you can see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not heal, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and have the patient abstain from drinking, eating salty foods and other things, and do not let him drink water; and so this must be done according to this regimen.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it appears; and it resembles tongs as you see, but there is some curvature in it. And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and it is filed with a file, so that when any cause is applied, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which is the summary of the speech concerning abscesses and on their section.
Abscesses are special kinds of boils, according to various methods as remembered, for each one in this book.
And they are diverse in puncturing and sectioning them through two methods. Of these, one is according to the kind of abscesses themselves; and by this, we deal with the humidity.
And the second method is according to the places where bodily accidents occur. For an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint. Each of them has its own treatment through operation.
And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but rather at maturity of the healing in those or complement of their.
And other abscesses some of which must be drawn out when they are ripe, and not matured according to their complement, as with abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess that is near a joint, its nature is prolonged into what is within the circuit of it, and greatly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, making it cause contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near the main member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is matured, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore perforate what is not ripe; and you must not perforate crudely, due to poor digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that you do not cause pain and be elongated inside the parts of the anus, and a fistula may be formed, or it is made in the term that has not healed. And you must know the time for the perforation of the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And note that it is cured when there is a decrease in pain and fever, and the reduction in swelling and pulse, and the subsiding sharpness of the abscess head, and other signs.
And know that when you note the perforation occurring in the location just below the abscess and of pus coming from the healing of the prominence.
And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the parts around the eyes or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the nerves, the arteries; and, accordingly, in all similar locations where there is no reflection; but in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in fleshy tissue, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to custom; as we have said. For if you perforate it before this, it will prolong the course of the disease and increase the hardness and depth of the abscess.
More abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or body as the necessity demands, or according to that from which the limb suffers.
And ensure that for small abscesses, you administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses, a large and wide or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as with bread, it should be done while already stiff, just as one does for clavos and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mulberry leaf, just as with abscesses of scrofula.
And of these, there are those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
More for those where none is done thus, as with superficial abscesses of lions, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial perforation, or flat one only.
And when the abscess is large and has already gathered a healthy pus, you should puncture it but do not cut so that all the poison does not come out at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day raise the abscess into another, then extract a larger part, and proceed to make cuts repeatedly according to degree until it is fully drained.
And more especially if the patient is of verdure virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthful fluid, and greatly weakens the patient, and you must open up.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; then administer either honey or garlic as appropriate. If the abscess is large and the punctures have significant openings, then you should place your finger in each to ensure they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have cut a part of the vein or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should suture it with old linen or a thread made of linen, just as when you have removed skin flaps or roots, preserving their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it as what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
But if you happen to experience a flow of blood during the time of your operation, then administer hot water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in many places of this our livre and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near strong nerves, then you must infuse powders in wine and oil with a cautery, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which be infused within the first three days, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse that, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses generally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said all about the abscess in how the cure thereof is conducted by chapters singly.
Chapter XL.
Of abscesses where the vein is in the scalp.
In the vein of the scalp, small abscesses occur, and these are of nodules which contain tunics that form them; the natures of these tunics are spotted.
And they are soft to the touch, and those that contain moisture resembling lime. And those that contain moisture resembling powder, similar to it; and those that are hard, lithiasis.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should perform the extraction without causing arterial obstruction.
And the operation to extract those is that you express them using an instrument of the form which is described nearby, which is called an entremes until you know it contains the moisture.
If what it contains is moisture, then divide that along the length by superficial section according to this form:
And start at the section of B line between G line. When the humidity is evacuated, then scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave none of that cause all, for too many times returns if there remains any such cause.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if available, otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will dissolve everything that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly treat that area with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, make an incision between the two halves of the section and thoroughly drain it, exerting your virtue in the extraction of the membrane which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly perform on the abscess incised and for its section and cure as we have said; the section on an abscess incised is lighter, because it has little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes some of these abscesses which are in the head, in some people for whom there is no humidity at all; the cause is that I incised not on an abscess in the head of an old woman and scraped the abscess thus like a deaf, rough, white pear, which could not be cut, and if any were subjected to percussion, it would burst.
But in other abscesses in the head, this is not covered by this chapter. As with abscesses that occur in the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions; but the section of all these should be a superficial incision.
And place the incision of those lower parts low, so that the body is relieved of the disease in the lower regions.
And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the patient's cure.
Capitol XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Black spots often cause abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is drained of its own tissue, just as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
And the species of these scrofulas are spots; some are hard, and some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not yield to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest tends towards the color of the codena, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not hard, cut that one with a superficial incision from above to below along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the edges of the codena outward with a scalpel or several small cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the incision not be too deep, that it does not reach your hand when cutting, or to calm the patient, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a plaster of vitriol trioxide or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which allows the inflammation of the abscess to rest and soften the wound and begin to suppurate. When the blood is incised.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire again as you have previously instructed if there are any other small scrofulous swellings, then incise those and cleanse them.
And if there is a large vein in the vicinity of the scrofulous swelling, avoid incising that part of the scrofulous swelling. Before covering that which you have folded strongly at the side, leave that which will fall by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrofula completely, then cover the wound and stitch it tightly so that no fluid leaks out.
But if you see that there is excessive exudation due to the size of the scrofula, then understand that you should incise the edge of it, remove it, and administer stitches as indicated.
And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears, and stop the perforation when you reach the dry pus beneath the body, as we have said.
And then administer the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it heals the part affected by corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the ointment of generative flesh while it is healing.
Chapter XXXIV.
Section of the base of the abscess under the heel.
The ancients performed this section of the base of the abscess, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with curvature, a cavity should be avoided during the extraction of the base of the foot, for if this is not done properly, all the veins and major arteries of the leg may be damaged.
More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or heel or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the base of the foot to avoid the damage caused by puncture.
When we want to do this, incise the epilhot and leave three or four small circles of the epilhot circles, each in the space between two circles by quantity, that the section be circular, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood within are laid open.
And if the doctor fears this, do it when he extends the thread of the needle, and then cut the thread before it reaches the canal, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have recounted; and it is significant on the section of the canal by the flame which is from that issue to what is of its disruption and by the abolition of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the hour is prolonged in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is healed.
And Alcubasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you may see some of those abscesses already have opened the wound of the thigh, and the thigh has come into death, and its artery has been severed, and some go on to cut the epiglottis so that the thigh breathes over the place of the wound through some respiration, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, I order to leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then, accordingly, I order to treat the wound until it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it on her thigh and cut out a piece of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat this case, and gathered mugwort as it grows from the dead, and exposed the wound and stopped the bleeding which came from the wound.
Then I have confessed that she had not injured a vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her so that it healed soundly.
And she did not suffer any injury at all, not even in her voice, and after a few days she returned to her usual disposition.
And now I say that in the section of the felon there is no fear.
Capitol. XLIV.
On the section about an apostema that occurs on the eyelid, and is called an eyelid hernia.
This apostema, named eyelid hernia, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it occurs in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other way is similar to an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not make the patient think that you are doing this to him only for your own sake but for his benefit. And you probe that area and examine it closely. If you find a hard swelling resembling a knot, and it is not attached to any of the veins, then you incise it like a knot, extracting what it contains from the skin and subcutaneous tissue; otherwise, you thoroughly examine its entire nature, and place it where it needs treatment until it is healed.
Capitol. xlv.
On the section of types of knots.
Of the joints, these are the main types, and I have already described all the types of joints in the division.
And ensure that you distinguish between a knot and a hernia so that there is no doubt.
Therefore, I say that in a hernia there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subdued; and when complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that ciphac lion which is at or in the sac itself.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a swelling and is made thus, whether greater or lesser, and they are according to two species, either fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at the beginning from the flesh which is called intromes, according to its form that will appear in the capitol which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues gradually with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intromis and consider what is set in the cavity left by it.
And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intruded substance, then you know it is fat.
And if it is dry on the surface in the form of a cross as shown: As I have shown you, suspend it with a thread, and completely remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sac if possible over it, and extract the clean part at the knot.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that clean part, and you mark it several times to prevent it from breaking for any reason, and then you remove it in pieces so that it does not break.
But if it breaks for any reason, either a little or too much, the knot returns according to the best method.
And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powders, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the wound as it heals.
And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and treat that which is inside.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with a third part that is vitriol and let that stand for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to divide what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Let instruments be made of iron, of copper, of fallen edges properly, so that they penetrate into the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced [physicians], and they are named Albed and Berid.
These are of three spices, of which one is great, the other half and little.
The form of the experienced [physician] is great, the form of his/her hand:
The form of the experienced [physician] is half, the form of his/her hand:
The form of the experienced [physician] is little, the form of his/her hand:
It is advisable that they be for those abscesses, wounds, fistulas, and buboes, so that among them are those of the bones and other causes.
And let them be round, large, like large needles to which the threads are sewn, and they are made of copper, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of copper.
And they make experiences with black goose feathers, which are said to work because those with openings in their cavities have reflections that are reflected back due to their lightness.
And from three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the opening and its narrowing.
Form of the large experience with lead:
Form of the medium-sized lead experience:
Form of the small lead experience:
The forms of the pins are of three species. Some are simple long ones with only a curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium.
And some are solid pins, and they are of three species.
And some of those pins have two curvatures, and they are of three species.
And from them you have three curves, and they are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a single small curve, its form:
Form of a large single curve having two curves: Form of a medium single curve having two curves: Form of a small single curve having two curves:
Form of a large single curve having three curves:
Forma of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are cut and scored with nodes and apstemes, and they are of three species, some of which are large, female, and small.
Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma of the female scalpel:
Forma of the small scalpel:
The ends of those which are cut for making sections are acute, while the other ends are non-acute. They are not held in such a manner, but rather so that it is done judiciously during the excoriation of the nodes to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and for this reason they ensure the healing of the illness and bring about some tranquility due to the slight burning which facilitates the excoriation of the apsteme.
And these are the forms of the amedies, and they are of three species: large, female, and small, as you will see.
If they are made of mercury and resemble rays from which alcohol is produced.
And it is in the outer side punctuated with spatium hidden and there flows to the parts inside and outside, as you want, as you see fit.
The forms of spatia, which are hidden between the fingers and do not perceive the patients, are of three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of ventosa, in which the flow of blood is cut off, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of which:
They are made of mercury citri, round in some length, and are subtle.
And you should use these suction cups of different sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of bad blood occurs with speed in necessity, and when first not treated.
But do not use those to bleed in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as the creases of the legs and thighs, and the creases of the breasts, and the belly, and the armpits, and similar fleshy creases.
And sometimes small ones are made with those instruments, resembling small cups according to this form; through which the bad blood is drawn when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol. liv.
For the treatment of the breasts of men which are often affected similarly to women.
Some times the breasts of certain men are swollen; you should give the compliment of sleep as they begin to be hard, and then the breasts swell, and the women's breasts gather together, like Roman women.
And to those for whom you have this, cut along those sections according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then remove the growth entirely, fill the wound with red medicine, suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
If the breast droops towards the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then cut it into two lobes so that each lobe is contained within the other according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the core which is between the two edges of the wound, drain the pus, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until what corrodes are removed from the fatty tissues, and then cure that which is left to heal.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses where blood leaves through titillation.
These abscesses where blood leaves through titillation are of the kinds of scrofulous, hard swellings, which contain a boil that is extracted.
And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised at the lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of the sore has been evacuated, then you complete it with new cloth and leave it for another day.
And then the cloth be left there and treated with appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess of the glands and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the wound is extended to the point of becoming gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Chapter XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur through an arrow or vein.
When an arrow breaks an artery and the chain (vein) above it is consolidated, then dark spots appear as abscesses. And the signs by which it can be known that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you apply heat to the abscess, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
Of the section on this abscess, it is dangerous, and especially in those that affect the axillae, the inguinal regions, the neck, and other localized areas of the body; and since it is large, it should be avoided as much as possible, and those near the extremities or the head should be particularly avoided.
More about that which is due to the inflammation of the opening of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the tendon; then open the section with forceps near the artery, and deliver the tunics so that they are exposed.
Then place a needle over that area and make it penetrate into the other layer, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places, — which causes you to stitch in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temporal region.
Then puncture the area which is between two layers with a spatula so that it fills with the blood, and dissolve the abscess.
Then apply treatment in which powder is administered so that the layers fall; and cure it with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to venous obstruction, then take what you can of the abscess with your hand; then insert the needle at the place where you have taken out the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and put a double thread there, extracting that from the other side, and tie the abscess with good thread as I said to you in the grapevine thread of two parts on both ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will come out, then insert wax at that needle and leave all the abscess from the first puncture site, strengthen the other threads in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location where one sits on it, and when you incise the excess of the cord, leave what is attached to it.
Then place the powder you have submerged in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with ointments when it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess that occurs due to torsion of nerves.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion or work of superfluous matter.
And it is most frequent in the areas of the assistants or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are relaxed.
And it is a heavy abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the major parts of his body several of them, and when stretched by strength, one feels in it the patient's semblance of stupor.
And it is not an abscess attached to the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is allowed to move freely in all directions and does not go to the parts front or back.
So those that are in the joints do not need to be drawn out with iron, for strong pain will induce contraction.
But that which is in the head or on the forehead, apply the chain with trepanation. But if the abscess is small, then use it with force and cut away that part with flax.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and excise that part, and place something in its stead; and suture the wound, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol li.
The section on abscesses that occur on the cheek and those that occur in the abdomen.
Sometimes in some people, abscesses appear in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called fungous abscesses due to their similarity to fungi; the core of these abscesses is fine, but the head of the abscess is large; and the pus from them can be small, and they can also be greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one myself, in the abdomen of which there were two abscesses that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white cores, all with fine pus.
And the pus from those abscesses was discharged and would裂开，且有湿液不断地从其中流出。
So I incised them and treated one foot with 18 inches and the other with 6 inches.
And in the incision of them, consider whether the patient is cold and wet, and if the color of the abscess is white, wet, with a fine core; then incise it with a broad cut, and let it be cauterized in your presence with fire, for the discharged pus should be completely removed without infection; and if you see the pus, cauterize that area.
And if the patient is afraid and nervous, guard yourself from iron; rather when you take recently made lead powder, and strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; let it remain for two days.
And adjust closely to the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead gradually in that part, between which it is severed and falls by itself.
But if the part is of large size, then in cutting it there is some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure the area in which the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to cut part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, and looks bad; for such a part is thus cancerous.
And I will now recall the patient's condition nearby.
Capitol.lix.
For the cure of hernia around the navel.
Hernia around the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the cipha, which is over the abdomen, and through it the membrane or intestine protrudes according to the nature of other ruptures; or by a wound where fluid flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or by constricted ventosity within it.
If it is due to a fissure in the cipha and the swelling's color resembles that of the body, and the pain is severe and appears in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with greater diversity. When you press on that area, it becomes hidden under your fingers and quickly returns; it is firm in that place and requires frequent bathing and vigorous work to introduce water.
If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is clear and not obscured, neither constricted nor creased.
And if by scald, when these signs appear the abscess in black diminishing.
If by no flesh, when it is a heavy abscess, large and hard, and is situated according to a quantity.
If by humidity, when you touch it, it is soft.
And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scald from an artery, or a vein, or by humidity; then dig a little that you may avoid the cure of it, for there is fear and anxiety as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then dig a little that you may command the patient to have his/her own urine, and stand extended; then examine carefully around the circumference of the navel, and command him/her to stand with your hands on his/her sides over his/her lower abdomen; then circumscribe with a line in the circumference of the navel above the area you examined with the examination; then extend the size of the abscess upwards by about an inch; then draw a strong string or thread around the area and tie it properly.
And then push the center of the abscess outward over the intestine and insert your finger in that space to find the hernia; and if you have touched it or handled it with respect to the intestine, then you extract it quickly and push the hernia into the internal parts of the abdomen.
And if you have touched the tissue, then take it with forceps; and incise the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that knot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and let the area extend and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can drain, and then cover it with ointment until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is fleshless or due to moisture, then you must treat the boil as we have said and drain the pus or moisture, which you find there, and proceed to cure that which has been treated and strengthen the area.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of pain.
We have already said in the division about the types of pain and how they are treated with medicines, and that the cure is valid when it is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain generated by the method and care of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some types of pain are in a location where the eradication of it is possible, just as with a boil which is in the mammary glands or in the groin and similar areas, one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and hard, do not attempt to treat it as such, for I cannot heal from that alone nor have I seen another like it, nor one that can be treated this way.
And the operation on them is when it is allocated thus as we have said, that you first expose and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found, if present refill it clearly.
And prepare the patient for the preparation in which the operation is located, and then proceed with the cuts that lead to it; and ensure a concave surface all around with the needle for good excision without damaging any vital part of the body. And let the blood flow, and do not stop it lightly, and squeeze the wounds, and cleanse the thick blood with your hand or with an instrument at your disposal.
But if you find it difficult to control the thick blood from an incision in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the species of dropsy of water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of rickets alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of dropsy nor to the species of hydropsy, for that is fatal.
And when you have medicated this species of dropsy (timpanistre) with medicines and do not find your medicine effective, consider that if in the patient already exists debility due to another illness or another dropsy, such as it is in their cough or stomach issues and similar to those, then do not medicate with iron, for there is fear concerning this.
But if you see the patient with an excess of virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy solely, neither child nor old man, then the way of the operation for this is that you lift the patient between your hands, and apply your hand to their stomach to express it, pushing the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this form:
It should be of two sharp parts long, with acute extremities like a spear; yet in it there is some brevity little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and let it alone.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you examine the section you move away from the navel by the quantity of three digits to the sides, on its right above the pubis.
Yet if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the kidney, then your section be leftward from the navel by three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your section be on the right side.
And do not examine your section on the side where the illness is located to prevent superfluities from flowing to that area.
And then pierce the instrument completely through the length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and siphon, and you draw out that part; if it is the quantity of an ounce or so.
And then perforate the cavity so that the phlegm reaches the desired place, and this is the location of the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two in one part and one in another part; and the end is incised in the manner of a pen, as you see:
And at the end of the instrument above is a ring; when the instrument reaches the water, then it quickly indicates over the instrument, so that it evacuates a small quantity of water in half an hour. If you evacuate more from there than can fit in the hour, the patient will soon die due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents may occur as death approaches.
But evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the instrument and according to your interpretation of the patient's condition based on the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of the remedy.
And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it; so soon as it is stopped by the cord which stops it that you puncture it according to that manner.
And then repeatedly apply the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water but only slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a large quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy soil, and washing with pure water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mesentery and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitol lv.
For the cure of children who have urine collection sites that do not perforate.
Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of the mixture is not perforated (or it is pulled straight or is not in its place).
So the aperture should be perforated soon after birth with a subtle spatium according to this form:
Then place a thin lead nail and stitch it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate he should be helped and urinates; then return it.
And if you do not stitch the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
But the one that you pull out should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days before it is enlarged.
But those in which it is pulled out of its place, as said, the cause is due to those where at birth the defect is located at the end of the head of the vagina, so that it cannot urinate internally; while elevating the vagina with his hand above the parts above. This is not a generation defect, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and this is a malady that lasts.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perforation with a sharp blade, thus like the cutting of a feather, or any part you do not wish to leave behind, so that the vein comes out resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location as needed.
And watch that in your operation for the flow of sand, if you see any spots arise; and pause there where you are cutting the sand, and care for the wound until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
When this occurs in the prepuce at the head of the penis, with corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Spots appear in this condition on the penis and form an excrescence of raw flesh.
And of those two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
And of those two, one is non-malignant, cover it with a thin ligature and cut into that in which the disease resides entirely; then place your hand over it to immerse it in Egyptian ointment; then treat it with diyafic ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near the incision and around it.
But if the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised man, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the part inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; and then treat the part outside. For when you treat the outside simultaneously with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be infected.
And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the black foreskin with corruption. Then you should reduce all that is already degenerated and that is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它是由新鲜大黄粉、提炼过的铁锈和筛过的粉末制成的。
And then attend to the other cure while it is still fresh.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it is broken out.
And if the head of the abscess is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease drains through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that from which the prepuce is derived, and over which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue dissolves and the head of the abscess is completely released.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the abscess and the prepuce, and this is because the prepuce, when thin and light, can be perforated slightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a strip of the fine skin, which is already softened by the cold application to prevent it from sticking again.
And then apply a styptic substance when it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of infants and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as are other infections: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those related to it are properly in infants, it is necessary that we assign to it the best operation and the lightest way, losing nothing for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and this practice was merely acquired through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with cautery; and they use lint with honey and incisions with ungual blades.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or frankincense, or myrrh in the modification like unguent, because motas of the cord escape above, because the cord of the prepuce is doubled into two tunics, and remain one tunic down, and light pressure is forced to another incision and certain pain. And concerning the circumcision which is performed by apprentices, and is digital, of which cobblers use, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, for strong pressure enters into the wound.
In the operation with unguent, strong pressure you apply and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and when seen in such a manner that it does not require modification, and I have seen it.
More of the modification that is performed with scissors and unguents of myrrh, its quality, I have learned from experience, for the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore their sharpness above is thus as sharpness below; and so when you press your hand proportionally on two sharp points, and cut accordingly according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the myrrh in a figure containing the cord of the penis from all sides, by which no error occurs at all.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child remain mostly if it be of those who understand a little, that you bind the penis only in its foreskin, and let it out the next day.
And properly make that alleviation in every way that is within your ability of what receives its intelligence. And properly place the child among your knees preparedly, and do not be more than a hundred centimeters away; hide the scissors in your hand or hold the child's foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And properly insert your hand into the foreskin and blow into the urethra, and pull that out so that the head of the penis is erect, and properly modify it from what is aggregated in it due to impotence.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the handles are uncut and the others are cut, let the stem of the key be inserted, and the length of the two curved parts should be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that if you inadvertently remove the intrinsic tendon entirely or partially, you must make an incision.
Therefore, make sure that you extend that of your hour along your finger in front of the incision site and mark it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then mark it with a pin and make the incision there.
If they have passed three days and remain what is swollen due to the inflamed inguinal abscess, then you let this be until the abscess is lanced with a cautery, and excoriates that for facilitation, and incises that according to how it is prepared.
And guard the head of the swelling, for that will not be in it.
And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a stricture, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause known to the patient, then give him an extraction through an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be very fine, like a long quill in length similar to half a palm, with a very thin cane at its head.
And the method of urination through this is that you take a tube folded and tie it at the end with wool or cotton for good closure; and insert the ends of the tube into the part where the syringe left off, and cut with scissors if any part of the wool needs to be removed. Then strongly insert it into the tube with vigor; and quickly withdraw the syringe with force.
And make a cut on the patient's thigh, and pour the bladder and the penis with a mixture of oils, olive oil, and vinegar.
And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the urethra; and then fold the penis upwards at the point of insertion; and then push the probe inside until it reaches the bladder; and then push it further until it arrives at the cause of the pain, ensuring that the meat in which it passes is not tortuous.
And then slowly insert the needle into the wool, for the urine will moisten the wool.
And then extract it and apply urine for treatment. Use the probe continuously until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitulum 6.lix.
Of the quality of the catharsis of the bladder, we must use and prepare instruments which are suitable for this.
When there is an ulcer or abscess in the bladder, or a fistula, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you wish to drain fluids and medicines into it, then a device called a clampcedra should be made. This is its form:
so that at the end of it is closed,密封的部位。 And in it there are three openings: two on one side, thus placed.
At the beginning, it is concave, in which the contents are contained. Its size depends on how much it fills. When any cause draws out the humidity from within, it should be drawn out, and when expelled, it should also be drawn out. When expelled for a long time, naphtha is applied to the cloth in the openings of the instrument to serve as a clampcedra.
So, when you want to expel humidity from the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw out what is pushed towards the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the end of the reed in the vagina as we have advised in the incision; and then press out the moisture with what you press, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the malady will center there.
The form of the subtle crest where the bladder is located, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or tin, the top of which resembles a small feather, and place the wick inside cotton.
And then take a bladder of mule, place the moisture you want to crest in it, and tie it between two strong bands with double thread, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crest into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with moisture in a descending structure so that the malady centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
But if you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through all those stitches, as they are turned; then return the circle as it is returned, for when you stop at what you want from the humors, smell and waters.
Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, and place your hand there where the humidity will reach the bladder.
Capitol lx.
Of the extraction of pear.
We have already discussed in the division the species of pear and its cure with medicines, and the difference between a pear generated in the ovaries and a pear generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
And we have discussed the pear in which surgical operation is mainly performed, and sectioning.
And the pear generated in the bladder properly is that which is placed in the bladder.
And I proceed with that account in a clear and abbreviated manner.
Therefore, it is said that a stone formed in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of this are that urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its genitals, with reddened penile skin, and soon becomes swollen; and thereupon it bores into the anus instead.
And the recovery of children from this condition typically occurs within four years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. More in young people, it often affects those between them.
And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we reach the cure of this, we begin by modifying gout with a hot application which warms the entire opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone and we then investigate it.
And then place the patient on their side with their feet elevated and compress and massage gently so that the swelling descends to the base of the bladder, or rises only a few times.
And then place those cushions under your hands, and the others under the patient, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the side being treated.
And then apply that and all that area.
Then if you feel the swelling in the space, immediately apply heat to the area.
And if the swelling does not subside with your touch, then take some oil with your left hand index finger and insert it into the patient's anus. And apply heat to the swelling while keeping your finger in place. And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and drive out that which is in the parts outward, see the place from which you are separating it.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand draw back the codena which is placed above the location where the separation is being made.
And then insert a spatulum; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the fold of the left thigh; and let the separation be over that stone which you said is at the anus, and let the separation be transverse, so that the separation outward is wide and inward narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the stone is possible, and not greater, for we understand well the separation which you said is at the anus the stone should have the separation, and it is a surgically created opening.
And you shall know that from the heel there is some angle and margins, because the insertion of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which resembles a lion's claw, and is round, and is made of it a slight insertion.
And if that which has angles and margins is adjusted in the fissure.
And if not thus perforated, then you must engrave upon it, or strengthen it with a gesture decently made, the extremity of which should be thus like a file on which you engrave the heel, and do not deviate from it; or you must insert a thin instrument under its curved extremity.
But if you cannot do this, then you enlarge the hole a little, and if you wish a flow of blood, incise strongly in it with vitriol triossate.
But if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then push a little in that place; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to make an incision in that great section, for which accident happens to the patient one of two causes: either that he dies or that he ends up with continuous urinary distillation, because for this reason the place is not fully consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is within so that it may be expelled, or use forceps in the fracture to extract it from the parts.
So when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and cold water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then lift the patient's leg above the side of the bed, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
And when you have removed it, sponge the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazic acid until it is healed.
But if in the abscess you encounter a carbuncle, adjust and corrode it, resembling as if the blood is in the bladder congealed, and through it urine is forbidden (and this is known by the excretion of blood with urine), then interpose your said instrument into the abscess and extract that blood, for if Roman corrosive provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
Then wash the abscess with good wine, water, and salt, and oppose all sorts of substances, using what is most conducive to its healing while it is healing.
And keep the hours of the entire cure that you have placed between the thighs and apply the medicines which are laid over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine discharge is prohibited, then cure it by applying what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness; and now I instruct you: take a metal drill, of which this is the form:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the fist.
And then take honey, and tie it to the swelling, leaving the stone to prevent it from returning to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach the stone. And rotate the puncturer with your hand around the stone little by little, and you make the initial puncture, then let the other part penetrate; for the urine will soon be released.
And then press your hand on what is broken from the stone of the part pierced outside the swelling, for that is cracked, and the urine will pass through it, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not available to you for some reason that prohibits it, then tie honey to the stone, and another piece of honey above the stone. And then place something hot over the stone on that swelling between two bandages. And then extract that. And then untie the bandage and modify the suspended wound, which is made in the lesion.
And there is no need to tie the bandage with linen; do this so that the bile does not return to the bladder. Instead, tie another bandage above, for when the bile is untied near the edge of the wound, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
And for this reason, when you untie the bile above, you should raise the cord to the parts above, or let it return by your proper gesture, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol. lxI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stone in women is rarely generated.
But if there is a stone in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that a strong maiden who is a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who can describe whether she has had sex with the doctor when she is chaste, or whether she is one of the women who have husbands.
The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the operation on the hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the section for gout in women is far from the location of the gout, so you need a general section, and there is fear.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then find a wise and good woman who knows it, and such a person is not easily found.
But if you are lacking in that, then seek a wise and subtle woman, or present an experienced elderly woman who is skilled in dealing with women, or a woman who has part of this art.
Therefore, have her make the presentation, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the gout to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, so she must put her finger in the woman's anus and feel for the gout.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie down on it.
But if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and hold that well with good grip.
Then if you find it, gradually moisten that from the opening of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the depth of the thigh.
And then lie down on that application of the strength of the vagina, placing the depth of the thigh at any part where it is lying down and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not moistened by the stone, cut him off.
And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe over that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the quantity which he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And be aware that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and pungent, long and round, and having ridges.
So you be aware of the grains of pepper that you signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol tincture to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare among your instruments those specified for the extraction of pepper in men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of the blood comes from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow it to constrict downward; do not repeat this; leave the pepper in place and do not extract it, for strong lifting will cause the illness to worsen. And then cure the wound.
So when the sharp pain in the tooth has subsided after a few days, then the place will heal, and you return to your operation while the stone is forgotten.
Capitol lxii.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
An inguinal hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue, which is left when the testicle containing the humor is withdrawn, and it is called a ciphac.
And sometimes it is in the proper flesh, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the testicle between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but a tumor.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness, which occurs in the testicles, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to a blow given to the testicles.
And this moisture having spots of color, whether the color of it is declining to yellowish or reddish, or raw, or is black floury, or watery white, and this is what it is most.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: if in the bladder, which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly elongated like the shape of a hen's egg, and the root appears, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper skin, then the abscess is round, detached from the egg, and for this reason one estimates that it is another egg.
And if the moisture is between the root and the bladder, then cut away the root.
And to know the color of the moisture, you should probe the color of the moisture in the abscess through a small incision that precedes its form; and judging from what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of your arm, then command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
And then let the patient be supine on his back on some kind of cushion, and place your hand on his body.
And then sit you on the left part of him, and command the minister to stand on the right side of him, who extends his staff to one of the sides at the knee of the thigh and at the side of the navel.
And then take a spatula and split the knee of the thigh in the middle location along its length near the patella.
And make the incision according to the correct method, equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the thigh, until it reaches the white fat.
And excise it, observe, and guard it for this that you do not enter that; and your excision from which you excise it should be suspended at the uppermost and subtlely examine it according to the quantity possible.
And then perforate the bladder full of water with an ample puncture, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the bladder to the parts above; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the bladder in that manner which is possible for you. And incise that completely or in layers, especially its thin wall; for if you do not meticulously examine the incision, there is no assurance that the water will not return.
More so, if the humor proceeds from within the chain of the genitalia during your operation, when you have completed the sectioning of the bladder, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genitalia's chain with sutures, and properly care for it as with other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the humor, and properly care for it as we have said.
If the water is added in two parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, cut that part equally as you did in the other; and if it appears to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
Then you clean the wound, and insert wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil into the sections; place another piece of wool soaked in wine and oil over it, and extend that over two genitalia and the miracle of the belly; place further on top of this folded cloths and powders, and sprinkle those with grains of wheat according to this form.
Then place two cloths and fill them with pounded flax wool according to this likeness; make the ends of which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers. One end take into the buttocks between the two, and the second end attach to the part of the crotch, and leave the four ends on the thighs and other four on the garters, and all the structure be fitted in the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section with iron; you should take a thin surgical cautery and incise at the cord of the genitals, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white cyst containing the water is uncovered, then take the cautery in this manner: and it is similar to the Greek letter.
And then puncture the cyst, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then enlarge the cyst with incisions, and excoriate it with incisions, and burn it with a thin ignited cautery; and incise it according to what is possible until you remove all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire does not reach.
And know that this operation is safer and further from the risk of infection, better than an incisional operation.
But if this operation causes you any complications such as an abscess during the incision or cautery, or the risk of infection, then treat it as any complication that arises from this, according to the cure which is said.
If the patient is faint and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I advise; and when it is certified that you, according to what we have said about significance, know that that hernia is dangerous.
When you must place the patient on a elevated cushion, then perforate the abscess in the lower part below the spine, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the incision be wide enough to drain all the water.
And then place your hand over the correct spot, clamp it, and release it, to allow the remaining water to drain. And then care for it so that the wound heals.
If, however, there is a contrary movement of the water in that hour, then perforate it: this is not done except because the white gauze in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary movement and prevents the flow of water. Then you should put into the wound a needle or instrument through which the water from the dropsy can be extracted, the form of which precedes; or apply a small ligature to the wound.
And you shall know that the water returns, and is agueguada for about six months or sixteen days; and when it is agueguada, then be perforated according to that method, for thus the malady will pass its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
You shall know that in the section about this hernia, there is a danger of losing life due to serious complications; for I have seen its disappearance and been saved by the better method.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the parts where the glands are conjoined, and this is done for various causes: either due to acute superfluity that aggravates, which spreads to the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the part of the body, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
And if the abscess is firm and black in color, it does not respond to treatment.
And sometimes it is caused by the concretion of arteries, and by inflammation of those arteries, as can be perceived in the memory of them, or by inflammation of veins.
More than that, which is caused by the inflammation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the abscess when one compresses that area with the thumb; and it does not come from those touches.
More than that, which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse from that area; one should not apply compression with the fingers.
And it is possible that sectioning be performed on this type and on the other tissues; for you may incise the channel of the genitius, then extend the hook above, extract that from the white cleft, deliver the suspensor of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensor after you deliver that from all parts of the hook.
Then if the humor has already become consolidated in those parts, you must extract the humor and incise there.
And if there is an adhesion due to some cause in the cavity, or between what is under the flaps, you must release all that adhesion and incise there with a round incision.
But if it is native flesh in the place of the adhesion, which is behind, you must incise all that is there, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then, when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Capitol lxiv.
On the treatment of hernia due to vitiation.
Vit is an apостиma enveloped by some envelope similar to a sprout, and it makes physical exercise and movement difficult for the patient.
And in the cure of this illness there is fear concerning what preceded it.
However, know that they will perform an operation according to how the first symptoms appear.
And I say that you should cut the illness on a raised cushion; and then place the scrotum over the pubic area; and have the cord of the testicles on your thumbs, and another minister by your side to hold them tightly as they are proven by the windpipe.
And then incise sharply with a scalpel across the middle of the vessels between which the vessels are exposed.
And then excise all parts as we have instructed in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie one end of the thread at the first location where you incise the vein, and tie the other end at the last of them. And then incise those in the middle place according to a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the leaking and corrupt humors.
And then cure the wound by the healing of other wounds in which you want health to be generated so that the vessels which we do not affect with either genius are not harmed.
But if it happens to all the vessels, then consider that the testicles are extruded or that the testicles become cold due to the vessels, because they will be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and will be established, or that they become cold by themselves and are no longer vigorous.
Capitol. lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends over the abdomen from the groin area of the inguinal ring, because allowing the intestines from that rupture into one of the openings.
And this rupture is either of the ciphac or excencio of it, and these two species occur due to certain causes: or percussion, or by heat, or by cry, or by elevation due to some heavy cause, or by similarity.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the ciphac, is that it occurs little by little over a long time, and does not occur suddenly, and is an abscess equally inside the vein where the ciphac compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to sectioning of the ciphac, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; and it is an abscess that appears different from the apparent vein nearby, and this is due to compression of the intestine, and its body in the parts outside the ciphac.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes it flows through a tear in the intestine, and here it is retained, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and worse pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there must be fear, for it is necessary that the attack be avoided in that.
And the manner of the operation is that you command the patient to return the intestine with his hand to the internal parts of its cavity if it obeys on its return, and then place him on his side between your hands, and elevate the patient's legs.
And then open the scrotal sac, which is attached to the upper parts, and incise the scrotal sac entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the incised section according to where you need to cut the section with those.
And if the section according to the quantity that you find possible, let the wound be thoroughly closed.
And then scrape the scrotal skin which covers the scrotal sac, exposing the white tough layer of each part.
And then insert your thumb where the testicle is attached, between the white membrane, which covers the scrotal sac, and between the second membrane, and separate the adhesion in the rear part of the scrotum.
And then place your hand on the scrotum and its surroundings, and at this point extend the white cloth with your left hand, and raise the head to the section; and command the minister to extend the head upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with complete solution.
And near the ties, it is said that this is not any cause of the intestine enveloped in the white cloth. But if you find any cause, then you peel it off to the abdomen, leaving it there.
And then incise at the part left by the string of the testicles along a section from which flows both blood and lymph as we have recounted in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply linament as we have recommended (and after several times, the white cloth is seared, which we mentioned near the incision where there is a flux of blood, for several times this occurs). Leave the linament so that it can dry.
If the onset of the condition is delayed, then apply cold water and place it over that area as we have said.
And then treat the wound on the other side of the body where the wounds are not yet healed.
Chapter LXVI.
On hernia ventosa.
In this hernia, there is nothing seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first doctors said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia case; which is to tie the vessels near the section where there is ease of passage for them; then dry out the middle part and apply a poultice with what I did there, while the vessels are falling.
And treat the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
On the displacement that occurs in the ankles.
Some times during a rupture in the arteries as we have said before, you should place the area.
And the surgeons do not give any cause of the hernias to the genius; and if they do give, it is few; and return then in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged, an adjustable fissure in the chyle channel occurs through which the hernia descends into the chyle channel; and this happens due to the extension of the chyle channel, which as we have said is in the arteries. The cause is that the chyle channel extends, and soon becomes softened, and the area becomes suppurated, so you should place it.
And the cure for it is with a cautery as described in the preceding narrative.
And some times it is cured with iron according to this method: and it is that the patient lies on his back between your hands, and soon after drying the area of the rupture of the abscesses, you cauterize it by burning according to the width as much as three fingers' breadth.
And then firmly strengthen the white cloth that is under the knee once it is uncovered.
And then take the needle and place one on the prominent part of the knee, and press the other on the pubic bone.
And then stitch the two prominent parts at the end of the needle on the knee, and adjust one to the other for the suture.
And then extract the end of the needle, and do not go outside the knee area entirely, nor extend the wound, nor other causes as I trust in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then care for that during the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the edges, clean it and restore the wound while it is still consolidated; for the knee contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
And use cautery here, for it is closer to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
Of softening the scrotum.
When the scrotum is swollen in some men, it is softened by this because the flesh that is within it is softened, and one should guard against it.
Then it is necessary for the one who is attending to the cure of him that he cause the patient to lie on his back according to his strength, and completely spread the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then adjust two folds at the suture.
And if you wish, suture the excess of the softened scrotum at three or four places and make a firm suture.
And then incise between the stitches; and afterwards cure by the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the threads fall out.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
Know that castration is excommunicated in our law, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this libretto; and the necessity of remembering it is required for two reasons, of which one is that when asked about it as a doctor, one knows how to cure it if it happens; and the other reason is that we may sometimes need castration for our young animals, such as pigs, goats, and similar beasts.
And thus it is said that castration is performed in two ways: either by excision or by incision.
In that which is performed by excision, the way of the operation is to cut the beast in tail water when the seeds of it are softened and relaxed and hang down. And then take those away with your hand when they are resolved and do not appear as marks upon touch.
In castration performed by incision and excision, make sure that you hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then locate the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
And then incise those pus that you have excoriated. And do not incise those of the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves some cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation.
And when the wound is healed, treat the sore.
Capitol.lix.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one is where the space between the testicles becomes enlarged, and in the other, a female-like characteristic appears between the two testicles.
And sometimes from that condition, it urinates, which urine is located in the space of the testicles.
In females, it is a special case: where the female characteristic over the pubis is like two testicles in a male, slightly more rounded at the front part like a male's scrotum with the testicles.
And the cure consists of three species: from two of the men and one species of the women. And you must cut those tissues apart where the pain escapes from there, and then cure those with the treatment for other wounds.
And in the second species of men from which urine is in the cord of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is performed there.
Chapter XXI.
On the womb and flesh protruding due to women's causes.
When the womb is strong, it is tightly positioned due to natural causes; and in some cases, it becomes enlarged in some women to such an extent that it sags like in men and passes during intercourse.
Then you must have the excess of the womb in your hand or a cloth and cut it out.
And do not finish the cut too much in the lower part of the womb, lest it causes a flow of blood.
And then attend to that cure of the sores until they are healed.
Hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother before it fills that space, and strong flesh is situated outside according to the likeness of the cord (and for this some first called this "caudate malady"); therefore we shall cut thus as we cut the membrane, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the cure of alratica.
Alratica is when the membrane of the woman is not perforated, or is slightly torn. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady that preceded it, and it is caused either by flesh that is not properly fitted or by a thin or thick cord.
And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or in her sides, or in the upper part of her abdomen, or in the lower part of her abdomen. It is forbidden during pregnancy, conception, and childbirth, and particularly forbidden during menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, promptly; but if it is not obvious, then you approach that area with your fingers or with the rod.
But if the obstruction is due to fine fluid, and is close to the two lips, then you touch and disrupt that area.
And you place powder over the two lips, and then place your fingers with the index fingers on both sides near the area.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips forcefully until that fine fluid is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take some wool and immerse it in oil, place it over the area, and keep someone watching the place to prevent the incised area from healing too quickly.
But if the fluid is thick and substantial, then you must incise that area with a lancet or with a leaf of myrtle.
If the obstruction is due to flesh, suspend it by an ounce, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites and wounds, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with honey.
And place a wide leaden tube there so that the inflammation does not become slightly consolidated.
And keep it there for some days and apply cold water.
And place it there during the treatment for consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, and then incise according to this manner. If it is due to a chronic abscess, in the chronic abscess which is in the mass, do not apply any iron in any manner.
Capitol. lxxiii.
For the treatment of hemorrhoids and ulcers and red soreness that occur in the vagina of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins within which blood continuously flows; and as ancient hemorrhoids, they form lumps.
And I have already said in the division of their species and the signs of them, and will say those that receive treatment and those that do not receive treatment.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and lumps when in the prolapse of the anus and do not appear externally, then in those where treatment has not been done, do not proceed with treatment.
But those that are in the anus orifice and on which sensation is present, are those that can be treated.
And it is recommended that you insert the woman into a warm bath and then extend the lumps with scissors, or with a rough cloth, and incise them with reasons.
And then powder over those veins the flux of blood from one of the powdered inspissative powders by six bites, as you would a face and appearance to those.
And then foment the soles of their feet for an hour, and place her in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then apply that paste in a decoction of sumac and of cloves and of walnuts and of appearances.
And then take flour of wormwood and mix it with honey and wine, and make an ointment with this.
And if the blood is absorbed, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two ventosas, and to the breasts make six incisions.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of woundwort with fermented wine, and apply it to the place; and place an ointment on the area until it is healed.
And cure him who is sick.
Capitol LXXIV.
On the perforation of the eye in the mayor.
Various specific cases of abscesses occurring in the mayor, such as carbuncle, abscess, ulcer, adhubela, erythromema, fistula hemorrhoids, and thy, as well as other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these ailments and the specifics of them, as well as their signs, and their treatments in the division.
And fear that I mention in this treatise on abscesses to cut which appears in the mayor when it is one of the abscesses that gather health, and if you want to know how the operation is performed for it.
Then consider if the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if cat over that the sensation, when there are no punctures in it, and cure that with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her on her side and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs. Place her arms behind her hips, and tie quilts with linen in accordance with what is appropriate.
Then the midwife should stay by the wound straight and administer the instrument through which the space of the vagina has been opened, the shape of which will be described in the cases that will be discussed later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the edge of the vagina of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not be more than the edge of the vagina and help alleviate the pain. But if the instrument is larger than the size of the bowels, then cover it with powder on the texture of the bowel's size so that no foreign object enters the bowel's cavity.
And cover it so that the vitrige that runs in the duct of the gallbladder is placed above, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vitrige until the orifices of the bowels are opened.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and wet, then cover that part by washing the head of it with spatum (a type of sponge or cloth).
And when the bile is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in mild olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency; and place the lint on the area in the bowels.
And place over the bowels and on the pelvis a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it is to be treated for about two days with ointment suitable for what needs to be healed.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and wine, then immersed in water in which is dissolved juice of rue or wormwood, and then returned to the application.
And if the wound is deep inside the liver, then beware that you must not proceed with the treatment, but take care to do as we have said in the division.
Capitol.lix.
To teach midwives how to properly apply medicines to bruises when they appear according to an unnatural figure.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs. When you see the female expressing pain at the openings and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is washed with what comes from her, and hastens the appearance of the bruise, then you know that this part appears according to a natural figure, and its appearance is on her head, and the second one is either above or suspended or pendant from the navel.
When you see those signs, then cover the patient's abdomen so that the embryo descends gently; when it is on its head, turn the patient and let the second one perform a good cleansing of those superfluities.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and unclean, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the patient is situated in front of the head of the patient and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its side, or its head, or its hand, or its belly, and it is firmly attached to its neck, resembling unclean figures.
For necessary causes the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those, and what each figure means so that it is significant and placed accordingly.
When the pain is situated on its head naturally, and it is vehement for the woman and made difficult for her, and sometimes weakens her virtue, then do that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek and honey oils.
And then insert the needle between his so-called small spinals and open a gap at the second one, or dry out that one with its nail into which runs what is in it of moisture. And press the woman's belly until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be lubricated with oil of pennyroyal and oil of fennel.
And then command her, by the chrism, that she inhale it while in a sitting position; and cover her mouth and nose for about an hour until the fetus is fully expelled.
And if the two parts of the fetus are already fully expelled at the beginning, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation. But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and then hold the bench over the ground; the woman must be held so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not already turned inside and the cut is closed, then incise there and extract the clot or draw the body with a cloth and extract it equally, so that it will be thoroughly cleansed.
When the cut is over its feet, then push those parts inwards, and gradually make the cut smaller, and ensure that you pinch a piece of it and slowly stretch those parts little by little.
More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that area expand with a compress, for it will be thoroughly cleansed if God wills it.
And if it is not thoroughly cleansed by what we have recommended, then return the cut to its smaller size gradually as you place it according to a natural figure, for it will then be thoroughly cleansed by slight incision.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, grind them together in the mortar with good pounding, and apply this to the woman's skin, just below the lower part of her abdomen. And then make that cut in clear water, when you can reach the hypochondria.
And when you notice that the parts around the sore are alleviated, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it. And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a cauterizing implement, and immediately perform a snuffing operation at the mouth of it, and lift it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause the wound to heal quickly.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Tighten the hand on the reduction of the patient's hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and apply it there.
And if it cannot be applied, then place the stone on the loins, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and then administer liniments which you have prepared from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then place the stone on the seam, and study the reduction of the hand, and tie the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman sneeze and command her to hold it until the wound is stitched.
Raise the foot above the heart spread out their hands and the foot's surface is towards the palm of the hand. Make sure the midwife holds the foot and gently rotates it little by little, so that it becomes easier to manage.
And when it is equalized and settled, then place it over the thigh as we have advised with oil and ointments.
And then command that it be moistened little by little, and when you have done this, then pour the decoction over a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be warm. And make the patient breathe through the nostril. The prepared fetus is placed on the side.
When the mother's pains occur according to this method, consider it, and then incise the second stage with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is hanging over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the episiotomy, so that it is not retained and leads to complications.
And then push the fetus to the internal parts between which you place the other as it fits, and order the woman to hold herself several times, and the pain will be slightly alleviated, if God wills.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins or spots of many fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes there are even three or four. But this is strange and worth investigating; mostly these are causes from nature, and not from a living cause.
And regarding these, whether they are multiple or a second one, they are separated by ciphac. They distinguish those within the ligament at the navel of each of them. Sometimes they are naturally expelled after several times as if it were a fetus through a light natural expulsion, and some remain for several times as if they cannot be expelled, as we have reported.
And if they are difficult to expel, you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures. Then you care for them as we have reported.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figure as it is prepared for her bringing about health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Some gestations are formed in the matrix one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten, and you must verify that a female aborts bearing a six, and another ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measure of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife that she holds to it when it seems like this, and therefore places her hand on it according to what is proper.
Chapter LXXVI.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of medication and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. Consider whether the woman is of good constitution and not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
When the woman is placed lying on her back, and her head is inclined sideways, and her thighs are elevated.
The minister should hold that [area] with two hands or tie it to the bed so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the mare with oils, honey, and juice from alfalfa and fennel and lemon.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation in the mare, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers should be placed on the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be delivered through its head, and then place the fingers in the folds of the head, or at the neck, or at the mouth, or at the palate, or leave the beard, or at the furcula, or at the proper locations on the ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
And if the descent is on his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And let him hold the thumb with his right hand, curve it at that place which is between the fingers of his left hand, and insert your hand easily, placing the thumb in one of those places we have mentioned, until you reach the affected area.
And then place and keep the other thumb, or the third if necessary, in such a way that it is an equal counterpressure, and not extension according to its straightness alone.
And let it be gently moved in all directions, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
And let it be between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert those expertly and rotate them where the retention is.
Then if the part of the fetus is left out, let the fingers be inserted where it may be; and do so while all the fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is inserted first, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and soon extract it while all of it is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or in the wrist.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences contraction during insertion, or there is water retained in its head, then insert a corkscrew between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be described among the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: then incise that area with a ring knife, or use the alundat as we have said; and soon extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is pressed and constricted, you should open the furcula, at which point let the humidity that is in the feet be infused.
And if it is not complicated, nor opposed to incision, then you should cut the head as soon as possible according to what seems possible.
And if the parts below the belly are suppurated or in edema, then you must perforate it at which point allow the humidity that is within to drain.
And if the fistula is near the feet, then the attraction of it is slight and its direction to the mouth of the main vessel is slight.
And if it is constricted, you should incise the belly and the foot, at which point you must extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the belly and the foot at the point where what is within flows out.
And if the other limbs are swollen and return to their normal state, then the surgeon should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the main vessel is opened, then she should insert her hand into the groina vein, and search for the head, and push it with her fingers into the mouth of the main vessel, and then insert one or two unciae, and push them there.
And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then ensure that it is not pressed on; first, ensure that you administer an effusion of moist fatty causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the pus is on his side, then it is possible to lance it: and administer what we have said about lancing the live abscess.
And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the abscess.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the main vein.
And if there is a flow of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the other fire is the death of another. It happens that after a long time a boil forms in the same place; and when it inflates open, it begins to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed my hand over it using some strong adhesive plaster, and applied an osseous substance to it, and after a few days, I applied another. I was greatly surprised, for in the wound there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were from the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I cauterized the wound, and extracted the bones from it. The woman was in such a condition as to have passed this way for a long time, and I cured her with a small incision.
And I do not consider this strange, but rather that in this there is science and help for what the physician administers through his hand for treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form for vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you join the ligaments, at which joining there are two vertigo stones at the ends of two rods. However, let this vertigo stone be more subtle in structure, and made of eba or wood.
And let the width of each rod be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. Let the length of each be a palm and a half; and in the middle location of the two rods, there are two joints of that same type of rod, which are already fixed. The length of each joint is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional items be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they be open when you move the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one similar to that, fine and very light:
Make it of silk or linen thread according to the likeness of forceps. But at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of those pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the uterus, so that the pincers do what you want.
The form of the virtue which the ancients would say:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Form of holding in which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like drawing pliers, into which is inserted and contained. Form of holding lightly:
Form of holding with one hand having a spine:
Form of holding with one hand having two spines:
Form of spoon having two extremities, in which the head is incised:
Form of two large spoons:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of those are multiplied, the workmen should prepare them, making their operation as light as possible and providing more of them in quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is urgent.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose. If she gives birth by this means, it is well.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and pause there over burning herbs near the mother's mouth, as with calamus, rue, nettle, camomile, scirpus Arabic, and cinnamon bark. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane tube in the mother's mouth, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then do that sneezing exercise as we have said before, and the second one shall be done quickly.
And if this does not work for this cure, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in the herb extract of helichrysum, and then insert that into the womb and seek out with that the second one, as you have found. And then take it and extend it little by little. And if it is attached at the base of the mother's hand, then insert her hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little according to correctness so that the mother does not fall due to the strong pull. Before this is performed on both right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and the application of an oil with herbs.
If all the causes we have recounted are not exhausted, then guard that you do not fatigue her repeatedly in abstraction, but instead anoint and apply tetra-pharmaca to the area at the entrance of the large intestine near the woman's thigh; thereafter chrismate it with ointment and tetrapharmacon; for this will cause it to diminish and be resolved within a few days and will be forgotten.
When it flows, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then ensure that sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies are administered for this.
Some of the Ancients have recommended sub-fumigations with nitre and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menses and the second passage:
It should be made of iron or copper.
And place the thin end in the cone and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation over the flames.
And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
When the child is sick and the anus is not perforated, which have already been dressed with a fine and padded material. Then have the midwife perforate with her said dressing; or, if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and be sure that she does not touch the wound.
Then place it over the area enveloped in wine and oil; and apply the ointment until it is absorbed.
But if you fear it has dried out, then place a tube in the tract for several days, and wait until the child is ready to digest.
And if an abscess forms in the anus for the consolidation of a boil or an apsema; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge.
The fistulas that discharge lower down are nodacious and gross, those that discharge close to the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And when that nodosity is old and flows with watery white or subtle suppuration, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what they result from those due to discharge and windiness; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in discharge, and strongly are they caused by those worms.
And some of these fistulas, in certain cases, penetrate into the space between the bladder and the flesh of the groin; and those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the scrotum.
And to know whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttock or does not penetrate, insert your finger into the buttock and carefully introduce a fine probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no purulence.
But if there is hardness, then insert a small probe of lead or horsehair between which you feel the tissue or hair.
And if you do not feel it at all, nor proceed from that any cause of evacuation, worm, or hardness, as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrant, and you should apply a cure.
And when the fistula is penetrant into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then its significance is retention of urine from that and prohibition thereof until the area has been medically consolidated.
But if it is penetrant into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then its sign is that the tissue permeates here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the part; and that it has always been redness; and that it does not respond to that medical treatment, nor is it consolidated by ointment.
And in all those penetrant fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of those is work and the diligence of the surgeon over which they are established.
In those that are not penetrating and not old, cure them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already applied and prepared.
And the patient lies on their side with their knees drawn up to their chest, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a lead tube or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, where you can feel the passage of the tube.
And if the patient feels pain around the throat, then you should insert your thumb along the throat.
And if you feel the tube already by itself easily penetrating through your thumb, or something between your thumb and the sore or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure in that area, as we have said.
But some may say that it is cured in some men quickly.
And concerning the treatment in which hope for healing lies, you should use a thin cautery according to the width of the fistula, as is previously described, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you can feel that all those fused flesh areas that resemble feather canes are thoroughly treated.
And then cure that which is with blisters enveloped by bandages between which all those flesh parts that are adhered, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is healed, well; and if not, then it is not healed in some time through another cure.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate deeply, you have said that which is in the anus, and between it and the probe that is often of flesh or cloth, and dry the fistula in what seeps from the surface of the wound, then dry the wound from the beginning of the fistula, and you must dry the probe, so that the drying reaches the place where the end of the probe passes, and through the probe it is freed and healed.
And then cleanse those fistula tissues which are similar to the quill of an eagle and do not rot from any other cause.
But if a flow of pus comes between you and the operation when inside those tissues, then let it be more severe and of the lighter instrument use a cautery by fire or with acute medicine, for the cautery by fire makes two good habits: it adjusts those tissues, and the removal of pus through the drying.
And then cure that which is with cold veins enveloped in skin or cut threads between the areas, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh generating and consolidating.
And in those medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when once it is restored, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the anus and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire with it.
And if the wound is touched and between you and her there is a veil of flax or flesh, and is close to the penetration, then it is not an operation in it but according to the way of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either to cauterize that as we have said; or to excise it until you achieve the cavity of it so that you can insert and cure it properly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of injuring the vein containing the cord, and acting against the patient's will; then cure that as we have said which will surely be healed; or extend that veil and cleanse that pus which excise that inside near the anus, as we have said, either by touch or by another pointed instrument, and then modify those fistula-lacerated tissues which are in the region where you can achieve desquamation; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and open the fistula near the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and position it at the cleft of the buttocks near the surface of the body with the needle and along the margin of the buttocks, then test for a perforated extremity as if piercing a needle according to this form.
And insert it there, wrapped in several threads or around them; then insert the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttocks inwardly, then you withdraw the thread in such a way that you insert your hand into the buttock; withdraw the end of the thread and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each one, and leave it for one or two days. When more of the tissue can be incised, strengthen the area where the tissues between the two ends of the thread are incised, which should fit well.
And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula's openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but do so gently, for it is not your task to injure the patient; and place something inside that will heal.
The shape of the spatum spinos used when the fistula is slit: the curvature of one part is acute while the other part is not, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, just as you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be classified into two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a date. And of these, they can be small and large, with the pain coming from them for varying times, some permanent, and affect the outside of the anus, as well as its extremities.
However, those that affect the outside of the anus are according to the degree of low humidity, from which yellowish water or a little of bloody discharge continuously comes, and are according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the bowels is that you command the patient to lie down and to press between where the bowels are and where the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you lift up and suspend with your fingers those that you feel at your patient's wrist, and then press down on those to find their pulses.
But if the fingers are not felt due to the moisture and softening of those [arteries], then take a rough cloth or thin or flaxen bandage, place them on the ties named, and then press down on them and sprinkle some powdered caustic substances near the incision, so that they act as a cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter of cauterizing. And then cure them with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then apply a small bite of cauterization on the patient with a cauterizing iron, and wash it with that fluid from the bowels which causes slight evacuation when the patient is pressed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is light, then take them with your finger or pinch them with forceps and cut them off, and then cure them as we have said until they are healed.
And if you have an incision, you must suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and make that pass through the needle into the opposite part, and wrap both ends of the thread around the part below the needle, and longitudinally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong tension, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
Do this to all of them, and leave one open without stitching it, so that the excess blood from the wound can flow through it.
And place a cloth soaked in oil rubbed or in ointment over the anus; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then let that which contains it rest; and when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or other treatment until it is healed.
And since they are old and not useful in medicine, it is custom to cauterize them with the point of a needle or with your finger until they become moist and then apply the ointment on top, which prevents their healing; and then cure those that have healed.
And when you cauterize them with stronger cautery than the first, until they become scalded and excoriated; and then cure those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not just any round spot according to the color of the body, resembling a potato, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains you must treat them.
And then cut what is in the circuit of the key and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and place care there.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in its chapter.
More commonly, a small sharp, fistula-like protuberance appears on the surface of the body, and veins show visible spots in most children.
And the treatment is to extend and cut that, or to tighten it with a needle or with a pin that goes inside. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a large fibrous or fistula-like protuberance appears on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the sting of a wasp, and is formed around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a pen needle or a volt meter needle, strong, and place it over the wart between which you contain the circle of the needle from the parts of his body; then rotate your hand around the needle while you insert what is within the circuit of the wart, and pause it in the depth of the flesh, and eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of flax or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, hard (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the finger is obscured and the rotation of that [needle] is concealed.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart as described earlier in the cauterization of a warty growth on the head.
By means of the instruments that you will use to give cautery.
Sometimes cautery is made of silver or tin or flax metal that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you will use, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those of whose buttocks are painful or sore, the cauteries for them should also be small.
The form of striking hard and little:
The head of the catheter above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, made subtil; and on one side of the tube there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the hole should be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one a little smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be a palm's length.
And it should be pierced with holes like it is wound; and the space which is between the holes the thickness of a finger.
Then insert into those holes strong raw honey or something wrapped in them; adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed in it, make a straight cut in the head of the catheter between two distinguishable places with strong constriction, and then strike each hole: More specifically, the quality of striking each one is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and ensure that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
And the patient is laid on his back, elevates his hips, and places something under them; then applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste to the end of the cautery; inserts it into the anus, and the minister takes the bag and squeezes out two more times with force so that everything in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; finally removes the crista and the patient lifts his hips to the wall.
And if the medicine forces him to void, have as much as he can; and if he sleeps all through the night, it will be more effective.
More so if you circumcise him for abdominal distension and the voiding of urine, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or apstemes in the anus, then use a fine, lion-shaped catheter from among those catheters for which children are considered criteria.
Of the cure for the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the cure for the plagues what was proper for the libera, and I now speak of the cure for those more and with medicines according to the complement.
Therefore, it is said that the plagues are diverse according to what causes the plagues and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
And the causes by which stones form in plagues are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or an incision of a sword or knife, or a blow with a lance, or a blow with a rod, or an arrow, or something similar to those causes of motas.
Moreover, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or something similar to those of the limbs.
And I am recounting the cure for some plagues so that you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head plaques, for the recall of the composed ones will come at the beginning of the third capitol.
So say that when an injury occurs in the head with a simple plaque and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow by a stone or something similar, and has already cracked the skull so much only and is a large swelling and you fear an impending bad outcome of apostema, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and you extract from it as much blood according to the quantity of its virtue if no other cause prohibits bloodletting, especially if the blood that results from the injury is little.
And the bloodletting should be from the opposite side of the injured area; and one must guard against swelling, and against bad outcomes from heavy food and drink.
But if some cause prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
And place your hand over the plaque, if there is an apostema, applying cold fomentations in olive oil or in wine that contains astringents.
But if it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own secretion and the air has not changed there, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a cut and the edges do not fit properly due to swelling, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe in suturing them.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and flesh, and it is not a retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then incise that area and properly cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which they take pleasure: meats and vegetables similar to their usual diet, until they recover.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that area and drain it, and properly cure it.
If in these swellings the artery or vein from which the flow of blood can occur is present and cannot be severed by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that unsevered one, then you incise it with a spatula or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood flow is abscindit.
If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; sprinkle this powder over them, having first prepared that which prevents the air from affecting those.
The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts blood from a dragon, and three parts cauterized fat; mix them all together thoroughly and sieve them. Fill the swelling with this mixture, bind it well with a good bandage, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then bind it above with powder and leave it, and do not loosen it while it is not poulticed, for the medicine will not penetrate it until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done solely with a cautery, when in your presence there is none of dragon's blood.
And this operation is performed on large boils when you determine that they should be paused over those and stretched, and on recent boils close to their surface, which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this poultice in its position. But then treat those as we have said, try placing it over those warm, digestible ointments, or place it over those mixtures of flour from the oven with water and honey that produce heat; and place the other treatment over them until they heal.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone of the boil, and it is small, then you extract that with tweezers.
And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
Of the boils on the neck.
If the pain occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head pains when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no engine but that it should be avoided, curing it in such a way as zinc and zegi are said to be vitriol and resemble them in corroding the nerves and opposing those. And do not place any cause of cold on the pain, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
And if what is cured by light medicines, such as is caused by washing with water twice, some times infused in olive oil rosy or unrosy, and treated when washed with water twice and the other soles mined according to this manner, then apply a moisturizing ointment.
But if the pain is great, then perform缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在治愈后用粉末处理。
If at the wound there is depth or accidents in the lower part beneath it, then perforate that in the most compressed area.
If the wound has already incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or bind it, or cauterize that if necessity prompts you to do so.
If the vertebrae of the collarbone are already incised or completely cut, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound by suturing over the bone of the collarbone and do not touch that; proceed equally with that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with a proper structure, leaving that for some days; then treat that with ointments in which stiffness and excitation are mixed until it is healed.
If the wound in the bone has already been cleaned, then tap that, and if it has fragments of bone, extract all those that you can; what appears unremovable, leave that until the wound becomes suppurated, and is separated, with relief to the swelling.
And if the injury is recent, then powder it over that powder which you are recommended. But if in the injury a fistula is formed, then cure that as you will recall from the following chapter which will come soon in this section.
If it is a wound from a spear or a sword, and you percuss its depth, then consider more whether the injury has any swelling when the patient faints; then you know that the injury is fatal.
And if there is no depth and the injury is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not strengthen it so that the blood does not remain deep in the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further fainting; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then you pack the wound with lint to let it drain what comes from the moisture; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is in the injury drains properly.
If however more than three days have passed since the onset of the plague and no spasms or heart tremors nor constriction of the lungs occur, and other good dispositions improve, then you may conclude that the plague is healed; then treat both with calamine and other therapy until it is cured.
If the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time has been opened, you may conclude that a fistula has formed; then treat it according to its own rules.
And if the plague is due to a wound from a sword or dagger, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or toe, then treat it according to what was previously mentioned for suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
If it has already perforated the bone, and you are now incising the flesh, then you should torque the wound and probe to extract those pieces, if they are separate. If they are not separate, then leave them alone until the wound drains, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the treatment in cure is what we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I believe that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not take care to prevent their interference in their place soon, for it opens up and becomes swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is in the two species mentioned above.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is according to four methods, but two sutures are common and suitable for the sutures of other body pains.
And two other proper sutures communicate to the other wounds, more importantly, most proper in the suture of the belly.
And I advise you each on every exposition and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine escapes through it, making it difficult to reduce that part, this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is brought about by inflammation due to the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, then you should soak that attempt by submerging a sponge or a moist cloth in clear water, or take in water squinianum, spicatum, and embrocate the area with what is inside to resolve the inflammation.
And on some occasions, I have seen this with stiffness, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which there is aloea and marigold, for by this the instrument within him is alleviated due to little cause.
If it is necessary to use an instrument near this cure, then cut the disruption with a small instrument on which blood vessels are embedded.
The primary cure is better when it is appropriate that no sectioning is done, and there is no occupation to dry out nearby and prevent malnourishment.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part is blunt. The tip is fine, but not too fine like a needle; it should be slightly rounded.
And therefore, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the original area, for this is better.
If the disruption is large and located in the lower part of the abdomen, then place the patient's back on a surface, and position their legs higher than their head. If it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then hold the patient's head and feet lower than the rest of their body.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for a while so that the part where the injury is may be more prominent than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large wounds and in wounds that are only slightly injured.
And in small wounds, pause what you have prepared, and then make sure that the administration is done by your most skilled assistants, who hold the wound with their hand and adjust its edges, and then uncover it to the one who will suture for any cause nearby.
And this is the common suturing method: take the needle, or a count of stitches according to the width of the wound; then leave the end of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or make sure you do not insert a thread in both ends of the gap, leaving two ends of the thread from the inner parts, until you make that thread pass through from one part; and now you have added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both sides together, and then join the two edges and the flap by decent joining; and then let the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the flap is complete.
And let the needles be of medium size between coarseness and subtlety, for the fine needles penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the thread, and therefore it is necessary that they be of medium size in terms of fineness and thickness.
And it is not advisable to place the needle at both ends of the thread close together, for fear that the flesh be penetrated lightly and that the flap open before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the flap is not prevented from healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not ledges the patient awake during sleep; and place powders expanded from all parts over the sutures, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you can tell that the flap is already consolidated.
These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, as only one or two needles are needed for their缝合。
The second stitch is made as follows: and you perform the suture of the four ends, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in fine and moderate thickness.
And when the needle has penetrated these four ends, you return the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and comes up from the other part to the wound, so that the suture resembles a suture of cloth where the threads are tightened.
And pause between each stitch the width of a little finger.
And this suture I know well.
And with this suture I closed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his abdomen, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound about two palms wide, situated around half a palm from the center of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and treat it; and then those vesicles by natural means, and they are converted into their normal states.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not treat it with ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but placed my hand over the swelling like an old woman two days a day and applied frequent wet dressings with honey water until the fire was healed.
And I will speak of two types of suturing properly according to the word of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside of the other side.
And so, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that path straight and lengthwise throughout the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from inside to outside in the other end of the wound.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same limb from the external part to the internal part; leave the extremity of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from the external part.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe at the extremity of the limb which is in the part of the body until all of it penetrates.
And then start from this lateral side and pierce it at the extremity that is on the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the codena which you penetrated, and return it to the codena with the extremity of the probe that is on the other side; and extract it from the codena which is on his side.
And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you cook the area thoroughly according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin on which you suture the skins, endeavoring that you sew the ciphac one time from the part of the extremity of the groin, and that you leave the other half inside until the operation is completed.
And the second species of suture which Gualia often uses, and this is by sewing it and then tying it, is that you sew that part with a needle and thread on which skilled surgeons sew it, endeavoring that all parts are added to their corresponding part according to nature; and apply the extremity of one to another and the extremity of the other to the other extremity of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
And you place the needle at your own discretion at the extremity of the wound on the outside, making that thread penetrate inside the part in that direction, leaving two ends of the thread; then you turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside with the other two ends of the thread.
And then turn those parts, making some from the inner side penetrate into some from the outer side at the two extremities of the affected area rather than in the opposite lateral direction.
And this method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is a suturing method about which we have previously recalled.
This is the saying of Gualia
And some would say that for suturing the abdomen, it is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and start with the insertion of the needle from where you should, making that one penetrate through the other side according to the stitch in which I sew the hearts equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
When you succeed in extracting the wound recently from his flesh before the air alters it, reduce the hernia and suture it properly, then place over it a carmine powder.
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place over it a dressing of those which you have prepared while they soften and fill the cavities, and may be consolidated and examined; and apply treatment to it as is the cure for other wounds until it is healed.
But if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place over it frequently, until it begins to granulate well, and change it twice a day as I have shown you, until it is healed, so that you will not need other dressings in minor arrangements when wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound might communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-pressed oil or in rubbed oil, and place it around the area between the groins, and leave the axillae.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, which matters we should observe, then charcoals those areas with a cautery using stiff black terebinth wood, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and made an exit wound penetrating into its cavity.
And know that the one from the large intestine is of slight pus and more easily healed than that from the fine intestines.
And it is difficult to heal, for the intestine which is called "gungun" does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, as well as the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the process of the plague is through the tissue, and you manage to obtain the recent one, treat that according to your discretion using which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to that space and is already red or black, then when you strengthen those threads over the area that is darkened, so that it produces flows of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another of that ligament, and place two ends of the bowel hanging from the cut edge of the wound, so that above you may alleviate the tension of it by securing the fabric and emission of the arm of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, it is sometimes possible to restore it in some people. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula, and he healed from the treatment and recovery.
Then I sought the cure for it, even though it was not fully integrated into the healing process, but I managed to subtly integrate it into what is healthy and where the area has become consolidated.
And I saw that the area was already consolidated. I then treated the wound that resulted from the injury to his belly; and no one recovered from this bad accident by merely eating and drinking, but they often immersed themselves in baths and exercised their hands.
And some experienced ones have said that when there is pain in the intestine and it is small, then one should tie it according to this manner: and you take fireflies from large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the pain and place one firefly of those that have the mouth open over the two lips of the pain; therefore when it takes on those and tightly closes its mouth, cut off the head of it, for it adheres and is not dissolved.
And then place another firefly nearby, and do not cease to make fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire pain.
And then reduce that and with the pain; and crush those adjacent heads in the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine is tied with fine dung made from the adjacent intestine of an animal; and you take the end of these intestine threads, be it raw, and then place the end of it in dung, wrapping it. Then insert those threads into needles and tie the intestine, reducing it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a matter of faith and hope.
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the fine intestines, where there is no ligature but merely a compression, and does not heal from it.
On the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it is encased and becomes ancient, forming an ulcer, and does not consolidate and discharges continuously over time without resolving, in whatever limb it may be, universally it is named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And a fistula, according to truth, is a fibrous node, hard and white, upon which there is no pain and around which the skin is contracted as if by the pain of an abscess; for this reason, it is called a hard ulcer, that is, a pain.
And in a soft ulcer, which discharges pus; and strong moisture is absorbed within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is hot, and it is small, and it is large, and it is subtle.
And I have shown all those causes, the signs of them, and the treatment for each with medicines in the division.
And cover thus so that I may make known to you the cure of fistula which is made by way of surgical operation with my hand.
And know that fistula occurs in all parts of the body; some of these fistulas lead to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like that of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
And know that some of these fistulas, occurring in this manner, are of difficult healing, and do not receive cure or occupation; and that such treatment is labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to come to know it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula runs straight, and inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead wire, for lead being light of its body is relieved and curved to alleviate the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then cleanse the openings through those openings, for the moisture with which you cleanse that one should relieve the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire precisely, according to the manner by which you can know if here lies a vein or a nerve, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or whether it is a fistula with only opening movements and this surpasses all with your strength, in your examination, where you examine the patient, and in your compression over the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood over all those causes in true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then whether it is a nearby apparent fistula or in some place far, distant from the joint, or from the nerve, or from the artery, or from the vein, or from one of those places which I tell you.
When you dry the fistula as described earlier from its narration, and plug what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preon until it is possible for you, and thereafter modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and then apply wrapped leeches in medicated substances, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with the leeches for several days until the sharp medicine corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or of principal member as we said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then probe that area where the corruption has set in completely; and place a dressing over it as the flesh inside heals.
And if it is not yet healed and strong enough, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover it again thoroughly, and make a diagnosis of it and its purification with your last strength; and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; but if not, then you know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, there is nothing for you to do but leave it as it is.
And if the corrupt bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
And if it is a matter of bones, then you must thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and from them you must not leave any cause for your strength.
And if it is due to some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then you must incise those ligaments or muscles if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your convenience, then pause over the area that can be freed from it, and leave that part within which this is near those bones of muscle and ligaments, and keep the area unconsolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Having done this, if you fear, pause over the joint submerged in a warm bath of oil, or a joint submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments, for when they can be freed from it, and the bones are separated from it, then the pain is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the thigh or similar, and what is corrupted in it is only its surface, then quickly apply the cautery only behind where the blackness and corruption are obstructed, and then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and incise into the place where the corruption has spread, and then cure that once it is consolidated.
And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in the thigh, have them lie on their side and use this example and aid for your operation.
Let there be a young man around 30 years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh. The gout affects the internal parts and enters the body, reaching the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the abscess was extended over time due to the error of the doctors as it matured, and the matter moved inward. The cure was almost paused when the thigh became fistulized, and you made orifices in the pus where all drained pus and the body's moisture flowed out.
And then the master of doctors around two years, and not fire among those who know better in the art, until I was called.
And there you see the leg and the fluids flowing from it through those openings; and already that man's body was stiffened, and his skin was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found those that connected to them from all parts of the leg.
And then I approached and incised over one of the openings, disclosing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the discovered bone.
And I conclude that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be removed and tightened.
And then wait for the restoration of the wound with conservative medical methods for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And tighten what appears to me to be that corruption, and then you must force the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and force the restoration, but it is not restored until you incise around one palm of it. And that extracted its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the femur, but rather due to the disposition of the fracture and the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of death. For it accedes at all hours due to excessive evacuation and bad syncope.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing replaces the integrity of the flesh; it is well done when his disposition in his body and the virtue within him are restored; and it is by his own dispositions and not contrary to his movements or any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the damaged area, then you must correct it in this manner: take hold of the bone gently but firmly at its extremity, and command someone to extend it. Place a thicker woolen pad over the flesh where the bone is left, and stretch the extremity of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the space left by the bone. Then uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut for the incision not to damage the flesh.
Then place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to make the incision without damaging the damaged flesh.
Then the incision should be made gradually in the damaged area, for if the corruption is within the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you must make another cut.
And if the bone is corrupt and non-eminent, one edge is continuous with the other, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fustian over it, and make that from the first edge where the corruption is to be within which the seam of the other part continues.
And the seam should be according to the location of the corruption, slightly, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but displaced.
And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the shoulder, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your capability, and each case should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
And consider what are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for every operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And consider that operation means to you regarding the type of instrument you need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, so that when you have them, you apply what is convenient for them from the instruments for all ailments.
And you shall find at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the prongs of an astelkey.
And do not apply any friction to the heads of the joints only when they are damaged, or when there is a large open wound.
Forma of lesser razor:
Forma of broad razor:
Forma of another saw properly made: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and the handle of its body of well-formed dagger. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor or something subtle:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a razor small like a needle:
Form of another incisor smaller:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a sharp point, and it is applied in certain places in the proportion of the bones:
Form like a ray which you apply in proportion to the bone that is being pierced:
And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly hollow like all the causes we have said regarding razors, incisors, and saws.
Of the incision extremities and the sawing of bones.
The extremities may be affected either intrinsically or extrinsically, or as a result of your having treated the corruption with medical remedies and the treatment did not bring relief, or sometimes the corruption may proceed to other parts of the body which you have not yet examined, at which time you should enter that part where the corruption takes hold, in order to expel the disease either through death or malice, which is a greater misfortune for the limb.
The sign of the one upon whom this happens is that the limb becomes black before it is heated as if it were burning, or you may see the blackness in the area where the reddening has entered that part which infects the whole body; therefore examine that part carefully.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, a viper, or a rueful snake, and its like.
And if the corruption or the blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you should incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And if you approach the hand, when you incise that of the thigh, do not give space for corruption to enter within where it might take hold in the arm's basin.
And if you prefer that, when you incise the arm between the codex and the joint.
And if corruption passes and spreads around the codex, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers that of the foot, when you incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, when you incise the whole foot. But if it enters the sole, when you incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already permeated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and allow the patient to die.
And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the thread in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another thread over the place; extend the minister one thread to the parts left and extend the minister another thread on his side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is uncovered; then it should be incised or closed.
And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound heals, it comes together properly and forms an appropriate scar.
But if a flux of blood occurs while working, then you cauterize the area frequently, or place some constricting powders on it to control the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a thread as required, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if an injury occurs on a man's foot, this accident which you and I have advised against, is one where blackness appears on his foot due to scalding that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidentally first occurs within the said intestine.
And then that man prepares himself to apply the cure as soon as he sees the healing go to the member with the urgency of his pain and the burning sensation he experiences, and places the affected part into the joint, promoting its healing.
Long ago, that corruption occurred in the hand of the one who applied the remedy.
And then it comes to me, and I force it to reflect on how to mitigate the excess in what is applied to the hand of the doctor; as the body's purification progresses; but the excess is not reflected and begins to go into another part where it first started in the hand.
And they call me to place the hand of the patient under it, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, rather fearing the amputation of the hand of the patient, for the virtue of the gout was powerful.
And after he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that the man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he was cured.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what has been said about this illness, and as a signification so that it may be understood and according to which it may be performed.
On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in some fleshly members and the space of the apostema is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it is ruptured and perforated, and the pus is drained from it, and the area remains as if it were a vessel, and the cloth above it is like a thin covering, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprint in some member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and you must ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
If you hope that the cord will adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded through a secondary consequence, and on the cord has passed toward the front, then you cure that with a cleansing enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the cloth that you apply has a foul odor, then give an enema with that medicine which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey in equal parts, and be sure to mix them in a vessel, and let them heat over the fire until the medicine is well heated and reaches a specific temperature.
And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; give this enema to the sinus, strengthen the openings of it, and let the medicine remain in it for about two hours.
And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the sore is healed.
And sometimes an enema is given with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes of vitex, put them in water; and then extract that and give the enema until you are sure that the sinus has been cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with thirty parts of cinnamon, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for by the property of honey it modifies and washes, and the wine causes adhesion to the sinew, especially when there is an excess ofstringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then use that mixture to cause flesh to grow in it.
And you take of dyafinicon ointment, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and stringy wine; or you use that mixture to administer certain medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinew is wide enough to receive the catheter of the enema, then you must gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, pausing in it while wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the opening is wide, then you should suture the lips of the wound and leave enough space for the enema to be added.
And if the opening from which the flux flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the flux can flow into it; when the flux is constrained in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if you are not able to dry the sinus thoroughly within the area below the opening as desired, then you should puncture the member with an appropriate preparation so that the flux flows slightly according to your ability and without any obstruction to the flux.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place in your hand. And so that you may know if what flows from the hand is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has adhered, or there is a growing adherence, then at once remove it or let it dry for one day. When you remove the敷料, then change the cloth to another and renew the ointment.
May it also be that from the sinus there extends a subtle virus, then do not wait for the adherence of this, for the healing of it takes hold, for some people in whose wounds flesh generation is delayed, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for nearly days it sits brackish indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if adhesion of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying out with medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment of dfafinicon when there is excess addition of zegi.
And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of dfafinicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it well over it, and use only this.
And pretend in that action when there is no brackishness, use an ointment of dfafinicon and honey when it is cooked until it thickens, and use it. Or you take myrrh and aloes and cinnamon, mix them all together and powder over the honey which is on the fire, then apply this over cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and apply that to the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered to him some doses of long winded aristology and reasonings of celestial lilies (and these are celestial lilies) and flour of mercury and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted ones, press them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use this.
And if the sinew is prolonged and does not heal by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the core of it, and already investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as is said above.
For the cure of tumors, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with additional cutting.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and swelling occurs in other fingers, and since it often prolongs its cure, it may become a chronic apostema, or corrupted, and penetrates the bone, emitting a foul odor. The extremity of the digit is then amputated, and the color of the affected area becomes dark.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not connect your cure, then you must incise all the superfluous matter that is discharged from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery motion is beneficial in this.
If the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adductors of the joint have drawn the muscles to the inner parts, and they begin to prick and lead that, then you must pause with a subtle ray at the angle of the joint that pricks the muscle, push that up and incise that muscle with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the muscle until it is all destroyed by the burning corrosive medicines; then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
If the corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for nothing is healed that remains in the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that side, then you must incise there in one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and cure that until it is healed.
If at the joint upon percussion or rubbing, and indeed in that pain it is very violent, then you should at the beginning phlebotomize the malady, and soon dry the joint with an acute spatum by transverse section above in jus, and guard yourself that the section does not penetrate into the flesh which remains outside the joint; for you will cause the malady a very painful pain, and it shall be reason for native excess of adjusted superfluous flesh at that place; and soon cure that place with what relieves pain.
But by "adjusted," which is native in many people, the flesh is very light, and the bones are very light, or the joint is very light.
And some of them are native in the region of the joint, or the native state of the fingers includes certain nodules. But that which is native in certain nodules of the fingers is not painful, and this which is native in the joints is very light.
And for those that are native fleshly, the section is light, and you should incise it with an acute knife.
More difficult for that which is near the root of the joint; therefore beware of its removal.
More difficult in that which is near the knee; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh at the joint into a round cut into the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient slots for this, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their knuckles due to observed injuries or by nature of the person who has them, or by consolidation from an ulcer or by burning, or by scarring, then ensure that you remove this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between the bandages of what you have infused with olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin layer of lead between them until it is consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and conform it to the figure of the limb.
Of veins, such are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are such, and they are large, enveloped veins full of melancholic superfluities that occur in the limbs of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the thighs, especially in those who travel, work, and carry things.
Then administer a purge of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
More specifically, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and draw off that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: moisten the beginning of the thigh with hot water until the thick blood has resolved, which is feculent in the thigh, and strengthen the thigh of the patient above the knee between the two sides of the hip with a bandage. Then dry the vein in one, or two, or three places with a wide drying process, and raise the black blood with your hand below the part of the thigh towards the inside, and above towards the groin, until the quantity of blood that you want and is sufficient has been drawn out, which will tolerate the virtue of the black bile.
And then lie her down, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
More specifically for elevating the limb in this manner: you raise the knee of the patient, if there are pulsations in the veins, then immerse it in warm water and apply the cloth to the knee with wet heat until it becomes red and the veins are dilated; or if strong exercise is available, if hot water is not present, until the limb is heated.
And then dry the bandage along the vein by sectioning it or at the end of it you should let it drop, or from the lower part of it you should cut it.
And then cut the bandage with scissors and strip the vein from all sides until it appears, and you should appreciate the appearance of that rope draining to black.
And then, as you remove the bandage, you see that white which is the rope.
And then you place that ligament raised and bent from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then strip the knee from the part above the vein where it appears.
And then raise that and incise that in the rear section. You should cut the tendon, and then extract that and raise what is inserted through the second section, and then extract that from the section above that.
And do this until you extract that from the section that is further above or higher than all sections, when everything is inserted; then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and raise, then insert a strong steel needle doubled and tie that and extract it. Or insert the ligament and rotate your hand in all directions until it is bent. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to raise that part and will have come over the wound through that damage.
And when all that is done, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and oil, whether roasted or unroasted, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an enclosure at the parts, and it does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut into that completely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the locations of its enclosure, and suspend that with strings while elevating that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so as not to cut the vein and not to damage that, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that; and serve your prudence there.
Form of the incident where the vein is dried up:
It is not prepared like other strings nor does it have a sharp end so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility. If it were too fine, it would cut the vein due to its fineness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the crus vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails, as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, with dry and poor soils lacking fertility, in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And this vein is generated in other parts of the body except the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain as if venom inside the body, serpents, vermin, and worms generating between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this condition is from this vein: when you touch the leg, there is intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein protrudes from the location of that swelling as if it were a plant growing.
And then when the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead which weighs as much as one drachm, or two drachms, and press on it, leaving the lead suspended from the leg.
And as many times as there is a cause from within for the parts outside, wrap this in lead and cover it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulceration.
To be treated adequately and extracted little by little, so that it does not return to the buttock, and no cause should be left in the body.
And from this vein, some men have been stretched to the length of five palms and ten, and I have already been told that one was stretched to twenty palms.
And if it is incised during the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that which runs long through the body, so that all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it according to the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it numerous openings, and is situated from each opening.
And therefore cure it thus as we have said in the division and what has been said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called the bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease; because motes of worms often appear among cattle and a few such worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they ascend and descend throughout the body, and are perceived by their own movement from member to member as they tear the skin and come out.
And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of certain humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and is perceived by smell, then strongly it affects it and enters and destroys the nose, and thereupon many motes appear.
And when you want to cure it and extract it, then it is not done so that you should only consider its movement and appearance according to the sensation, but then check that you have what is on it and what is left it in ligature and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
If you find it to be approaching the head near the ear, then tightly bind over the supraorbital ridge with a strong ligature, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it; and ensure that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that expel foul humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section regarding the disease of the nose.
This illness is named nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is shifted from one member to another.
And I have already seen that according to which I will recount. I have been called to a sick woman at a village, and examined her arm where I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up like a worm rising from one place to another, though less urgently than feared, as if it were live silver moving from spot to spot.
And then I felt the pain at that place and pressed it into the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
And then I corrected on the other side of the body near where it affected the other arm.
And then I was told that she moved around the entire body as I observed; it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed with which one member affected another. And I had already seen this before in my own cases according to that manner, but I have also seen many instances where the pain is perceived as being transferred from one limb to another. But you do not see this in the heels as in the female.
And I do not consider this to be the case, but rather because the female had a lean body with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that distension changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are plump and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear on the heel as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it lie lightly and dry over it, between which the distended vein should be compressed, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it on the heel bones, then cure that by an evacuation of the body and by what expels distension, and stop those with foul-smelling pills and with snake-root pills and their like.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and others have three angles, and of those to which tongues belong; and of those to which are spines.
And of the signs of the liver are when the arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and is situated over the cavity which is above the brain, for it happens by the sudden violence, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the pupils, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, greatly reduced speech and destruction of voice, and are situated over the area of the wound white moisture resembling dust, and from it resembling the humidity of flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then refrain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there, which is not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black bloody wound drains, and there is coldness in the extremities, pallor, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him completely.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he exhales a great breath or gasps for air.
And if the arrow has pierced the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and does not allow all the limbs' muscles to relax.
And if you cut the arrow in the stomach, then strongly press the wound with some indigestion.
And if you cut the arrow in the abdomen, and it is embedded in it, place some opening of the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure without extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow cuts the bladder, and it pierces through causing urine to leak, and the process from it affects the parts outside, and strong pain occurs in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, and arm, the ribs, the pelvis, and their counterparts of the limbs, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery, and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning their cure.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the inner corner of his eye and the edge of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and suffered no harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from Jusef which struck him in the inner corner of his eye, leaving the eyelid but removing it, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be取出箭，只有一个小小的尖端粘在箭杆上，那个箭是一个大号的土耳其急射箭，箭杆上有狮子图案且没有耳环。
And Jusef was there, and suffered no harm to his eye despite the mishap.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck in the shoulder. It was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ear wings; then I incised over it between two muscles, and it was already submerged in his shoulder; then I carefully dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And extracted another arrow from a man which was embedded in his belly, and perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after we passed thirty days and no change occurred due to his disposition, incised upon the arrow and removed it, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow struck his back, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incised the arrow at the side of the thigh.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow struck her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and showed no change in her disposition or condition, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her natural operations.
And there was another man to whom an arrow struck his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken. He did not experience any more pain, and appeared similar to this.
And extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was struck in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly declined to the right side a little bit. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
And then I examined the wound of the arrow closely; and then I inquired if there was anything subtle under it, and he did not feel it; but he felt a prick on his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
And apply the place to be plastered with an attractive and digestive plaster, believing that by placing it there, I will find the location of the arrow, which will then dry on that area.
And do not miss the significant location where the arrow hit; and continue to apply the plaster over it for several days without missing any spot; and during this time, the wound consolidates, and the arrow is slowly expelled through its own nostril over the course of a few days, and I experienced this.
And then place a strong corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. Then apply heat to that area, and examine it closely to find the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine when the extremity of the arrow appears visibly to me, and pass it to my time through the space of time between four months.
And then, when the wound is fully opened, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that, without hesitation, until I can grasp it with the forceps in a descending manner, according to the form of those as described at the end of this chapter; after which I extract it; and then restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restore that and the wound is consolidated, and the patient recovers entirely, with no scar in any cause.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning behind what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor comprehended by those who read freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little about motion; and from what is present they infer what is absent; and find new operation and new tool for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And thus I say that arrows are not excluded from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the contrary part.
And that which is excluded by the place into which it enters, or the arrow proceeds into a fleshy place and is then thrust in and out.
And if it does not obey the sensation of the hour in which it is cut, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey your sensation, then leave that for a few days and repeatedly apply attraction and movement on any given day, and then it will be excluded.
And if your attempt does not succeed after some days, then you must puncture along the circuit of the arrow in that bone of any part moving subtly where the area is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot remove it due to the size of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there are neither nerves nor veins here, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is held, then you incise the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides as much as you can; and use your skill here, if you cannot drain the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas where it must yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand twisted with forceps from all sides until it yields; and be subtle at the rear subtlety that the arrow not be broken and that it be made easy for its extraction and for that extraction.
And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of his body recover, and then repeat that which is alleviated. But if there is contrary state of the blood, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do so with facilitation, tranquility, tardiness, and firmness as you have recommended.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient is according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible according to the figures.
But the arrows that are counter-directed from the other part, or which you have already treated in the parts of the exterior, or cause swelling at the tip of the arrow due to the pressure from the part above the shoulder; then you extract it over that area; and the extraction should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; then withdraw it, for it is made light by the effort.
If it is retained in the joint, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction to that in which the arrow presses on the joint, and gradually extend it, and then extract it.
If not, leave it for a few days, and then repeatedly apply pressure to where it is stuck.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
If the shaft is embedded and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your hand so that the concavity of the shaft aligns with the arrow's groove, and then push it in.
If the arrow is concave, then push it with strong pressure into place, for the arrow will expand due to this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you create a depression in the flesh where it is located, if possible, and then treat it accordingly.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the stomach, or the bladder, or the side, and is near enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it, and afterward treat the wound as necessary, and cure that part until it is healed.
Form of forceps to which arrows are applied:
Let the ends of the forceps resemble the beak of an eagle, shaped such that they grasp the arrow firmly without letting go.
And these forceps are made in special sizes, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and its shape.
Thus, in order that the instrument in the concave groove may be relieved and pressed thereupon.
Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Of phlebotomy of the veins: The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed are xxx, which are in chapter XVI. These are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are under the two eyebrows called ascendent; and a vein in the middle of the forehead, and a vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegi at the neck; two veins in the upper lip; two veins in the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and two veins behind the tongue. Moreover, the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are V; of which one is cephalic, and is from the wild basilisk; the people call it "the vein of the head," sorda, and is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call that branch the people "vein of the whole body," while basilica is the vein which is from the domestic basilisk, and is called "citular," and the vulgar call it "vein of the belly"; funis of the arm, and is placed over the axilla, and it is this one on which phlebotomy is performed, and it is this one that appears above the armpit by a clear appearance; salvatella, and it is the vein between the said auricular and the small said, and it is in it two branches.
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's horn; and the second is sophena, and its place is given to the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given to the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The veins near the ears are catarrhal, headache, pharyngitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sugging those is as I will recount to you: it should be placed at the back of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are near the ears; then firmly press the patient's neck with a band in which the two veins appear, close to the depressed areas of the head near the ears. And you want that at your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those at your right hand here, try to sugg them.
And you take the scalpel lancet, and it is that which is incised, and then you insert it near the vein between where the bloodletting will reach the mouth. And then raise your hand to the vein and the cord above, incise the vein with an incident incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you desire.
And then strengthen it with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arteries that supply the temples with the vitality of bloodletting is migranea, an ancient and evil affliction, as well as constant eye strain from a body full of acute and excessive fluids in the veins.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recount to you: constrict the patient's thigh with your hand between which two arteries become apparent by a clear sensation, and by feeling their pulse with your finger determine the position of their veins; and then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the knee above the vein at the parts above as you have just indicated, and insert the flebothomi incidentially, and elevate the vein in them; and incise that thus as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the compression of the thigh, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, and then place the compress and powder over it with a strong constriction, and leave it there until it is healed.
And then the remembering of them is preceded, and of those the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the thigh.
And the treatment of the femoral venous puncture is similar to the cephalic vein puncture for ancient ailments of the face, such as migraines, swelling, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is as I have recounted to you; it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a fossoir, this is its form:
Pause the point eminent at the cap of the fossor over that vein and strike it with your hand either inclined or for another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity which you wish; then return the perforation of the malaise and strengthen it within until it is healed.
In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for venesection, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as in other venesections, or before being from the side extremity, and make the venesection according to the transverse, for the bone is nearby and strong; it would break the venesection when it is subtle.
More the juvenile state of the two veins that are at the lacrimal ducts of the eyes through the groove of the eye by redness and swelling in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The quality of the venesection is that the malaise strengthens the cold in its area with a bandage, and then make the venesection there, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And perform the incision for venesection according to the transverse length a little, making a few small incisions, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, strengthen its extremity so that it breaks easily.
And let the blood run until it is necessary, place a bandage over those areas, and strengthen them with a new one.
More often the incision of the vein in the nose is used for acute fever and intense thirst, and for ailments of the face such as migraines, swelling that occurs in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient strains his neck and places his nose near your left hand, taking a fine long incision and placing it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to proper direction, for the vein does not appear here, and the blood begins to flow quickly.
Gently close the incision with your finger and let the blood flow according to your need; then cover it with a new bandage, for that is quickly restored.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of veins and the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad, corrosive ulcers similarly as with phlebotomy.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his thigh with a stick; and the attendants are over the head of the patient, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually make the femoral incision along the length with a small and wide incision little by little; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is necessary as needed; and make a similar incision on the other side.
And then remove the stick and tightly bind the two veins with a midwifery bandage so that the patient does not get overheated, and leave a hole through which the plague can heal.
And the benefit of the femoral incision for the algirich veins, it helps to resolve small abscesses and pustules in the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the patient, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then revolve the labia and look at two veins, of which one is on the right side of the labium and the other on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so in the circuit of those small dark veins; then incise each with an incising incision.
And if doubt remains for you, and you do not know which is which among them, then you make the incision of the larger one of them, and of the more obvious.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
And of the two veins that are left, the treatment for the tongue is close to the femoral incision for preparatory steps in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of flebotomy is to follow the patient's veins in front of their navel, raise the vein of the belly, and regard it, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each declining to black.
And then perform flebotomy on each; and note that you should not end your hand in performing flebotomy on these, for they are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the crease are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is performed according to two methods, or place a small mirtilo or olive needle subtilly; or use a surgical knife for flebotomy, and call it lnessil, and this is its form.
Let the wound be thus sized, and you need to open the concave veins full of large apparent vessels, as well as those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this bloodletting is of lesser size and finer extremity, suitable for the bloodletting of fine veins containing thin yellowish blood.
More appropriate for the bloodletting of the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the bad blood that affects the knee and the groin, as well as what causes pain in the foot and the abdomen.
And you must instruct the bloodletter, when performing this bloodletting, to be well aware of it and show great caution, for if he misses and improperly punctures the bloodletting site, he will injure the artery and cause flows of bad blood. Therefore, it is best to make a small incision before puncturing with a needle, as if cutting with a razor.
And if the basilica does not appear through a clear manifestation, then change to the other one, or look for some branch there; or perform a bloodletting at the end of the arm, for that is manifest, and dry out the other with a bloodletting in such a way as we have said.
And if you wish to perform the bloodletting of the arm, then proceed in front of the constriction of the arm and touch the place where you recognize the location of the pulse, then place your hand over it; then lift the arm and dry the vein with a concave section of the blade in such a way as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur over some space of the artery's location.
And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflation occurs in the place you marked with your hand; then that inflation is due to the artery, and therefore avoid that area.
And if you see the blood flow in the bloodletting as golden from a child, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is the blood of the artery; then lift and pause your hand for a long space over that area; and place your hand close to it, and if the blood is cut, for small motas are cut, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And keep the patient warm, and do not let them catch a chill for several days until they are healed.
If the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must do more than what this medicine suggests, then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity will be constricted, and the blood will stop; or that which you take from a recent fistula, and you do that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura, descent on linen and powder the next day.
And if the blood stops, that is good; and if not, then treat that with what preceded in the recall of the location of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood in such small areas due to the location and the possibility of the arm's movement is difficult.
And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial to extract the blood from the part above the groin up to the part below the body; because this is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalic, as we have said.
And cover the incision after phlebotomy where it is over-tremorous in the phlebotomy of the patient; for that is a nerve; and then if you adjust in the puncture of the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will happen to you stupor, and it is difficult the healing of him, and not easily he is cured completely. And this nerve manifests sensations at times; and if it is hidden among some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the phlebotomy where you make section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein lengthwise.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the eyes.
And cover this properly, if you want to make a phlebotomy at the olive phlebotomy or at the myrtle phlebotomy; for it is taken from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not punctured in the first percussion, then do not mark it again with a lance.
The first of these is that you should know that an incision should be made only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses, and that the incision should be made in one of the veins that are in the thigh: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision should be made at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter shortly after eating, when signs of edema appear.
And a femoral incision should be made and the third day or at the first hour of the next day after three hours have passed.
The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it should be done when deemed convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any hour, and at all times.
And let a boy not be circumcised until he is four years old, and a girl who is pregnant should not be circumcised but only in the fourth month before giving birth, and women should not be circumcised those which have passed fifty years.
And if anyone wishes to be circumcised in any manner, let them modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a leon clyster if there is a mota (wart) with a hidden opening, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluids during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purged, and do not harm the principal members.
And let no patients who are nauseous, sick from overeating, vomiting due to illness or drunkenness be circumcised until these conditions are remedied for them, nor in cases of dropsy. More often, circumcision should be delayed until colic pain passes, and until vomiting, abdominal discomfort, increased sexual activity, work, and exercise, as well as fasting or staying awake, and all causes that dissolve the virtue, either corporal or animal, have subsided.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with food and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise by some exercise so that the wound be subtlety treated.
And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at about the hour of three, as we have said.
And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be guarded on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and from all bodily accidents, as when there is work and superfluous pain or copulation and resemblances to them.
And at her side have present the causes in the use of which custom of men is based on aroma and odor, and with balsams as those according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the phlebotomizer over a cushion that is higher than the cushion on which the patient should be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flap knife two or three times; and tightly bind the limb with a bandage and wrap that area twice.
And if the constriction is tempered, or when the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is due to softening, and then prohibit the body's flow of blood accordingly.
And when the constriction is present, have those who are to perform the incision rub their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and clearly apparent to the touch.
And the surgeon unites the incision with a little antiseptic oil properly; then places his finger of the left hand on the vein, positioning the area where the incision is to be made so that the vein slightly protrudes and can be clearly felt. The vein should feel like a fleeing cord, indicating fullness and ventosity. When the surgeon pauses the incision over this area, it contracts, revealing the location; if the incision does not open the vein, it should be tightened.
And therefore, in this case, the phlebotomist should be kept engaged and attentive to all these causes.
And then remove the phlebotomy device, but if the vein is fully opened in one go, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this process or for a shorter duration next time, or apply more pressure if the area does not show signs of suppuration.
And if the area is suppured, or the sore opens up, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not pack it tightly, for this would force pus out and it should not be bathed.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the pus is subtle, and you fear that it might not drain enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust slightly based on the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area suppures, for the area will suppure less when you use a smaller opening.
But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not touch it, for it serves no useful purpose; instead place something over it from the fissure of oil, which alleviates the body's pain. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer the fissure of oil in all fistulotomy where veins are cut to prevent the flow of blood, and they do this by applying tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes thin and is circulated when it is thick.
And if a large suppurate arises in the area of the fistulotomy, where major accidents occur, especially to those who have not been lanced but only that one time, or during the sign of the small vein, then you should lance and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, strongly keeping it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
And ensure that this is done near the discharge of the blood from that vein, either with the vein or another vein.
And if there is any darkness or greenishness in the area for several days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over it some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mustard juice or of its seed or similar to it.
And when blue spots occur, you should perform bloodletting at the basilica.
And place your hand over it. If then you find it soft, apply your compress to that area, as that eminence is bad and harmful; and then be careful to place over it some cause of what we have said, for strong blood will flow from the aorta.
And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, to make the area harder, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And ensure that you extract from the wound all the pus according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, you let it remain until it becomes clear; similarly, if you see it thick, you let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, you wait until its acuity is reduced.
And when it comes to a person who is full and strong and has the need for rapid bloodletting from a vein, enlarge the venesection and let the bleeding be liberal.
And when it is a woman, do the opposite, and cause her to bleed in small amounts over several days, and that she bleed steadily.
And the best that is administered in venesection is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection avoids the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is more commendable and safer than venesection according to length and breadth.
And when this method is accustomed to cause syncope, do the venesection and ensure that you cure it before the venesection with a drop of wine of milgranas or simple oxymel; and extract from the side of the vein in three or four days.
And if it is a swelling of the complexity, then apply before the venesection a poultice of myrrh extract or an aromatic honey poultice with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant honey poultice.
And if you happen to encounter syncope, perform a femoral puncture, as it is caused by the cessation of motion in the blood. Then let him take in a drink of meat broth and inhale a subtle fragrant vapor; use aromatic substances like laurel, and apply them to his feet with this.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter on syncope by evacuation.
And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply to him from which the femoral puncture is by major evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if one wants to cool his arm and circulate his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral puncture.
And if one wants to discharge the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it is flowing, then do this after it has been cooled on the second or third day.
When that body in which there is hot blood already flayed and is acute and causes fever, ensure that the blood is drained from it in one go and a large quantity be let out, and amplify the perception between when the syncope occurs; and since you have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse of the patient, to drain the body of the blood, so that it does not end up dead instead of syncope, whereas many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too bad.
And let it remain until the phlebotomy is performed again; or wait for the heat of the phlebotomy to coagulate the blood in the orifices of the vein; or place your hand on the area of tyriaca alfarach, or sagenea, and keep that with a light compression until the blood settles.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the pus at once, and there is no excuse, then you let that out in the same place or on the other arm into another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised instead of the funica or basilica when they are not readily visible or are hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of incising that vein is that the patient inserts his hand into warm water as the vessel becomes evident and visibly apparent.
And then bind it tightly with linen to prevent swelling; and then incise according to the small transverse vein, neither longitudinally nor according to its length.
And make the incision wide, and let your incision be where you incise that vein near the wrist of the hand.
And if you are to stop the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water until you have achieved your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead keep the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves.
And the phlebotomy of the basilic vein of the right hand is related to ailments of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you press the hand with flax or with your hand, rather than leaving it in trailing water until the vein becomes swollen and clearly visible; then proceed to make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it entirely, no harm will come of this.
And make sure that you do not place your hand over the venesection too close to the fingers, for then you would expose the nerves of the fingers without flesh.
And immediately immerse your hand in the basin of water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse that part in the basin of water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted in the necessary quantity, then pause above the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not consolidated completely; similarly ensure that you do this for the entire length of the vein.
More importantly for the youth of the venesection of that from the left hand, it is that you attend to the illnesses of the mesentery.
And perform similarly in the venesection of the leg as you have done in the other.
And the youth of the phlebotomy vein is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as illnesses of the liver, and retention of menstruation, and for illnesses of hernias and old ulcers of thighs and chests, and their similar to other illnesses.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's leg enters into cold water and makes friction on that area where the veins become apparent; a bandage is placed over the knee joint; at the location of the vein, he cuts it open, and from there its branches spread across the thigh face.
And thus incise the vein more widely or place the bandage to cut the opening, which is better and more secure.
And if you perform the femoral incision on the thigh, then you must guard against the nerves that are left on the surface of the thigh, and place your incision over the area where you cut it transversely, as if you wanted to incise it more deeply.
And let the femoral incisions be deep.
But if the bleeding is prohibited; then you wet the leg in cold water and let the blood flow in that area until it is evacuated.
And if the femoral incisor makes an error in the first attempt, then repeat the incision a little more, for the location is secure. And do not fear its depth; rather, guard against the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make a cut on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the place is as we have said; you should cut the thigh and leave the parting wild valve.
And the indication for femoral venous incision is pain in the hip when it is due to a severe cut.
And the quality of the femoral venous incision is that the patient enters the bath, waxes, and strengthens the thigh with a bandage long and thin, which does not show except through this.
And when it appears, then you perform the venous incision according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better; or make an incision for extraction or incise it for bloodletting, for the place is clean.
And it is often found to be a large vein; and if you find it but do not appear by touch, then incise some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the side of the foot between the auricular and annular toes.
And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you want.
And then release the tension and place your hand over the phlebotomy site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilation is either of corns, or of ear, or of eye.
And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either by fire or without fire.
And for the ventilations administered with incision and extraction of blood, there are fourteenth places in the body, of which one where ventilation is paused is alnocrati, and is the last part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; ventilation of the chin leaves the jaw behind and leaves the mouth open; ventilation of the cheeks; ventilation of the collarbones, and it is at the end of the shoulder blade; ventilation of the thigh bones, and they are two braccia long; ventilation of the upper legs; and ventilation of the thighs.
And by venesection, do not extract the blood from the wound but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and thereby do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you think that venesection should be made by fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion when the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity provokes venesection for an illness or during its continuance, administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, and in the middle of the month and at any other time.
And when often in some cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than just passed after one or two hours.
And the benefit of ventilation from the neck is that when you apply it to gravity in the head and to what is deep in the veins; more effective is this than just general evacuation of the whole body.
And this ventilation is in the place for phlebotomy of the cephalic vein.
And it is not advisable to use for this that which causes inflammation or in which there is a cold, as it gives great harm.
And for this, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty ailments.
More so for those who have continuous inflammation; and for this, you should command the ventizer to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
More frequent ventozatio of alkehel is in the place of fleubotomia of the venas fusca and basilica: and thereby you will contribute to asthma, and to the constriccio of ale and to the scissura of the sturment of ale, and to coughs, and to replecio.
And know that if the ventozatio of alkehel is stopped for a little while, it will engender weakness in the body and stomach.
And the ventozatio of alhagdahan will contribute to headaches and ophthalmia, migraine, premonition, and tooth pain; it is in the place of fleubotomia of the basilica.
And know that you should command the ventillator not to press his hand at the scarification so as not to incise the artery and damage the flow of blood.
And if the ventozatio is stopped at the mento, it will cause alcohol in the mouth, corruption of the gingiva, and appearances similar to those of illnesses in the mouth, which are in the place of fleubotomia of aliheric that are in the two lips.
More importantly, the application of heat over the two spoons is applied to the caput, which is done by warming up.
And the windsock application of the two parts inside the flasks contributes to the benefit of the incision of three veins, so called basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for they draw the scum from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the larger veins through which the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the heater not to proceed with incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, leaving only nerves and arteries.
And it is a windsock to which heat is applied and contributes to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the ulcers, and leave them so.
And make sure to command the heater to use a large windsock, made of wool, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly have subtle and light winds applied with incision.
More colds from the legs diminish by manifest diminution, for they carry the scanc from the whole body, and contribute to ancient pains of the hips and of the thigh, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and contribute to bothor and ademil; and are in place of a flebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two ankles.
But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the colds, alahorcoben affects the youth to the colds of the two hips.
And the quality of the position of the colds is that you place the cold at the beginning viewable and draw it out by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the colds, but place them lightly, and retain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already become red and swell, and the sign of scorch appear.
And then you incise and gradually increase the suction, while considering the disposition of the bodies.
When a person has tender flesh due to cold, incise him only once and not more, lest the place become ulcerated.
And command the fan to enlarge the incision slightly and apply suction with ease.
And if the wound becomes inflamed, then you should incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for the subtle flow of blood and its humors. More in the second incision, for the thorough extraction of the gross blood.
And if the blood is muddied, then the third incision should be made to ensure its complete removal.
Finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or only a small amount, suffice us one incision.
And if we want an extraction of foul blood, perform a cut with the lancet; and if we know that the blood is thick, then cut with a deeper incision.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision solely.
And if the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are straight, then the places for the cups should be rubbed gently, opened, and resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or balsam of copaiba or olive oil of cypress; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or blood oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is thick, apply, then oil of amber, or balsamic oil, or oil of aloes, or olive oil, and to those similar.
But if the cupping device has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be forbidden to use oil, and instead, the areas around the cupping should be washed with warm water or cold water from a solatrum, or water from copaiba, or water from borax, and similar to those.
And for those whose fever is due to humid moisture, wash their veins with wine, or with water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
And for those whose superfluities are large, wash their veins with old wine, or with water of sanicle, which is marigold, or from decoction of dill, or of chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the vein is guarded before bathing; it should be administered approximately after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the vein.
What must be done to regulate the patient before phlebotomy and venesection.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: if the patient who needs phlebotomy or venesection is choleric and the fever is acute and inflamed, then ensure that they take causes of cooling, such as sour milken, endive with wine, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like pears, pigeon hearts, and seasoned chicken, and foods flavored with garlic, in their likeness.
And for those whose complexion is pale, give them to drink essaroop of almond, or essaroop of alecost with seeds, sumac, and vinegar mixed with wine; it should be recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like pears, onions, pease, and small pigeon chicks.
And ensure that the drink is greater than the food on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy.
And ensure that some men are given to drink tiryaca alfarac or medicines from musk, such as muscat or acetic acid, before ventilation or phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members be comforted and the wound subtiliate; and do not let them take any scalding drinks.
More specifically, the vents for scarification should be located on the liver, over the melena and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the side, since these principal members do not suffer from scarification directly.
And it is not desired by those only for an attraction of the member's vein, thus as we apply a suction cup on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that there may be dissolved a friable viscid swelling of the member, thus as we apply over the belly and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the member and heats it and mitigates the pain which resolves the swelling.
And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when there is a prolapse or displacement, for by virtue of its strong attraction it reduces the prolapse and eradicates the pain from its place.
And it seems to work when applied over the liver and spleen in cases of swelling within them.
And these suction cups are applied using suction only sometimes; and at other times, they are applied with fire.
And at other times, they are applied filled with thin water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is to make the suction cup full and larger, it should be filled with cold water or water in which suitable herbs have been added.
Form a suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the amount of the preion be half a palm; and place it in the middle of it, in the location that is on the circuit, to the extent of its size, I draw it so small according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.
Let it be made of elm or citrus, with thick edges, juniper, equal and smooth so that it does not cause the limb to deviate from its position on it.
And let it be at the center of the elm or iron ring, where the candle rests in the fire.
And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have described; and the smaller amount according to the ailments and the condition of the person using it.
And the suction cups for children and those who are weak should be different from those used for young and healthy people.
And the quality of applying this suction cup with fire to the limb is to extend the wick of the firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and place that at the center of the transverse ring in the central location of the suction cup, so that the fire is lit around the part left, to prevent the patient's body from burning.
And then place your hand over the patient's thigh, and tell him about what we have said before, within which when we have our hands and do not need them to hold the aforementioned and that the vapor rises above that part, then the hand will soon be dissolved.
And then apply the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if you need that.
More in the case of the ventosa applied in the disease of pleurisy, then apply water, in which there is no transverse or vein, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the part only for so long.
And this is the form of it: And this ventosa the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas are not applied to large members but only to those members where the position of the ventosas is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips and similar parts; or to a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the clean waters of putrefaction.
And soon let them lie in clean water for a day and a night until they become softened, and let no cause of inflammation arise in those; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and with purges; and soon foment the limb of the patient when it becomes red; and soon place them over it.
And when they are filled and swollen.
And if possible, draw from the place with purgatives, it is more effective for recovery.
And if not, then wash the place with water mixed with wine and subsequently with warm water; and foment it and express it.
And if the bleeding of the body is prolonged at the place where the leeches are attached, and if they continue to bleed, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding is increased, then powder vitriol trissat or small pieces resembling the causes of haemostasis over it; or place warm bean poultices on the area and let them remain until the beans adhere to the place, and the bleeding has been stopped.
And if necessary, iteration of leeches, when possible change those.
And if the leeches are prohibited from use, then wash the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the areas until blood appears; and place them there, waiting for any blood to begin.
And when you want them to draw blood, powder a little aloes trissat, or salt, or ashes over them, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the proceedings of the surgical part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary observations on the art of medicine; and it pertains to the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that both the false physicians and the vulgar ones, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or not even a letter from their writings, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during such a long time; and I have not acquired what follows except through much reading of the works of the Ancients and study over their understanding, from which I extracted the science.
And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and about which I have conducted my experiment; and here I summarize this for you others and deliver this from long repetition; and I condense this at the end of the summary; and I demonstrate this at the end of the declaration; and I arrange these in forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
The first chapter.
Sum up and collect the essentials of bone fractures, those for which a preliminary examination is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and various injuries of each. Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and the chapters for the understanding of which the artisan must be positioned at the beginning on the truth of those; it is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore, say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, then you must turn to the beginning and perform a bloodletting or realign that, or both, if no cause prohibits it, such as a lack of virtue, or if it is in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
And moreover, let the patient eat herbs such as vetches and meats of partridges and crabs; but avoid fatty meats and those filling in general that fill the veins with sang, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to its first proper position according to the custom of the area.
And so when the broken bone begins to be restored, then see that the patient is fed nutritious foods rich in both moisture and density, as those with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and coarse substances similar to these, and with this regimen coagulation of the fracture is induced lightly and honey is applied.
And know that broken bones in those who are in the prime of life and in the elderly cannot be continuously set and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part, similar to glue in which thickness adheres and strengthens it. Together they conglutinate and harden together, at the end of strength and firmness, such as fire at the beginning, and no cause prevents this from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place the patient on their side, where there is gravity and viscosity, and bulk, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the arm; and similarly all other limbs are diverse among themselves.
And I will briefly recall all species of fracture, explained in their own chapter distinct from the others.
A variety of fractures within itself. And the species of bone fracture are diverse in themselves; for some fractures occur arcuately or where they strike the stars; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as the fractures of the laminae, stars, and additions both primary and secondary, as when a pen is prepared to write, or fractures by cut and disruption in the head, or small fissure fractures.
And for each case, there is an operation or torture proper in restoration of it according to the separate recall of it in its places.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And for this, the bone fracture is known: there is a deformity of it, and an elevation and prominence visible by touch, and its sensation when you press on it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is neither apparent deformity nor pain, you should touch the bone with your hand with some movement and if the patient does not find great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is a deformity or small crack. Therefore, touch the area with your hand and apply compression throughout; pause over it using the medicines of which you will recall at that moment, which relate to the location; and then straighten by subtle constriction.
And perceive that the area when curved and does not split into two or another part as nothing happens to it in its integrity, as if all parts of its composition are inflamed, then you should begin your treatment for straightening it, having an abscess form by cautery.
And if an abscess occurs, leave it alone for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can use for elevation and drainage.
And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the surgery where you make such incisions.
And then strengthen it according to the recall of the operation that will come.
More if in the bone you make such incisions, then it is necessary to extend this broken member into two parts, whether it is the hand or the foot; or use your hand if the member is small; or use two strings or one string and your hand.
And place your hand in such a way that you level the member according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those joins with care and according to any method you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that it does not occur to the patient due to your operation any pain or injury; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that profitable hour you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen through their operations.
The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is that which I recount; so that you may know that the broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small, like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, then know that the envelopment should be of soft fine cloth.
But of those that are large, like the thigh or the chest, then know that in those an envelopment firm and hard should be used, for the firm binding connects the large and strong limb from all sides at the fracture equally, ensuring that no stain enters.
And then, after your initial dressing, apply three or four bandages conveniently over the site of the fracture; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the site of the fracture, and strengthen more so that your binding is stronger than the one you applied to the area of the fracture. And then slightly extend the covering of the fracture area, and gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take from that place a large portion.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other part around the injured area covered by the wrapping, and gradually bring the wrappings to the portion past the fracture; and let your operation on the tension of the wrapping and in softening that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
And then place the stopa cloth or bandage between the wrappings to match the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually match these wrappings properly made as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess there and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the wrappings.
And let the wrappings be of linen cloth of good quality, well formed; or of bark of pine; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each wrapping be according to this form and this figure:
However, ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is much thicker and tighter than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read about the member in size and smallness; then strengthen on the strips with another bandage according to your first constriction; then place over it decently with a piece of cloth as we said about the constriction, and that be your constriction more where the fracture is, and the more it is stretched from the fracture, the less the constriction.
Ensure that the threads are medium in thickness and fineness, and are of fine material; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used the threads of ropes for binding, it is a great mistake when applying the constriction equally.
And such thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to apply the constriction where you want, and it must be that there is at least one finger's width between each bandage.
And if the patient is led by the ends of the strips near the constriction in the area, then place there some strips of linen or carded wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Sometimes a fracture is caused by a blow, and there occurs disruption in the chain, and I will recall this in the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for any member broken, it is not straightened with staples on the first day; for this cause, when the member, if large, cannot be held still by staples, it should be allowed to rest without being moved for about 5 to 7 days or more, according to your safety regarding the onset of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to apply, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of plastering for the reduction of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is applied to that on which no heat or cold is used: and you should take powder of meal, which is the marrow of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And prepare it thus, but sift it with flour of wheat, and do not make the preparation too thick or too fine; and use this.
Another method of plastering for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is extracted from wild millet grass, all in drachms 20. Take myrrh and aloes in drachms 5; alcohol in drachms 20. All are to be crushed and sieved, then mixed with alcohol water or with egg white if the patient's skin is sensitive; and use this plaster, which is of good composition, for lightly broken bones, and apply it to strong men.
Another method of plaster for fractures and sprains: take migrach and 20 drachms of white mallows; 5 drachms of myrrh; 6 drachms of acacia; 20 drachms of armoric balsam.
All are to be crushed in a mortar with contricio, then sieved, and compounded with water or egg white and administered.
Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidental pain in those areas and for fissures and fractures: take virgin wool and immerse it in acidic wine and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
More in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of abscess cautery and expel pains properly.
Another way of plaster that restores blocked passages: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them together and make a plaster of them.
Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: take root of algae, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour of rush, all in equal parts; mix them together with wine, if the limb is not inflamed.
More if it is inflamed, then moisten that with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolution than the first, when you encounter an abscess that resists, for restoring the limb: take root of algae, seed of flax, safflower, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all in equal parts and equal; mix them all with water of oak bark or with water mixed [with] vinegar or with wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color of it.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the member soaked with salt the restoration of it but a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and he recommends that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Galen, however, be seen as saying that it should be placed over the broken member the restoration of it and the causes in which there is drying of little quality so like myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cypress, of skin from a flayed man or an otter's pelt, and of honey, and salt; crush them, sift them, knead them, and make the plaster.
May the quantity with which you should grind the ointment and then dissolve it be such that if no pain has occurred nor swelling, and the bone is not broken, do not disperse it for many days. And if pain occurs violently or suddenly or inflammation happens in the area, then you should remove it at once and apply a poultice to it.
And take a cloth and a sponge of seawater, soak that in brine, and apply it to the area until the pain subsides; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover it with wool soaked in vinegar or olive oil rubbed on it, and keep it on overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the limb subside, and alleviate the pain.
And then apply that fine poultice lightly without straining your original bandage, and keep it subtle until the area is healed.
And if you see that the abscess, the redness, the pain, the inflammation, and all other accidents have been alleviated as much as possible, and no further poultice or bandaging is needed, then continue to apply it in the same way as at the beginning.
And if no cause occurs to the member of those we have said, then remove it after approximately three days or four or five or seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you see by the sliding of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and becomes attached to the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
And then adjust the tighter constraint more than in your first constraint, and adjust to the swelling of the food pipe, according to whether the memory of it precedes.
If you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then perceive that nutrition is forbidden to reach there; therefore, moisten that area with water from a sponge all day long that you applied there; do this for three days; loosen the constraint a little, and by this operation supply the member with nutrition, and it will be healed slightly.
But what the scribes of fractures do another day when the member is not restored to its beginning, according to what it should be, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear; if they were right about this enlarging the Ancients in their books and warned about this work.
And I have never seen any of them do so, which makes it even more reasonable that this should not be done.
Chapter Two: Of Fractures When They Occur in the Head.
The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, where the impact breaks the bone completely through the cartilage, leaving the bone as if cut in wood; thus, this type of fracture is called atransverse. Or the blow affects some part of the bone, cutting the flesh but not passing the incision into the marrow; this type of fracture is called an absolute elevation.
And the swelling of these two types of fractures can be great or small, and the frictional fracture is caused by impact on stone or pavement, resembling them in appearance.
And this fracture can be penetrating, coming close to the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the swelling of these two fractures can be great or small.
And this fracture is made in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this it is named this kind of fracture called capillary.
And this fracture is caused by compression or percussion of a stone, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as happens with iron payroles when they are struck, and the part of their entry into the internal parts.
And this is mostly caused in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of infants.
And all these kinds of fractures are serious, like separate wounds. And I will add a reminder of all this in its place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures through detection by their marks and through inquiry about the broken flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary fracture is known because it is discovered on the bone, scraped off, and limits around it, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and when you see by the accidents that it signifies manifestly by signification fear, thus as is vomiting of bile, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, swelling of the eyes and redness of those, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the greater disposals, then doubt not that it is serious.
And if you see uncommon accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin the treatment of it.
The cause is that if the patient has come to you in the beginning of the injury and is injured, and this occurs during the days of winter, then consider that you study in the bone's membrane the day XIV according to all disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then consider that you cut the bone on the seventh day, having to know that what remains of the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that uncommon accidents may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the brain, and is broken into many pieces and is irritated, then consider that you incise the broken part and irritate it, according to what I will recount to you.
And you should raise the head of the patient, and uncover the area over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible according to the shape of the wound, and let it be light on the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flows of pus or abscess, then you should apply something that fits, and it is that you fill the area with infused cloths in wine and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is relieved; and when you are sure of the flow of pus; then gradually start at the circumference of the bone and around it.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor slightly to the side of the first; and this is its form:
And then use the incisor slightly more to the side of the second.
And carve out that you are named incisore various, of which some are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and be in the rear part of the sharpness of their extremities, and be of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisores so that it does not strike the head and lead that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you should perforate in the circumference of it before you use the incisores with the tremors, which you name shallow perforations.
And they are not named so, but rather those that do not reach the end of the bone's depth to what is close to it, so that the tremor has a round extremity or edge over that which leaves the head of the perforation sharp, resembling a small margin or circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you use a great number of these tremors, each of which suits the thickness of each bone, within which let the extremity of all be sharp, the quantity in length and shortness be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
This is the form of three species of trephinations: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is to place the trephine on the bone and rotate it with your hand in the hole called entro until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then remove the trephine to another location, and pause where it goes through the entire thickness equaling the size of the ray or around it.
And then incise with the scalpel where you go through each part of the bone, and make that fine pus above it on the surface of levity, as we have said, until you remove the bone, or with your hand, or for some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and thin tongs.
And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
And therefore, after perforating the bone and separating it from the cavity if it continues with it, you will extract that part. Make sure to rasp and smooth it out on the roughness of the bone using another instrument similar to the scalpel, but ensure it is finer and thinner than other scalpels.
And if there is any small part of the bones fractured and set, then take that easy way with what you should do of the instruments; and next cure the wound with linens and ointments which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Gualia described and incised with great skill; this is the way he said: At the beginning, you must necessarily start by uncovering the part of the bone where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, which has this form:
And it is that the lens-shaped part is bone and you must not incise for any cause, while the acute part divides into two halves lengthwise, as you see; so that the lens-shaped part is placed against the handle of the incising blade, which meets the acute edge on the bone.
And then strike on the blade at one small spot where you will incise the entire bone easily as it is turned, and you must be sure of the ligament that it does not accidentally interfere with the accident you fear in any way, and if the doctor was the worst fool of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, even if he were asleep.
When some cause affects any part of the bone in certain parts of the body, it will incise that one at the extremity of the incised lenticular one, and release that one with ease, for it is relieved from its damage and fear.
And if the bone fracture does not penetrate into the muscle, and what is excised or remains of the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine sutures, then you must scrape that roughness away and eradicate those fine sutures with sharp instruments prepared by you in various quantities so that you can administer from them the most convenient parts of them and the right part according to where you have directed your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And you must administer according to your proportion with which you scrape the bone at its beginning using the broader part of those razors, and then use the finer part thereof, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thicker and finer part of all.
For in any other fine or subtle fractures, you must administer care according to where you have directed for the correction of it.
And it is because they are not accustomed to all those who have studied that art. And place us on what they write, as we have shown in great fractures.
And if the bandage is cut when you remove the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in olive oil, and place it over the wound opening; then take another piece of cloth folded or tripled, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this lightly enough that you do not weigh down the dressing; then apply lint over it, and do not press it more than the size of the wound requires.
And leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines that need superfluous dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, and powder of thyme and of aristolochia, and similar to those.
And you make these medicines into a powder that is sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine of a nature that cleans and does not irritate.
And guard that in your treatment the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it have deafness of ointment or another; nor leave to add virulence in it; for when adjusted over the cotton padding of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and occur on the patient near this malicious evil.
And it happens in the skull of the head, as from it is changed the bone and most especially when the cure of it is neglected, and darkness in the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is perilous for him.
And if no darkness accideth but from the medicine that is applied above, and is in virtue of that medicine which maketh that darkness, then take that thou mixest a part of honey with three parts of rubbed oil, and line those with a cloth, and place it over the skull; and cure it with the spices of cure that thou deemest fitting until it be healed.
Third.
Of restoring the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together or one of those few fractures, for in the nose there are two bones; the part you have is cartilaginous and not broken, so do not damage it but rub and apply friction.
But if one of the two parts is broken, you must introduce the little finger into the nostril and equalize the fracture inside according to your previous indication, and outside with your other hand, so that the nose returns to its natural figure. And do this for you with ease, and watch that it does not swell as a result of your operation on the patient in pain.
And if the fracture is in the cartilaginous part of the nose, and your finger does not reach it, then you must equalize it at the end of the rib where there is a slight swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And by cot tea you have restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, shortly after the seventh or eighth day, you should apply the rest from the apostema caut.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or two strips, if the fracture is in two parts, and let it expand so much that it fills the nose.
And this is said by some of the ancient restorers that the strips be wrapped in oil, and be changed throughout the day. But I have not seen it done; instead, use a cover so that the cloth is soaked in honey wax mixed with powder of pounded drugs; and leave the strip until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a strip, a poultice wrapped in linen cloth; and this is for when the nasal fracture is severe enough that the patient is not prohibited from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use strips.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster with honey or a cloth dipped in vinegar and olive oil, or with a diaphoretic.
And if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame flour and powdery colocynth with honey; then place your hand on the patient's stopa (a part of the foot), and do not apply any heat to the nose for any reason.
And if the bones of the nose are broken or slightly fractured, when you need to split those bones and extract them with instruments suitable for this; then close the incision, treat that area with something that heals and consolidates, and apply plasters as appropriate.
And if a plague occurs inside the nose, when you need to treat that with washes and administer lead canulas until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial and not broken into two parts but bent inward, in which case the awareness is slight.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should introduce the left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then introduce the right index finger; and push the gelidity of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outward, with your other hand from the part outward of the bone; do this properly to that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the straight line where possible for their alignment.
And if there is a loss of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those which you hope will break on the edge of gold or silver or cedar; and place your hand over the broken jaw with cautery, place it over the doubled cloth, and place it over the large star-shaped stake decently made, or a piece of wood equal in length to the jaw; and place that above according to how the ligature is applied to it and what you find convenient for its application, provided that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and refrain from his usual services for a day.
And if you deem that the figure has already been altered in any way, then let it rest for the seventh day; and then correct what is already altered in it and plaster it with powder of molybdenum, or with ash of oak, or with flour of alum, after which you have applied cerote to it, and place a lion's skin over the plaster.
And then, once the plaster is properly applied and the bone's position is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for this fracture will be strengthened in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said previously in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
And if the fracture is comminuted, then consider whether it is a severe separation of the bone or a compression fracture. Then you must carefully excise those compressions according to what is appropriate for their removal.
And if the wounds are wide, then enlarge them by means of trepanation according to the quantity of your need.
And when you have completed those stages, and from there it will not be necessary to enlarge the wound, then place yourself over the wound if it is large; otherwise, cover it with one of the plasters that are suitable and apply it until it heals.
Capitol V.
For the restoration of the furcula when it is dislocated.
When the furcula is fractured, you should break the muscle in front of it, and the fracture can occur in one of three ways.
When it is fractured, separated, or separated into two parts without going through stages, the restoration is easier; if it happens through stages, the restoration is more difficult; or when the fracture is through a wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture is through a wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and guides the broken furcula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
And then equalize the fracture by placing it in the sockets according to its form, and do not place it at a low point or in a depression.
And if you need more extension, when you place the patient's limb on a pad or wool, let its length be according to the quantity of your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and hold the pad with your hand so that you equalize the fracture according to its form.
And if you cannot extend the extremity of the fork to the parts outward, because it is obstructed by the knee, then place the patient on their side with their neck and shoulder supported, and place a cushion half the size over the muscle.
And the surgeon presses the muscle of the limb inward until the bone of the fork is elevated to the level of the knee, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it in the sockets.
But if you feel gaps in the fork and it is loose, then cut there and remove those gaps easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then make an incision on it using one of the bistors you have prepared for this, after placing the furcula (a type of instrument) as the support for the chisel; and this tool is made of wood or iron, of which this is its form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the cavity; and its width according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But its length should be according to what is possible in the operation; that it has two extremities thus like you see, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and you are sure it has an abscess, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with a suture.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with bandages and powders according to the amount of the incision in the wound.
And if a boil occurs, then immerse a cloth in oil, rub it well, apply it, and place it over that area.
And always ensure that the stick does not touch the broken bone; thus, you can see the bad part every day. When the lint becomes softened or you see the stick already dry, then correct this and strengthen the ligature.
And then place the patient's head on its pillow, and carefully support the patient's neck so that during sleep at night a small cushion is under it; thus allowing the support of the affected area by the ligament of that region to be elevated, and therefore the fracture of the furcula is raised to an elevation of the muscle; or the arm of the patient is laid on the side of that.
And do not loosen the bandage unless there is an accident or abscess in the same place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see the surface of it turn to this, and adjust it to the stricture and restore that, and let the fracture of the furcula be restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the most in twenty-eight days, and in some cases it is done in less time than that.
Capitol. VI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spoon blade is broken in the lateral part of the wound and not from the wound itself but from the margins.
And when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the place — and is not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare that place and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner in which it is possible for you.
And then place on the area powder of ground albino wheat and stopped hyena; and then place powdered duplicated cloth; and then place over the stick on the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or a little more.
But if you leave the stick concave in some parts of the spoon, then level that concavity with stopped hyena, and then place the stick according to equality.
And then strengthen above with compress cloth tightly and firmly place the stick so that it is not displaced from its place.
And consider the dressing on each day; and all days that it is softened, dress again and strengthen and level the stick if it is displaced from its place.
And apply the patient's knee over its own leg so.
And the spatula is restored in 20 days or in 25.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and you know for sure that it is from which bones their beginning was neither feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then put a ligature there, cut over it, and hold it as we have said in the fracture of the furcula with an apostema caut, if this happens here.
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its length, and this takes time to heal; more often, the ends become callused and comminuted.
And the complications when the foot breaks in its middle are that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and fever. These are evident within the cavity of the broken bone and cannot be hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that they are supine on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their spine against the bones of both sides, and with subtlety in the operation and equilibrium in every manner possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place it on the plaster and padding, and place it over the table with a thin layer of wax or pitch similar in weight, so that you wrap it in cloth; then with subtlety place it around the broken bone to ensure it is not too tight; and gradually bind it along the back several times, strengthening it with proper tension; and always consider the binding at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity causes a discharge from that, you should incise or probe, or relieve pain, or treat the abscess that occurs in the area. When you incise and remove it, eradicate the plaster and correct what has occurred with the method of curing it; then reduce the plaster, if you notice this; and adjust its tension as it heals.
Chapter VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join two together; and from their ends at the front part, such contact does not occur since they are cartilaginous. And the perception of it is not hidden to the senses by touching it with your fingers.
And the restoration should be done as you equal the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly复原应当尽可能地用手指调整骨折部位，使其对齐，然后根据情况敷上药膏并用夹板固定，如果需要的话。
And if the fracture of the ribs is located at the internal parts, it will cause severe pain and puncture-like sensations in the patient. This is similar to the pain experienced by someone who has pleurisy, and for this reason, the rib is covered with a bandage; and it causes difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to blood. This is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
And from them they say: place the patient in a position where foods are induced to cause inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven towards the outward parts.
But let us first say that this should not be a light matter to apply a cauterization; if it already occurs, then help is needed for this.
And some of them say that it should be positioned above the abdomen and near where it swells with strength; although this seems like a reasonable argument, nevertheless it is feared that the swelling might drive the superfluities to the area due to weakness.
And some of them say: place the area under a cover of wool that has been submerged in cauterizing oil, and sprinkle powders between the ribs until it is full, ensuring the poultice is equal in thickness as you wrap it according to its roundness; then treat the patient with a regimen of dietary cures and medicine.
And if the severe constriction causes pain in the patient who cannot bear it, and they need to be punctured with a lancet through the veil, then beware of the patient, and immediately cut over the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then place yourself above that instrument which must keep the chip, the memory of which precedes, and by which we shall incise easily and extract it.
And when we have adjusted the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and we treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise it and insert powder in oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is suitable for the abscess inside.
And let it be dressed on the cloth on which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitulum IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the thoracic and cervical spine.
Sometimes when there are fractures in the bones of the neck, and then apply friction to them, similar to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot grow, extend, or strengthen, and when you stretch them with your hands or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and in such cases the condition is fatal.
And if you stretch them and feel the pain in the muscles with your hands or prick them, then you know that the bone's marrow is saved and that the illness will heal through cure.
And if you feel in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider the feet.
And if you feel that they are already softened, apply what happens in the muscles to them, and when they lie on their back, have freedom of movement and excretion according to their will, and sometimes they are lifted onto their back and want to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is fatal, and then do not attempt to cure them.
But if no other cause occurs there, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for this is to puncture for the extraction of the abscess with a cautery that you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or on well-heated pieces of wood; place it over that area for several minutes each day until the abscess is extracted.
And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and apply pressure to that area; and command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that the fracture of the bone is displaced or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must cauterize the wound and keep the bone in place; and properly adjust the two edges of the wound, sew them if they are large; and apply some flesh-colored ointment to that area until it is healed.
But if the heel of the bone is broken, and it is the end of the toe, then you must insert your left hand's thumb into the foot, and equalize the broken bone with the other hand as much as possible by second equation; and then apply a plaster and bandage, if needed, and properly keep pressure on that area.
And if you feel broken phases in it, then work on that, hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that is to follow once it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of health.
The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split in length and decline towards the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient with pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it fractures.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area while it is over the fracture, which is the shape of the bone.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the bone, then you align that part according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or that which already declines towards the inner parts, then you place the patient on their side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized that, place a plaster over it, and then place the wooden or copper rod over it, and tightly bind it without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
And equalize the cavity so that it fills the space where that will be bound tightly according to equality, and command the patient to lie on their back or on their side.
But if an abscess forms, stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated. Place a plaster over it to cool it as described previously; then return to restoring it, and tightly bind it as appropriate.
And if this occurs in the bone during fragmentation or comminution, treat it accordingly.
Capitol. xi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutori is that which is between the condyle between the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you should use a splint of good wood according to this form:
And place two threads at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
And place the patient on a cushion; and then put his broken arm on the splint until it reaches the middle point where the curve of the splint is attached.
And place it suspended above that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor apply pressure to the fracture with his hands at all times, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
And the other way is that the patient be resuspended on his own neck and hold his head with a thread; and then command two servants that one of them holds what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then place strength on the fracture with one piece of wood and another on another part, and each of the two servants stretch at their respective parts.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then place half of the splint on the muscle and leave the other half on the fracture to secure it.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the splint in that location and on that joint.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it as much as necessary when it is properly equalized and applied correctly.
But if an abscess forms, then leave the tension within for five days, and place a piece of clean woolen cloth soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the place of a splint, without prohibiting anything due to a broken bone.
And then use splints.
And you should place that splint over the fracture which is longer and stronger than the other splints; and place the distance of your thumb between each splint, with the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three thumbs' width.
And then firmly place the splints at the fracture which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And make your bandage over the site of the fracture tighter. And when the fracture is longer, use a looser bandage.
And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the bandage as we have said in the hour when you restore the limb to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the stricture and stakes inside for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no accident happens at the puncture site or inflammation; or if food is prohibited due to the disposition of excessive stricture; and therefore correct all this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause will happen from this, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's knees be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place your hand on the assistant's full woolen cushion, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not distorted, or that the ligament is not softened, therefore correct this with your virtue.
And withhold food from the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning while it is being gradually strengthened; then increase the amount of food.
For customarily the legs and their waist are strengthened in forty days; then they should be loosened and a bath should be given, and an ointment applied which rectifies that.
And if the fracture is not yet healed, then do not loosen the bandage and splints for at least a day or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
On the restoration of fractures of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the forearm, while the latter is large and is placed beside the smaller one.
And if the larger bone of the arm is broken alone, or the smaller one, and if both are broken together, they must be set properly.
And when the smaller bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its healing is more rapid.
And when the fracture of the leg is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing thereof is difficult.
And worse when two long bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small tibia, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, allowing a slight extension between them to facilitate healing.
But if the large tibia is broken, then you must allow more significant extension.
And if both tibiae are broken together, then you must allow more forceful traction.
And you must place your hand to restore it and extend the limb over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above, more than all the others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the leg should be extended on a tilted bench.
And place a cushion in front of it at its height or upright, so that the leg does not undergo further strain.
And then the minister extends the arm from that side and places it or wraps it with linen, and another minister extends similarly above.
And then the doctor realigns the bone within the joint according to the best shape he can.
And if there are cracks in the bone, then you must force it to reduce completely into its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separate crack that cannot be closed as you wish in the restoration of it, then you set it aside and treat it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is open, I have already treated this separately, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with wax made from oil rubbed and white wax, making it medium in thickness and fineness, and tightly wrap the cloth around it between layers for the abscess to yield. Then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared with powder of madder in honey, and place a bandage; let the bandage cover the area on the side and more strongly.
And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I saw in major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the greater the tension at the parts above the fracture or at the lower parts of it, place the compression a little more moist according to how the remembrance of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture be moistened with liquid, not hard nor rough, and the fat oil which is strengthened be of the proper mixture between subtle and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and joint for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as previously mentioned what happens to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that irritation ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the compression.
And if the contraction is already softened and the bone is already mended and resembles those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have said occurs, then you must not let it be released or about those within approximately twenty days.
And place the patient's hand for its virtue of movement agitation, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or around thirty-two days, or more gently in twenty-eight days, and all this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the arrangements of virtue.
Capitol.xiii.
On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers tendons are located, and do not injure them but rub with visible threads.
And when fracture or tendons are injured, let the patient remain lying down and before the limb be extended equally, then place your hand over the extended one.
And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those so that they are aligned well.
And then let you apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; then place a candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
More so if the rupture is in the inner parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a pocket of cloth, and command the patient to hold that tightly with his ruptured palm; then have him hold it firmly with long cloth.
And let the candle be held in cloth in which it is placed lightly, so that the heat is applied to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is in the outer parts, then you should place another strip above the bone and another strip on the side in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you are turning your hand at a right angle between your fingers with grains of wheat.
If a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip upright so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, or the little finger, then equalize and ligate it on the finger where that bone is; or ligate all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above it, as we said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and especially that, the placement of cautery and opposition — in your operation — according to what you see when a cause from those occurs, as indicated in the narration.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the hip bone.
The hip bone fractured is perceived according to how it is displaced frontward and backward.
And the restoration is done by reinforcing the ligaments over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their abdomen and face.
And then the surgeon extends the ligament along its proper side according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is close to the rim of the hip, then place the ligament along the side of the pelvis, so that the extension reaches there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the rim, then place the ligament along the rim, and the extension to the sides below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to develop an abscess in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you leave it for a few days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: first ensure that you wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and secure it from any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
And insert a long needle between the thigh and the upper part of the leg near the fracture, ensuring that the ends of the needle reach well beyond both parts. Then roll over the bandage and thigh with what remains excess from the wrap.
And then place something over the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is constricted.
And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle of the thigh over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, finer, and softer your bandage should be.
And then extend the ends of the bandage to the sides where it reaches the foot's arch, and tighten both ends of the strings from the other side so that the bandage does not shift from its place.
And then place the bandage over it such that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation in the limb; and if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then immediately treat them, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
More specifically, if the bone itself is severe and cannot be reduced as much as possible, then fix it in place and treat the area from which memory of the injury was recalled until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to its sides, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But still in the restoration done in such a manner no harm occurs to the patient's ability to walk; and if it is restored alone, or another part is applied to the other side, then it is necessary that the patient limp for some time.
And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other arrangements.
Capitol.xv.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often results in more severe and prolonged atrophy.
But if the fracture occurs, then it is merely a crack or a tear in its parts, and this is either one-third or two-thirds, and above all, there is no significant sensation.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers so that it may be added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, ease, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and your hand on that round plaster, if you need it; and strengthen above at the site to what is appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as with an abscess, cauterization, and appearance to those that are applied to every accident according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; and the other is thin and is named the pubis.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur in the ilium as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason, its restoration is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
However, if the joint fracture has visible spots, let the extension be more gentle and lighter, and bring relief with your virtue.
And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, and when you equalize the stars and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are located in sutures, and make them thus from palm branches; leave those with little roughness, but not like large knots, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and between them place those with more smoothness.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be underneath at the base of the foot.
And then place the two straps in three locations of both extremities and at the middle location, for in this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it must be well positioned.
And then a brace of wood has been applied according to the length of the leg; and place the leg so that it maintains its movement.
And above all, ensure that you do this in a fracture, for when there is such a condition, it is properly called a dislocation.
And then consider the leg each day and study it carefully, and guard it from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then apply to it what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fracture does not occur in the talus at all; more commonly, fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not occur to them unless they are rubbed in the proper manner.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on the prepared ground as shown.
Then place the other foot above those elevated bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
Then apply plaster and set it over, and place the abdomen of the foot on a small table with two convex ends.
Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in proper structure, after you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger straight according to its length, and slightly to one side. Then lay the hand on this table which you have adjusted, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each broken bone straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, pierce the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and apply this method to any similar case.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis bone and the scrotum of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, make that cut in the inclined position, and then incline it slightly towards the upper part of the leg, and let it be held behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as desired; and then the woman is supported, and her leg is lifted gradually, for all this must be done before the upper part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, wet the cloth to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return it according to the manner in which you mixed it at the beginning, and then return it to its original powder.
And do so for seven days or until those recover, for they are being restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound on the patient's back; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and soon blow through the tube to infuse virtue into the bladder so that it inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with wet cloth and left for some days according to our reckoning, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and stitching of it what we have prescribed for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that occur rarely, but especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major just disposals in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from pain, and insert the thigh into it; then place your hand over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and heal it.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to treat those upon whom a displaced fracture has occurred, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the humerus, or similar. You should set and bleed that area frequently, provided the conditions for bleeding are favorable as we have stated above.
And if the displacement flows pus, then you should set it to retain the fluid and try to sprinkle safron on it. If another cause is not present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that day, and do not delay this if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration of it for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh or tenth day, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes over the knee joint, then you must probe to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
But if the extension is not to your preparedness and cannot be equalized with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for any type of fracture.
And it should be round, and of moderate size so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with margins at the edges; and be thick on the outside, but thin within.
And this is the form of the instrument:
And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of the patient be elevated above the end of the bone.
And draw it back in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take the instrument well, then it is customarily that you insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise that part as is appropriate for it from among the incisors which we have mentioned; or it may be that part using one of the saws in any manner that is possible for you.
And quickly remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, if the patient finds intense pain in the bone, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and then do what you will confer with the patient for great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then immerse a cloth in vinegar tied with a black string, and properly in summer, and do not stay over the wound with a wet cloth or any other cause involving oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption occurs.
And then administer steams at the time of the full hour after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it has healed sufficiently, using forceps if necessary and employing bandages according to the size of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound near the fracture, for many times doctors have caused this to happen to their patients, leading to death or a severe and corrosive illness, if it is healthy. And if the swelling is mild and different from the swelling of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain at that place, then do not stay over it with steams, but apply a cloth wrap instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when usually one or two days have passed since the wound has started to swell where a blister is formed, then lift up the cloth you had placed over that area, and then apply cold blisters, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat wounds, thus applying tetrafarmakon and resembling it.
And you should remove the bandage and examine the wound at midday and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the part is prepared in such a manner that pus flows from it to the areas left open.
If the wound passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the blister been removed from it, then you should know that here the blisters are situated. You must examine the wound by pricking it. And of those blisters, those that are separated remain and are extracted, while those that are not separated and cause pain in the limb, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the wound turns red or black, it is stiomenios or another form of corruption and putrefaction. Then you must examine each one of those as described in the section that precedes the treatment for which there is a detailed narration in its own chapter.
And from where the child was lying, you make your presence known: when the head is broken, stand over the member thus like the head of the patient and the helper, seeming like those of large members, and do not presume extraction or introduction of any foreign objects; for if such accidents occur, death will result; have left that which can resolve itself within, for it will fall away on its own in about 20 to 30 days; and then cure the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of a birth that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Foreign objects may cause this birth in the vicinity of the healing fracture, especially near the joints, and distort the shape of the member; and strongly prohibit the member from its natural operation.
Then consider if the birth is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and balsam; compare them to those substances; try which you take from these some or all, confirm whether they are astringent, or white of egg, or oily; place them on the birth in cotton, and apply pressure with good compression.
Leave the compression in place for several days; then remove it and apply another, during which time the swelling should subside; or strengthen the lead sheet downward, as lead has the property of reducing anything that is inflamed in the limbs.
But if the knot has already turned into a stone and is hardened, and if necessity demands to cut it out, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or cut through it with forceps until it subsides; and treat that area until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of fractures, when restored and then immediately let the limb heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then let the thin limb and flesh heal according to their natural course: this is not done except for certain causes. Of which one cause is the excessive dissolution of the ligament and its connection made not according to what is due; or due to excess compression of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the heart of the patient tender while the disease multiplies within it; apply baths; and insert tubes and joy into it.
And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nutrition, or continue the moistening with white wine, while the nutrition flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter XXII.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced in a tortuous manner and prohibit the operation from being carried out on such cases.
When the member, already reduced, is near the completion of its healing from tortuosity and prominence in the broken bone and nodulation, and this is due to the form of the member, yet the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then you should not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish doctors and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in water of mule urine in which are placed soft herbs, such as those of althea, rue, melilot, similar to those; and it should be made a plaster with a mollifying plaster thus well prepared; or that is prepared with mucilage of herb of althea and is compacted with grey of gauze or oil of cinnamon, and is applied with that; or that are prepared with fatty figs and are wrapped in cloths of dove, similar to those of the medicines named almond consolidatio.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction applied to the most humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered continuously at all times.
And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, converted into a stone, and provoked it is necessary for its cure with iron, then it should be that the pus above the cecum and the continuation of the bone be dissolved, and it should be incised what is superfluous of the nodation of that method on the bone with incisors subtils, and should be administered facilitated in that area with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On the speech about dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of any joint in a certain location, making movement prohibited and altering the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to act promptly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area may become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of gangrene, as hot applications cause spasms and severe pains.
More specifically, when this occurs, you should attend to the incision for draining the gangrenous area in the foot, and allow it to rest until the gangrene has subsided; then, the limb should be bathed with warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
And every member be treated with water of which the memory will come to its place.
And I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what precedes in fracture; from the part of the body first, then to the part next, and leave it.
Chapter 24.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are barely moved from their places and slightly mollified; or they are completely dislocated, after which they are mollified at the joint where saliva flows from the patient's mouth, and the patient cannot open nor close their mouth, with their tongue wrapped in a cloth.
More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place with little cause in major displacements.
More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and thorough, you should administer a gentle reduction immediately, and not delay it entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the gap of the jaw inside the mouth if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers holding the cheeks; and command the patient to stop moving his jaw and bring those that have wandered back to their places; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not relaxed, then place it on powders of linen with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply a soft pad to facilitate the bandage.
And let the patient lie on his back, with his head standing between two pillows, so that it does not weaken on either side; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food forbidden until the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then weaken what he desires.
And let this be given in moderation, and you should not work on the appetite of his mouth by letting him eat and drink or take medicines until his jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places causes fever and frequent swelling, and a strong pain in the abdomen of the patient, as well as severe vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is dangerous; and frequent swelling may occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the stern inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms. And then compress the area with your palm with strong pressure, for it will return.
And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and strengthen it.
More often, the extremity of that which is attached to the thigh is not dislocated in any day; then it must be reduced and realigned as we have said and according to what is at your disposal.
And then place your hand over the area, apply the plaster and powders, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this therapy, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any other way than three manners, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is mostly dislocated and pushed outward to the back parts of the tendon at the bone, especially in those where there are few muscles, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it is pushed outward with difficulty.
And sometimes due to the force of a blow or impact, a man's muscle becomes infected with an abscess, and is cut because it is already dislocated.
Then cover what you are especially over them with, and proceed in the cure of them.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder area, you must manipulate; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the normal muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. By manipulating the head of the muscle, it should feel like a hollow, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear, nor move it with all movements.
If it is dislocated, manipulate the foot or above it, and then you will find a clear touch, not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is unconscious.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the area; then places his fingers on the shoulder, manipulating it with strength at the joint. The minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then presses the shoulder so that it returns gently.
If, however, it does not return through what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from the beginning, for several days, then the patient should be bathed in cold water and a moistening and liniment application given as if with roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be applied.
And then the patient should be placed on their back and kept in this position until the wool felt equally between levity and stiffness, and then the doctor places his hand on the surface, elevating the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the patient's hand so that it is not harmed at the joints, while another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being twisted.
And if you wish, return the other according to this manner: and it is that you have a person who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of the affected limb, and insert his muscle under the titillation of the patient's foot, elevating the titillation above the joints upwards while the patient's limb hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the patient's hand from the joints down its abdomen. But if the patient is light, then consider that another cause may be suspended, for fear that grave illness returns quickly.
And it is reduced slowly in another manner: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long rod whose head is round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, and then place the patient; then cover its head with lion skin, and let the patient lie according to the length of the rod. And extend your hand to the opposite parts of the body; and stretch the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this cure: and you should take a rod whose length is about two braccia, its width is four digits, and its thickness is enlarged at the tip according to this form.
And place lion skin over the round head to prevent the rod from injuring the patient.
And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm along the side of the body, and tie the limb to the support and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended along the sides, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon heal.
And when the instrument for him is completed in any way that is possible, then place under the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply an ointment prepared from powder of milled pepper and honey over all the muscle, so that it is well mixed on top, and tightly bind the head with a bandage; the headband should be rotated over the ointment, and the hand should be attached to the neck, and let it be, and do not move the hand for seven days.
And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comfortable, for it is more favorable to its recovery.
And soon after, more food should be given about seven or five times and exercise should be performed; and thus if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to several days of humidity that affected it or for another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery three times, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it for several days, and still are not closed and catgut is not placed and the arm cannot be raised above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should manipulate the foot and calf or the parts behind, reducing it with impulse and extension while it returns.
And let it be administered in the other stricture, and care that within which it is healed.
And if there happens an immediate gravity in the member and tardiness in the movement of it, then the patient uses warm baths until that gravity is alleviated and returns to its natural state.
Capitol.xxvii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden to you—whether by quickly observing or touching according to whatever form it is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder into place, this will be manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
And seek the sockets, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to an abscess. For if it reaches an abscess, reduction becomes difficult, and even with strong means, it is not fully cured; especially when it is in the rear parts, for it is more harmful than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and warm baths often bring about death.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended with two others, and his arm be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on his thigh and let him, and he press the joint with the heels of his hands or between the palm of his hand as it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, between striking the thigh with the palm of his hand.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
And have two ministers extend the arm, and hold that position with two ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
And then rotate the arm completely around, as it is wrapped with a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint and facilitates its return; then press the joint vigorously as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity, it should be placed on that cushion where there is a padding and drainage with white linen, and extended in a hanging position, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left for some days.
And after it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament of the foot and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then you repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
But if it happens to him that there is gravity near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, especially if it is a matter of excess fat; and then bind it, and leave it on the bone day and night. And apply that to it, and put it in the bath; when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and repeat over it for a while, especially if it is due to excess movement, once, and the second, and the third time. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place your hand over that moist and weathered crack and press strongly against it; do this several times, for that is moist and return it to its position.
Capitol. xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the shoulder.
Shoulder of the arm is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of such a dislocation is light. Conversely, for other joints, it is more important that there be speed in the reduction when it occurs, before the area becomes swollen or appestematized.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's arm joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The surgeon then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
But first it should be noted if the palm is already pressed against the patient's abdomen, then the patient places both hands on a table to extend and reduce; and if the dislocation is previous, place both hands, while the position of the hand is intricately on the table, so that the doctor's hand falls over that potential of the joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; but if not, then strengthen the area by packing it, allowing the abscess to come to a head and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor suffer for the reduction of it more than what passes in a day.
But according to the joint's tortuosity, strengthen it; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather have your hand mollified and unable to strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and there is no engendering in it except that you strengthen it with a cautery near its site and fortify it with this conferring some cause.
And since the gout has returned, place it over the packing which we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then release it, leave it, and exercise the hand.
And if the movement in it has been obstructed and occurs with some gravity, then apply that which is cauterized water and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cure of dislocation of fingers.
In some cases, dislocate the fingers entirely.
And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its center, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers, until it returns to place.
Then hold the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
And when it is night, manipulate it according to that instruction, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and manipulate it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And make it seem as if you are doing this, if it is dislocated in the hand, and hold that part to another part, and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you are doing this when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the spine in the second degree.
When you encounter dislocation of any of the vertebrae in the lower back or neck, and numerous vertebrae are affected in that location, there is no cure for it, as death may ensue.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion forces itself out against their will and they cannot retain it; several times, parts of the body, or one or both sides, or one of these areas, become soft. Or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, as several times a vertebra is displaced and multiple operations are performed to remove those in four directions.
Then that is reddened at the rear parts and is named jaundice.
May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice is caused by urines, then in that case there is neither cure nor does one fully recover.
May it be that in those caused by stone or by percussion or by appearance similar to those, the Ancients spoke at length about the methods of cure, regarding which the most returns are prophetic; but I will now abbreviate what is of little use due to its excess, for the nearness of my own understanding and exposition to which I have expounded and formed from various instruments, with which I shall show and expand upon that.
And of those, only the jaundice that occurs in the two specific areas as I have described is cured.
And the patient should be extended on his back as close to the wall as possible, and let him lie on something moistened so that his feet are not exposed.
And place a straight stick, planted in the ground at the end of the arm near its head, and another stick vertically under his feet at the other end of the stick.
The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and ensure that the ligaments are tightly bound. Extend the end of the ligament to the stick which is fixed at the head of the patient, and tie it there; and tightly bind the other ligaments over the hips of the patient with his kneels, and position his legs. And adjust all the ligaments and tie them to the other stick which is fixed at the feet of the patient.
And the minister should extend the ligament to the part of the stick, and do not remove both sticks and the ligaments in which they are inserted, but rather keep them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with force between which he returns, or places one hand on a table, and adjusts his feet on the table as he returns.
And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose breadth or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we have said that it is near the patient a place at the end of the table. And place the majority of the table over the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well between which the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open the wound which is rotated in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of two sticks, whose length is one braccio, and place his head at the heel of similarly two sticks; and let the distance between each stick be a palm, and already make a hole in each stick through which torn can flow, and let each be firmly fixed on the ground so that they do not move.
And let there be a round stick for the rod, and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole through which the stick passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is turned; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the foot of the patient in the hole through which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the rod through which you place its feet.
And then place each rod and have a minister hold the rod with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine according to what we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with an ointment made of goose fat, and a bit of wool; place a strip of cloth from a table, whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and whose length should fit the area of jaundice, over the part of the spine.
And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment under it until it heals.
And if there is any danger at the site near the end of healing, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and soothe for a long time, which we have recommended; and already a lead sheet has been administered in that location.
And sometimes dangers occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you already foresee that no suspicion should arise about it with this medicine, because it will make it very strong to your detriment.
Capitol xxxi.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the hip joint and the joint of the muscle should dislocate only in such a manner, and not occur with those things that happen to other joints with slight movement and depression.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated according to four manners; it is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the foot of the healthy side against the injured side, it becomes longer and the sole is more prominent than on the healthy side. The injured foot cannot bend its toe; this is the place where you should cauterize the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is already reached here.
And the sign of one that is affected by dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of it are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of one that is affected by dislocation to the anterior parts is that the foot swells according to the complement, but it cannot bend the toe that is in pain. If forced to go forward and cannot do so toward the anterior parts; his urine is retained and his swelling is an apostema, and you should treat his mobility on the sole.
And the sign of those who suffer dislocation in the rear parts is that they cannot expand the belly, nor can they bend what should bend, and the leg is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh is displaced at that location.
The main reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old, whether it has already hardened. If so, you should then reduce it gently according to its position, but not in all aspects; then one should not attempt to make any assumptions about it.
For the one where the dislocation is recent, and it is one of the four species of dislocation, you should reduce the joint by turning it back and extending it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left, as it will naturally return to its place without needing further treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the leg on that side, or place your hand under its thighs, or apply liniment which is rubbed over the leg below the belly; another should extend his hand from above so that it touches the patient's thighs with its fingers; then firmly apply liniment lion over the back of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the liniment.
And it is an extension of his back or from the angle to the fork part, or from behind to the side part of the spine.
And it is the extension of all these in one go, raising the patient's body from the ground and allowing them to hang pendulously.
And this type of extension is special for all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, ensure that the patient is laid on their side; then place the pillows on the side of the thigh in that location where between the head of the thigh and the angle area of the spine; then extend the pillow above the part of the angle to the other side of the fork.
And then another minister firmly holds the legs of the patient, and compresses the thick part of the affected thigh, extending it outward by strong extension, so that it returns to its proper place.
And this species is of such slight cure for which this member is reduced compared to other species.
And if you excuse me and do not follow the training for this species of cure, then make sure that both feet of the patient are tied together firmly, lightly over both the ankles and both the insteps.
And let the length of each be equal to the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And place the patient's leg above the stake's head, and let it be in the hand. Let the length of the rope be equal to the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong young man to hold down the patient's thigh, and another strong young man to suspend the leg. The other man should hold down the thigh with strength, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when dislocation is at the outer part, make sure the patient's leg lies on a pillow according to what we have advised regarding the position; and strengthen the rope around the patient's leg and over its ankle.
And then place two stakes, one on the patient's foot, and the other on the head; and place stakes adjusted in the middle of the stake placed over which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the stake is between the patient's thighs, for you must allow the extension from the parts left undone to be avoided.
And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then make sure that the leg is extended slightly, and this according to this narrative method about the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the injured thigh, and nearby draws it with the other hand, and at that draw place that extension to the rear parts towards the front part.
If the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not let the patient be stretched out on the back, but elevate them above the ground; you should place them on a hard surface, as if the width of their body is dislocated to the front, according to what we have said about its position on two widths; and they should lie on their side with their limbs extended, as we have said, not otherwise.
A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is dislocated.
So, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both sides of the patient's limbs, and when you test them equally and the joint extends its usual space, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place — then you place cushions and apply bandages so that the width is not disturbed in any part; and you keep the joint at rest for three or four days.
Then compare one limb with the other and remove the bandage and dressing.
When you see equal signs in the wound, then know that the dislocation is already closed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a plaster there, and bind it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
Then loosen it, and allow it to rest in mobility for each part for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their hand to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make sure the patient lies straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible; attach your knees to its face, and place your foot between its feet; then make sure the sole of your hand adheres to its sole, keep those between your fingers on its sole with strength, and another attendant stretches his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of its submission is that its leg adheres to the thigh with ease, without effort.
And then apply this and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and keep these in place with a bandage for three or four days, and later remove them.
And do not use the patient's leg for walking for some days until it is healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration was given.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is caused either internally or externally.
And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen from the part where it is dislocated.
More so, the treatment of reducing the ankle is by gentle manipulation, and it should be stretched with ease and returned to its normal position.
More so, in the treatment of the ankle when it is dislocated according to injury, ensure that you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured part at the midpoint.
And then, with your right hand hold the foot of the injured part above, and with your left hand hold the part below the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left by two stretches, and extend the left; and push the foot's sole to the right, let the leg bend as it works.
And do this twice according to how we have counted.
And then push the foot's sole to the bend on the third stretch, and you are at the knee.
So if it returns in one or two stretches according to this manner, and if you close the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for if it does not return.
But if in you the reduction of it as we have recommended is forbidden, then make a poultice on the sole of the foot, and place a hard piece of wood on firm ground, and let it press between the patient's thighs, and you have wrapped it with a cloth so that the poultice does not fall off.
And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with wood they place on the heel of the foot; and then each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the piece presses between the patient's thighs, holding that there, so that the body of the patient is not drawn to the sides you let them maintain their extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assists by holding the healthy thigh at the parts left open, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then, as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to be healthy, then apply a strong paste externally to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And be careful not to place lint over the nerves behind the ankle, as it might be too strong and severely irritate them.
And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint is moistened, remove it.
And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for ten days. More so, if it is necessary to walk before that time, there is no guarantee that the dislocation has not become dissolved and corrupted, and what does not receive treatment.
And if an abscess occurs in the leg, then when you administer treatment at the site of the lesion as we described earlier in our narrative, do so in another location for treatment and fomentation before it becomes suppurated.
Chapter XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Make sure that which is dislocated is gently reduced to a small extent; and what is not difficult, it is easier to do so beforehand.
But if the dislocation is in one of the big toes of the foot, then make sure you place the patient's foot on a level part of the ground or on a table, and keep it thus as if they were walking.
Then stand on the patient's foot, and place your own foot over the area near the joints. Gently press that part with your foot using its natural strength until it returns to its proper position, and observe that it is reduced without appearing as a prominence in that location.
And then place under the abdomen of him a table that can hold his foot, which has two ends, and strengthen it with structure decent and firm for three days; then remove it and make another repose of ambulation for several days, until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol.xxxv.
Of the species of dislocation that are caused by strain or fracture or any other means.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, you must guard against the occurrence of death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is wise in the art, long experienced, merciful and pious; who waits, not impatient, nor rash, nor presumptuous; and uses at the beginning of medicines that allow cautery to take effect only, and leave the outcome to divine judgment, rather than relying on any one method for complete recovery, but to whom you show some hope in the alleviation of illness, and in which you appear to have some hope. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, administer a regimen that prevents the formation of an abscess and heals the wound in a way suitable for it using drying ointments.
And if dislocation is with fracture and accidents in the bones separated, then you reduce their joints, and do so as we have said in simple ailments previously discussed in those locations.
And use and avoid according to your virtue that part of the instrument along the ways of fear as my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you to be held by your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true essence those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be blessed. Amen.
