Oh, my children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, through its completion and the end it brings, and by its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of surgical operation, so it is surgery.
Since the operation of surgery is prohibited in our region and in our times, yet it is a science that should not be neglected, and its principles are well-known; and only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients have survived, which correct many errors and hesitations among them, thus understanding of it has diminished and its force and art have been weakened.
And it is clear to me that I should vitalize that part of this treatise in accordance with the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes in line with the forms of the surgical instruments, including their addition by declaration and preparation, which is necessary for the cause.
More than that, the reason why a good artisan does not apply his hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long and difficult, and one must be trained beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen knew well, knowing the youth of the members and their forms, the joints and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number and their properties; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and the places of their contraction and expansion.
And for this, Hippocrates is said to have named it "Mot," but in his smaller work, more so in the art of the hand.
More than that, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for those who do not know what we have said about anatomy will fall into error on this account, which will cause men to die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science but proceed from the other sciences and their experiments.
For I have seen a foolish and inexperienced doctor who caused an apostematosis escrophularia in the neck of a woman, and severed some arteries in the neck so that much blood flowed, and the woman died from this.
And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had been suffering from his condition, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he drained that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be removed, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient lying there, he will die.
And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black slave who had suffered a fracture in the thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he removed the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then let it rest for a few days as commanded that we release the ligament; and thus remain so until the thigh and foot are fully healed, and only then proceed.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the ligament, and success brought peace and an attempt to relieve his pains.
But nonetheless, since corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not prevent it, and did not cease to circulate the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which the malignity of the illness increased in the lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely of melancholic humor, and does not affect the whole body, but rather affects a member which suffers from being assailed by it.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and one where the work is perilous in the major preparations.
And I have already existed in all parts of this book in which the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak ill of you.
And therefore take your weapons with zeal and protection of God, and your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way through the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible diseases difficult to cure, and place your weapons against what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not abandoned: for more remains to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gout is already dissected in some monastic texts: Do not treat disease with bad medicine, so that bad doctors are not named.
And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the head concerning the feet, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cautery, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and perforation, and on cups, and on plaigs, and on extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of torcicollo (a distortion of the neck), and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
I will describe the quality of the coals for the cautery and the ingredients used, as well as in what condition a cautery should not be used.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coal and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; much has been spoken about it by wise men, and they are in disagreement. To me, a little from their sermons will suffice, for fear of lengthiness.
And therefore it is said that the cautery comforts all kinds of universal ailments which are either in flesh or sinew, except for two kinds, which are gout ailments.
In the dry gout ailment, the flesh desiccates; for some said that the cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that the cautery is not suitable for a malady which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such a malady be treated with something that is itself dry and cauterizing.
And say that those who say the opposite are correct, for through the cautery, it is beneficial in all dry gout ailments that come in men's bodies. For when you compare the body to its humors and to the nature of fire, you find the body to be fiery.
And I say according to the saying of those who have experienced this and discovered it several times.
But I do not claim to have experienced this as much as those who have been well-versed in the use of the cautery through long practice, and who have come to know the diversity of human nature and the disposition of ailments in their various forms, and the causes of these, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of such times.
In other complications, there is no need for fear, and especially in wet and flaccid illnesses, since all doctors are agreed on those, and do not differ in applying cautery in them during youth.
And understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, in medicine involving burning instruments, is because fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterized and causing no great harm to other members.
And the action of burning medicine reaches there in the members where it touches, and strongly brings to the member an illness that is difficult to cure and quickly afflicts it.
And the fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to evaporate superfluous substances. We already know this through experience and long service in studying the art regarding the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my speech. If it were not that this is not written freely in this pause, and that you do not know the secret of the fire, which relates to the quality of its operation on bodies and the way it expels illnesses, a philosophical demonstration would be appropriate, which would enlighten your minds.
And be wise, children, that they do not disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and pause the best time of spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at any time, because the damage from the accidental timing is submerged in the youth of what is cauterized, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong wounds, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that those caused by evil intent are greater than small damage entering through time.
And thus do not trust in these, children, for they are only valued by the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus because they care for this, for a cautery is nothing more in medicine than a means to alter the composition and dry the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
But nevertheless, an excessive cautery over medicine for the swiftness of its virtue and effectiveness of its operation and greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that his illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the illness and the location of his illness, and its virtue, and what is prepared in his body from the accumulation of superfluities in him, and what is acquired by him in his nutrition and semblance of those causes; but the illness where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that that pain does not return there, more so when it is done in small amounts.
And more commonly said is that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a saying used by surgeons, not what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
And the cause is contrary to this; and the understanding that the cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not suffice, and at the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which then benefits. And at this point from here, the last remedy of medicine is a cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and most of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely dry; for I have already tried this and examined it, and found that it only works in some bodies but not others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; yet when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it has not been declared to you, for it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the roughness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; if you apply it over the ignition, the gold melts through the fire, and cases in the fire several sheets so that the artisan can cut by the occupation of that.
And for this, you should make the cautery of iron lighter and more precisely aligned with the proper operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those of the leg, so that I delay the asking for what one wants.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servant accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of swelling and a multitude of traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the regions of the cheeks and ears discharging, and a multitude of sleepiness, and toothache, and yawning, and generally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytic, swelling, apoplexy, and symptoms in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient, their age, and their habit.
And then command that his head be shaved, and afterwards cut his hair on a leaning bench and place his hands on his feet.
And then place the razor from your palm near his toes on the razor between his heels. More importantly, since the right place has been determined, mark that place with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery, which is in this form:
And then place the heated cautery over the marked spot with a needle, in such a way that it descends gradually, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the spot, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as a grain of barley, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or to another of those, if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little salt, dissolve it on the spot, and let it be for three days.
Then place your hand over the inflamed area on the side, leaving that part over the interior where the scar of the fire has been destroyed. Then apply a tetrafarmaceutical ointment to the area until it is healed.
And we have already said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the ankle should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until a part of the specified bone is burned.
Then scrape away what is burned from the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until it cools, and this is the method of Alphectus minor. And they believe that from that location, the vapors of the head escape.
And keep the wound open for a long time, and then treat it until it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, only in some men according to the way of fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when possible; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of it as we have testified in other members, especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do so for health.
Capitulate second.
Of the cautery for the head.
When pain in the entire head is chronic and long-lasting, and this has been prolonged in the patient, using towels, cloths, poultices, plasters, bandages, cataplasms, and especially if a cautery has already been applied but does not improve with any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; if it is cold or does not have much swelling, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is parted. Incise the vein and the quantity of the mouth which we have recounted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And raise your hand thus, and do not uncover the mouth, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauteries.
And I say this cautery in its place, for know that the cautery with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head, top.
On the cautery treatment for new migraines.
When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a dull pain between the eyes, the head should be treated with purgative medicines to empty it, and then the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, then cauterization of the head can be done in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, heat it up, and divide its ends into both sides. Then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid gently there and make the cut so it is concealed.
Then strengthen over the place stopped by descending compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; then remove and draw the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then place it under water submerged for a while until the area dries.
Then anoint the wound until it is healed.
And if you wish, do what some burning medicines they have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be done according to this method: heat it with fire, for which this is the form:
and it is called a key clamp, for the head of which has the form of a knife, in the middle of which there is a small projection.
And then place your hand over the location of the pain, so that the artery which is left is not adhered to it, and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the cut of the cord is as much as its quantity, lift your hand so that the artery is not adhered which is left, so that there be no flow of blood.
And then dip it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place a warm cloth over it, and apply ointment until it heals.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the scalpel according to the cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this new migraine properly.
Capitol quart.
Of the cauterization for ancient migraine.
When you cure migraine as we have said in the previous treatment, and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve the patient, and sometimes due to the disease which is not cured by what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place a line on the area of pain that corresponds to its size, or mark it; then place your hand for a moment and strongly apply it there to incise the artery and penetrate into the bone.
But you must guard against the continuity of the jaw, which is disturbed by chewing, and ensure that the skin is not adhered and the nerves which supply it are not damaged, so that no spasm occurs.
And if it is about the care and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or anxious; and leaves the operation to chance.
And I will recall the regulation of blood flow in cases of artery injury according to its manner, in place of this free text.
And if you see this illness has not reached this cautery and you find the patient's condition tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound while it is healing.
And if you see, administer the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the stretching of the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more appropriate.
Chapter V.
Of the cautery treatment for ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to inflammation and has been treated with other causes such as lactic acid, and another treatment as I have described in the division does not alleviate the pain, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
Then apply the puncta near the beginning, and it should be directed around the entire ear as if rolling a wheel, or along the circumference of any part where the pain is located. Hold the cautery at the root of the ear gradually moving it to the spot you have tested.
And if the cautery of these points in the entire ear, and then cool the areas, and proceed to cure the spots as they are healed.
Chapter VI.
Of the cautery treatment for tetanus.
The inflammation which is cured and treated with a cautery is nothing but due to the winds passing through the veins, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Avoid using the cautery for conditions due to drying or spasms of the nerves.
When you cure that kind of inflammation by jarring, headache remedies, and gargles, and if you are not satisfied with your cure, then when you treat the disease with three cauteries: the first should be at the base of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery at the opposite site of the affected area, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to place it along the outer part of the ear down a little above the corner of the head, and on the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the side of the finger. Then place your hand over the area where the quantity of the thickness of the wart has been burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is special to the barber-surgeon, the form of which is shown in front here. But more subtle is that when you see a little bit like this; and carve with a knife for a slight excess of crudeness.
And then cure the area where it is shown after it has been treated until it is healed.
Capitol. vii.
On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said, and if the patient does not have fever, then cautery treat that area with four cauteries: especially on all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the kidney. And the method of the cautery is made according to what was said above.
And already it has been cauterized at the mouth of the stomach; and more posteriorly; and then treat this with what you are doing.
Capitol. VIII.
Cauterization of oblivion performed by flame.
Apply that it be given to the patient at the beginning large jars and pills of the服众消。
And then wrap the head of the patient completely and place it over the heart as described in the treatise on plasters.
And place it for a few moments, as this is the way to cauterize. And do so according to that method and order as I have already said.
And therefore, if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cauterizations at the rear part of his head, which are descending from the upper part of the head towards the lower part of the neck. And place the thickness of your hand between each cautery, and then carefully apply the cautery as instructed.
And if you add more to the malate and it is tolerable, then apply the cautery in the middle location; and if you add too much, then cauterize it over the two horns.
Then carefully apply the cautery where it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped as given in the form.
Capitol. ix.
On the cautery treatment of parazili and the mollification of the entire body.
Cover that you process in mollification of the head with jellies and as we have said; then at the base of the malate, carefully apply the cautery in the middle location of the head, and over all its horns, and over the back part of it, and over three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of mollification of the body to add more cauteries and the malate is strong, then apply the cautery with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind with one cautery between which is firm from the backbone, and lift your hand. And then cure that which is within so that it is healed, and let this be an olive cautery.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, modify the brain of the patient at its beginning and in the other cure which we have described in the division when the illness is great and tolerates the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer gargling and chewing substances to the servant. Do this for several days, with improvement of the food.
And then place the hand on the patient's head, and carefully cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and another cautery at the occiput, and over each corner of the head, cauterize it. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize those points as mentioned, while keeping the body paralyzed and softened around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And cauterize with olive oil as previously described.
And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery in this manner.
Capitol. xi.
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross heat, then cauterize those points as we have said in keeping the body paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture turning into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then give them to drink what purifies their brain as described in the division.
And place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a tortora mark with it over the circle, and then pause in the middle of the head.
And if the patient is senseless from the cut, let him be held from all sides.
And then apply the liniment; it is more worthy to rub on an old sheep. And heat it over the fire for a tempered warmth by measure, which the patient suffers when more is applied. And then place it in the middle of his head in the circle, and let him remain until it is rubbed.
And do this to the patient once a week, and use the other regimen until he is cured; or if you wish, make a cautery of it by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on a properly arranged cautery: this is a special cautery which wets the brain in equal measure.
And then place that cloth soaked in oil or in grey of linen.
Capitol.xii.
On the cautery with water descending on it.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the stomach by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other one free from all moisture.
And let that sugar be bathed in decoction for several days.
And then command him to rub his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; and cauterize that spot with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of dysentery from water in two stomachs, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one stomach.
Cauterize all the veins and arteries which are left unclosed; and let the cautery be long in the width of the temples.
And guard against flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with any medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, as well as the caution against flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck leaving two bones really produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears from the feet are old and frequently present in the veins and arteries, which are located in a manifest place on the head above, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic fluids, then cauterize that area with the cautery we have recounted in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing in the feet, and use a cautery in the middle of the head, and two cauteries in the neck leaving two temples, and two cauteries in the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to add a cautery, then cauterize that area at the entire length of the sole of the foot near the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cauterization of nasal foulness.
When you treat that patient as we have said in the division and your treatment is not effective, then prepare and give to drink the mallow seeds to the patient for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery made of iron and another of olive wood. And then cauterize that area with a cautery made of carnation on the two supraorbital regions, leaving the hair a little.
And beware of the artery so as not to burn it.
And the form of the carnation cautery is this.
Capitulum XV.
On the cautery for the mollification of the eyelids of the heel.
When the eyelid of the heel is mollified due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery made of this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that area on the two supraorbital regions a little with two cauteries in total, and let them be long from the temples. And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the sore.
And do not press too much with your hand on the cautery, but according to the quantity that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the cautery of the eyelid when the skin is converted to the inner parts and palm of the hand.
When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must prick the eyelid. The cautery in these cases should be done according to two methods: either with a cautery or with a burning medicine.
If the cautery is with fire, command the patient before applying that the skin be pricked as those which are cleaned, entering where they are prolonged and equalized; and if I prick it, you hold it at its origin. Then strengthen the eyelids of the patient with a bandage so that it does not get infected until the skin is regenerated.
When they are born and equalized, then place the head of the patient on your lap, and nearby place a hand over the eyelids of the patient to test, marking the mark in the shape of a laurel leaf, which is the beginning of the mark for the skin.
Then place a cold compress in the eye or on the mucus membrane of the eye.
Then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows.
Then apply the cautery over the shape marked, little by little in small circles, until the surface of the wound is burned, which appears as a laurel leaf, entirely apparent and proper.
The sign of healing from this operation is that you see the eyelid of the eye start to contract and the skin around it rise, indicating successful puncture of the eye.
Then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the compress to ensure the scar is healed. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid is softened, then make another time the cautery over that area just as you have done first.
And if the skin is in the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is elevated to its natural place and is healed, ensuring that the skin does not remain loose.
And the cautery that burns with medicine: command the patient to extend and heal the skin until it is stretched, and then make a cloth in the shape of a mistletoe leaf.
And then take a known soap and fresh fat, or what is equivalent to this, and mix these fats well, and prepare this mixture to prevent it from being rubbed; then spread this over the cloth which is made in the shape of a mistletoe leaf, and place that over one side or both; and place the other side carefully on a wick soaked in honey, and the patient's head be at the middle.
And place it over the medicine and press it slightly but not too much so that the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for the biting is like that of fire.
And thus, to perceive the atrophy's biting, when you leave the medicine and press that slightly as you said; therefore, when the biting ceases, place the medicine and wash it well with water; then consider if the eyelid has risen as it was washed; if so, apply the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is good; and if not, return to the area where you did not press the medicine and ensure that your operation is equalized and constricted fully.
And then place it over the swelling between where the adherence has been eradicated, and then treat that with an ointment or another method so that it is healed.
And you must ensure that your operation is conducted with vigilant diligence so that the medicine does not fall into the wound. If the eyelid becomes softened over a few days or if any hair falls into the wound, then reapply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning. Then irrigate it until it is healed.
And this is the form of the surgical leaf.
And know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your incision is made.
And the way of the rectum must not be obscured for him to whom this art is studied.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the wound's lacrimal area.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of ailments and do not align your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head in your lap, and have another minister hold the patient's head between your laps in such a way that it is neither too tight nor agitated on his head.
And then place the cautery on the flesh in the fat of the wound or on the pustule over the patient's wound.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
which is hot, as is the form of a cane or a vuelto (a type of curved instrument), from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you insert it, let it penetrate to the other end. And if you want it to come out as it is drawn out.
However, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and clean and dry it out. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-heated cautery on it, and hold your hand a little above the entrance of the nose, so that your hand does not err or reach the patient if the wound is deep, and then place the cautery in the nostril and destroy that.
And so if at the beginning of your cautery it enters into the bone, that is good; and otherwise, then iterate the cautery one or two times, as needed; leave it thus for three days, and place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and apply an ointment once it is healed.
And if after ten days it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is revealed and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula which some first doctors will say: identify the location of the fistula and do it there, then place your hand on it with good retention, so that the ill humor does not enter because the melted lead does not reach there; cover it over the opening of the ill humor until it is well sealed like in a white of an egg or water, for the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said about the cautery and healing, that is good; and otherwise, it is necessary to administer a nostrum and reduce the fistula to the nasal cavity according to its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the cautery treatment of the wound in the foot.
Red marks or cracks often occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
So when you treat those cracks as we have said in the divisions and do not deepen your treatment, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
And let its cavity be according to the subtlety of the blade.
Then place that hot cautery in those cracks until the cautery reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then treat it with cerate until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
Of the cautery treatment of fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess develops in the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth and quickly forms, and soon breaks open and becomes chronic, and then a fistula is formed, and you treat it but do not deepen the treatment, then heat the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula. Place the heated cautery into the track of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches the bottom of it. Do this one or two times. Then treat it with what we have said about the treatment until it is healed.
And so if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to uncover the location and set the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
capitol .xx.
Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, cure those with medicines and do not confere. Then place the patient's head in cold water, and soon ignite the cautery in the form which will be described below. Try to place the cautery flame over the tooth and insert it into that area strongly, keeping it there for a short time so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times according to your desire.
Then the patient rinses his mouth with salt water and keeps it there for an hour, then spits it out, as the decayed tooth is closed and the softened gum is tightened, and the humidity corrupted is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the application of cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a abscess or pus, and you cannot achieve relief with medical treatment, then the application of cautery in that area can be done in two ways: either with a calf's foot cautery or with fire.
Cautery with a calf's foot is done by taking the foot of a calf and applying it to the place where the iron was placed. Then take a piece and wrap it around the tip of the probe, and immerse that with the bulbed part over the painful tooth, and keep it there pressing firmly until it becomes inflamed.
And then repeatedly apply it several times until the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if you do, soak a piece of wool or a piece in the calf's foot as mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth, and keep the heated iron on it until the iron reaches the root cavity of the tooth.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire you must attend to the wound of ear or of iron, and there be in its flesh some crusty substance and the acuity of the fire not penetrate to the mouth of the patient.
Then shape the cautery as it will come, and place that over the dent and put your hand inside so that the cautery is well rubbed; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
Ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and keeps it that way for about an hour; this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery the wound where you will cease according to what is possible.
This is the form of the cannula:
Capitol.xxii.
On the cautery for extrophy.
When extrophies are caused by phlegm and cold humors, and are not responsive to digestion through medicines, when you perform the digestion of those mildly, then you ignite the cautery in the form of which follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end, and place that ignited part over the abscess for one time, and another if you feel it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and let it remain for three days, placing a piece of wood over the deeper part where the fire has burned.
And then cure that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Capitol. xxiii.
Of the cautery for hoarseness and the constriction of the throat.
When the humidities affect the wall of the lung, and especially when it is due to cold constitution, then you must evacuate the patient at the beginning with medicinal laxatives, and then cautery the diseased vein in the area of distension.
And beware that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn along its course but only a little.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck on the rear part of his spine. And cauterize the collarbone in the manner previously described.
And then cure that which has been treated until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by moisture, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old illness, then cauterize two areas on the furcula over the depressions called lion's breasts and buoys; and another cautery in the middle of the foot area between the two mammary glands; and use a collarbone cautery as previously described.
And if you wish, make point cauteries at the locations where it is called puncta, and the form of which you describe in the section on puncturing for ear pain.
And make points into them; then carefully tend to that which the preceding method treats until it is healed.
And having the cautery with three prongs, the cautery is applied in this manner: with one pass you can make three cauterizations according to this form.
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should reduce its dislocation while it is in the process of returning, and by a slight movement, it will be relocated as it strives to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, then place the patient on their back or on their side; lift the knee which is in the inner part of the iliac region towards the outer parts above your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain where that enters the other limb; and the figure of the cautery will come when of two heads the cautery has.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because the cauteries are .viii.
And then place salt on the cautery for a while, and then make the patient adhere to rest, so that the limb is not used for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pricked cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is alleviated and the patient is cured.
Capitol .xxvi.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by moisture and humidity that extract from its composition and multiply within it, if you continue the curative methods without success, then you can suspect that gout has settled on his back, extending its hands and things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cauterization on the foot with a cauterization of the size of a finger's width, and two cautery placements on the sides of the cauterization, forming the figure of a triangular cauterization; and leave space between those not to be too close as they will cause suppuration.
And if the depth of the cauterization is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cauterization be as follows. If you wish, cauterize with a large cauterization in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this shall be a cauterization in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And the stomach should be cauterized with punctures where one is afraid of the cautery: and you prick the stomach with a point according to the quantity you want to test, then cauterize there with the puncture; then cure it with the cure that comes before it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cauterization of the sore foot.
When there is pain in the foot due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has not yet been expelled from its normal state through superfluous evacuation, and the ill state is treated as we have said and you do not find relief, then you should cause the foot to be placed on its neck, and prick three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity over the foot below the hypochondria, with one along the side of a person lying on their back.
And let the space be between each cauterization according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of a straight person's body.
And do not place your hand on the cautery while it is hot.
And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the swelling of the affected toe, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, when lying down, which has already extended its parts, raising its knees.
And it is possible for you to apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery when using your subtlety and prudence in the art.
And guard that you do not overapply the cautery, so that the cauterization affects the entire toe and spreads into the intestines, for the toe here is delicate; and know this.
Capitol. xxviii.
On the perforation of an abscess on the foot with a cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the buttock and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the buttock or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the buttock, the patient will experience increased gravity and pain intensity.
And if it is in the skin of the buttock, then the pain will be intense and often causes the doctors great fatigue in treating it.
Therefore, make sure the patient is lying on their side; and then find the location of the abscess and attempt to identify it; and then apply the cautery, which resembles a reed in shape, as shown in the preceding page. And cauterize it such that the entire cord is burnt, until it reaches the chord, in healthy flesh.
And then treat it with the treatment for other abscesses until it is healed.
And it must be that this cautery is used only by those whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in most of which maladies they are acquainted; but this one has been experimented upon several times in this operation, yet I leave that to your discretion, for it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cautery for ulcers.
They said that the ancient cautery for ulcers was made by taking from the branches of aristolia a long stick of wood, which is found and has a thickness similar to a finger.
Then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and use this cautery to cauterize at that location which is between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; then leave two small cauteries guided, one slightly inclined towards the side where the beard begins, and two more cauteries in the area that is declining between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining a little towards the back; and place another cautery in the middle of the foot; and place another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the back; and place one cautery in the location between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on each side of the foot, placing the cautery between the two shoulders.
And ensure that your hand is on the cautery, not off with the handle of the cautery.
And some ancient authors say that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is cleared, as we said when treating the inguinal abscess.
In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for often it happens in the location of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery treatment for the wound.
When you treat the illness of the wound, as we have said about the treatment in the division and do not change your treatment, then the cautery for it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. Of these, one way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the wound, following the figure of the cautery for the abscess, the figure of which has been described previously.
And the distance between each cautery should be the width of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the abscess cautery equally.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient lie on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery having two vertices, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the direction of the seam along which the juice of the patient's left side flows.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the breadth of the body.
And then place the two vertices together, ignite the fire, and in that space where you insert the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cauterizations.
And if you do, cauterize with the cautery having three vertices.
And then you treat the cautery more when it has remained too long without burning, as this is more conducive to healing than other previous causes in the treatment.
Capitol xxxi.
Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply four cauteries in the circuit of the swelling, one on the stomach, another on the back, another on the spleen, two between the spine vertebrae, one on the outer side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin.
And place the cautery there so that it stays hot for a long time.
And do not evacuate the bad humor near the cautery with that which you use so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be accelerated by the aid of healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form as described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their shape.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellowish water, cut out the part of the foot where it is between the big toe and the little toe, and place your hand on the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand from the cautery, but do not return it completely, as the yellow water will drain.
The cautery should be done in this manner: And then make two cauteries on each thigh, and on each side at the lower end of the surgical cautery. And the cautery should be done according to the length of the thigh: and place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh, and the other end in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water seeps into it.
And then cure the ailments which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity penetrating its thickness, it is due to the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and the intestines. This is treated according to the methods of cure without conferring, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of vital virtue, so apply a large cautery over their stomach according to what was described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries in the circuit of the fine humors, using a subtle clavil cautery; or use a large aloes cautery, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then apply a cautery over the pentil and over the intestines, and strengthen it by placing two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the which you will not err.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature derived from ancient hemorrhoids or from thick humors or corrupt humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division, and you do not apply your own cure, then cauterize three times on the base of the two small and slightly triangular parts, and with a cautery above the navel down by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they consumed was not digested, and their face appears flushed, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and use one cautery on the groin, and another on the thigh with a pointed cautery. Let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure the patient until they are healed.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment near the site of lithotomy.
When you incise the thigh, then heat the cautery that resembles a rod. Then insert that heated cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the pus flows.
And do this one or two times; if the veins are too many, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between them as they heal.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over several areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts around it.
When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, heal it with a cautery.
When there is an old fistula in the natural rear and it is corrupted by bad health and humidity, then what is most worthy to probe is with a thin needle, and you know the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned needle.
Kindle the cautery that resembles a ray. And kindle that cautery and place it in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
And repeatedly apply the cautery until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly one or two or three times, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy location and you perceive that it is not penetrating.
And cure the area once it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut away from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not held away from it, then you can see that they are penetrating or in the vicinity of the wound causing corruption, or this comes from those causes which will be remembered in its place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts become painful due to rubbing or excessive moisture, and as a result the patient's pain increases, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using a claw-like instrument, for which you will find more details later.
And cauterize it forcefully the second time with a small break, because three linear cauterizations will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol. xxxviii.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that part on the side of the bladder, where the skin begins at the groin, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the toes; cauterize that part with a cautery on the lower side of the toe, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be as hot as the process requires.
Capitol.xxxix.
Of the cautery of the urethra.
When there is venous congestion and humidity in the urethra, and for this reason, intercourse is prohibited, and the menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and joint pain occurs due to its condition, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the lower side of the toe, or with two cauteries, and the cautery should be hot.
Capitol.xl.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle, and cause displacements in their location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is treated with a hot cloth.
Then cauterize the ankle with the cautery in a circular manner, as you have marked the circuit of the area as it is rotated, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And the form of the cautery as mentioned before is used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive wood cautery sticks.
And the cautery should be made according to the strength of the inflammation in the entire limb; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol forty.
Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
When pain in the sciatic nerve occurs and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with the method we have said and you do not apply it. This is an ancient method, so if you cannot relieve the patient of large cold humors, use bad-smelling pills or artificial ones or similar; then cauterize the area.
The method of cautery for this is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a fire.
According to two scientific methods, of which one is to make three triangular cautery marks on the sciatic area and do so with good depth. And the spacing between each cautery mark should be equal to the width of a finger, whether using an olive cautery or a larger one.
More often, apply the cautery in the middle of each location on the base of the spine, as there are four cautery marks.
And if you wish, cauterize the circle around which the form precedes in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
And this is the way to cauterize for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
But if it is extended to the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the lateral part.
And if the surgical cautery is used, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the sensitivity of the tendon.
And if the ankle passes through the pain that is extended near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you pass the cautery with three or four points, or more if needed.
And if the ankle passes through and the pain is felt in the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
And in every cautery, do not finish with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or a major artery, for thereby you are badly injured or cause a contraction.
And I have seen several cases where doctors cauteryed the spot and finished with the cautery, the bedfire inflamed between which the tumor reached the skin, the fire perforating and corrupting all the skin. And then there is a severe solution of the belly, and then death follows.
And if the pain is in two parts, cautery each one according to this method.
And the wise will say about the cautery of water: this is the method: make a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and its holes should be according to the size of anfinger bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and the space between them is the width of a thumb; and those circles are opened in two parts; and the length of those lines is one finger or two fingers, and make them on the edge of the iron properly fitting into the circles; this is the shape of it:
Approximately it is ignited in the fire until it becomes red and emits sparks, and approximately it is placed over the part of the water, the patient lying on the latz (couch). And therefore cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one pass.
And approximately let it be for three days; then apply a plaster with grease and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis: Oh, son, of this species of cautery we have used little because of the fear of looking at it, and for those which we have found concerning it.
More from the good cautery for him who suffers it, and find it to be in that place.
More, a cautery with adhering medicines is that you make two circles having a perforated frame in which go the sparks of the iron door; let the length of the walls in their thickness be two nuts or quarters.
And if the space which is between each of the patient's thighs due to the size of the swelling; and they have been opened below and above, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the spot on the flank where the patient is feeling pain, and hold your hand over the spot on the side; and then take water cauterized and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and let the patient endure the pain of the bite and the tightening—because that atrophy bite is like fire—until the bite ceases.
And then lift your hand from the instrument and remove the cauterized water from all around the side with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the tightened bite fades, and leave it for some days, after which the redness will disappear; this is called derier in jouvament.
And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or hip, apply a poultice in it containing water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way of applying water externally, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the extinguished caustic, each part one, and three times less of the other, mix them in a new vessel in which one part is perforated with a small hole according to the quantity that enters it.
And place the bottom of another vessel under the perforated one, and let the liquid slowly pass over the alkali and live caustic in such a way that it collects them for about an inch, and then remove those with your hand by good compression, leaving the liquid that flows from the sharp water in the part left to the non-perforated vessel.
And then adjust all that liquid, and pour the remainder over another live caustic and new alkali, for which this will be of much greater acuity, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
And some of the medicines, when they are to be cauterized wide, thus with terebinth and honey, and I advise that they be mixed together.
And Gualia recounts an operation and cure from an ancient man concerning joint pain and sciatic vein pain, and praises the method very much, saying there is no need for any other treatment, and that he was cured in one session as recommended, for he immersed himself in warm water and cold baths as instructed.
And if there is no vervain available, a fresh fig should be used; it should be tied with a few grains and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then tied.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient endures the application.
And then place it in warm water and when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that none of these medicines should be treated with a cautery until after the body's evacuation.
And I say that when making a cut in the sinewy vein, it will swell more if cauterized; and the cautery should be done in this manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and over the bones.
And place a cut from dry wool in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it expand. And repeat this, and continue doing so until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the cattle cautery.
Chapter 42.
On the cautery for pain in the feet.
Sometimes pain in the two [limbs] is caused by multiple reasons, such as from a wound or striking or excessive evacuation, and other causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery should not be used except in this single case where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Therefore, open, and place pills similar to them for the evacuation of the patient over both sides where the pain is three lines according to the width of the area. Then mark with cautery or more wherever there are signs in any line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cautery.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cauteries using a medial-pointed cautery in this manner:
Capitulum XLIII.
On the Cautery at the Beginning of Gout.
Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulties in eating, elevation, movement.
In the lowermost vertebra of the spine and the ribs that are starting to overgrow the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: let the cautery cover the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
Then place your hand over the area until it is healed as we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in inflammation caused by nerve spasm.
Capitol XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner that cures it and not just alleviates the pain, but heals it with cautery.
And you cauterize the area near the joint of the foot with hot cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
And the olive cautery is what it looks like:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains ascend to the toes or other joints, and you notice this, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of the olive cautery.
And if you need to use cautery for these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that part but do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a coin.
And if the pains penetrate to the knee and shin, then administer the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the malleoli and is called goutra, then puncture along the circumference of the tendons as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the tendons on each finger and over the back of the hand.
And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbows.
And if you do not evacuate the malaise properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flame are applied, this cauterization will be in vain, God willing.
Chapter XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and the intestines protrude through the opening in front of the abdominal wall, and this begins to close, then when you order the patient to fast on that day and use milder remedies so that the closing opening in their abdomen does not reopen.
And then place the patient's hand over their abdomen, and command them to keep it there until the swelling goes down or the abdominal wall or intestines become apparent.
And then return those tied hands and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which appears similar to the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
until it is well heated and begins to spark. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can find the bone of the shin in the middle of the calf; and repeat this with another pass if you did not succeed in the first pass through the bone.
Observe wisely the pulse of the patient during your cautery, that you do not burn the intestine, lest it lead to death or other great harm.
Be mindful that when you use the cautery, you should not touch the bone, as this would interfere with your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days, keeping between that the wound from the fire is healed.
And then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the area and wound are sealed.
And ensure that the nourishment is withheld according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out through great efforts to heal.
And then when it is time to lift after 10 days, properly apply a liniment, and keep it for another 10 days.
And let him rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely, he will recover.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity. This is what is exsucked from the cord similarly to the tender part of it; then care for that area as we have said, and it is not adjusted.
And some have said that a rupture should be sealed with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with thread:
And a line is placed for the width in the wounds first over the rupture, and another above it; then your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cautery for the tornio.
When pain in certain members persists after compression or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its nature and depth, as well as the location of the tornio and the pain associated with it.
So if the wound heals with the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, those pains are punctured in a neighboring member to the affected one, so that you may achieve the desired healing through the cautery while the patient recovers.
Chapter XLVII.
Cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, and more frequently when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And therefore, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and affects only part of the body as we described in the division, neither here nor there, and fear that the corruption may encompass his entire body and all its composition; then cauterize that area on the head with five cautery marks: one in the middle of the head, leave the second space from it, extend the forehead to the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servant.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, and thus the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; cauterize on the cheek according to necessity.
And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and clearly manifest, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the end of the nose, and two cauterizations on both malleoli, and two on two vertebrae of the neck, and six on the vertebrae of the back, and one large one near the coccyx, and one on the scapula, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the kneecaps, and one on each kneecap, and two on the thighs, and two on the muscles, and two on the tendons of their foot; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the hand and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the bones of their shins.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterizer on the os of the pentenilh and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since their body is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limb and joints according to how it is preceded by the species of the instruments.
And place the cautery in flour mixed with honey and other cure inside until it is healed.
Capitol. XLVIII.
On the cautery for numbing.
When some limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little. And then cure that ointment inside as it heals.
And sometimes it is cauterized some stupor which affects the most parts and the feet, and the spine of both sides, and the vision of the nerves which go to that member, and the stupor is alleviated.
But do not presume on this except those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the exit of the nerves moving throughout the body.
Capitol XLIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are morphia.
When ulcers are old and you do not apply any of the medical ointments to them, then cauterize over that area with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the cochenille powder until the whiteness and color of the ulcer change.
And then cure that ointment with powder of err (likely a typo or term for a specific ingredient) and lentils in olive oil and leaves of arnica, and the juice of dove or the juice of yarrow, taking a part of each and mixing them all together. Then place a cloth over the area until it heals.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the thigh.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is rotated.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the last cautery in the middle place; but I do not see this, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this several times.
And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for carbuncles.
When some carbuncles are delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, as he may be old and weak, have few humors, or it may be due to time; if you want to hasten the maturation of carbuncles; then cautery it with several small puncturing cauteries in its circuit; and leave the one that will mature.
And if you want to make the puncture with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the form: and place that in the middle of the area until the needle penetrates.
And if you place the cautery in that location, do so to ease the pain in the arm; and then treat it until it is healed.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a wandering corruption in the member, which corrodes that part as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where a fire-cautery is applied, then heat the cautery with several small and large flames as appropriate for that location where the corrosion is present.
And then cauterize that completely until you eradicate all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And for three days let that be, and place a hot cautery on the areas previously treated until all the sores are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And for that cure the flesh producing sores with ointment.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then repeatedly apply the cautery to the areas that are decayed and corrupted.
And after medicating with some applications of sharp medicine, which is half the use of cautery. But nevertheless, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for gentle healing.
And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use it when you need it.
Chapter LIII.
On the Cauterization of Ulcers and Other Similar Conditions.
Moles viewed in the spaces at the bottom of the patient's foot where pain is felt, which is called clau, and this is a large cause, infiltrated, which affects the foot; and for the cautery there are two ways, one is a hot cautery and another is a water-cauterization.
The hot cautery is when you heat the concave probe resembling a hook, which is made of iron according to the quantity it contains for all parts, and should have thin edges.
And then place that ignited object on the clau, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the clau so that the cautery reaches the depth of the clau. Let it remain there for three days until it begins to scab. And then apply a plaster with wild nettle leaves salted, and let the plaster remain on it for one night until the clau is eradicated from its roots.
And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so non-converting, and motes viewed occurring in the surface of the body, mostly in the thighs and feet, then you administer in those areas with water cautery, and you take a quannula of elm or iron or pinewood, place that over the nail; then put in the quannula of water a small quantity, retract your hand, and you revolve that by compression of your hand from all sides, and press the margin of the canula on the root of the nail, and you will find the water flows through the hole of the nail; wait the patient a little for the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove that, for the nail with its roots will be eradicated.
And do the same to those and nearby where you come over all of which they have in their body.
And then treat those pus where the roots of the nails have been eradicated with ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When an earthquake-like tremor occurs due to friction in the nerves or from fever of some cause, or for another similar reason, then you should cauterize that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and place one cautery on the foot, and one over his stomach.
And the tremor subsides, and the healing of the illness is completed.
Capitolium.
Of the cautery for injuries to the body.
When in the body there are gashed wounds and pus-filled cavities formed by corrupt materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the wound should be cauterized over its entire length with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with a stick from oak bark; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and not being creased, and when the superfluous matter is ruptured, they heal from those.
Moreover, I must ensure that this is done near the evacuation with flebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery treatment for flux from an accident due to an arterial incision.
Often times, flux from an arterial incision that occurs due to the wound which penetrates deeply, or due to the incision of an abscess or cautery of the member, then appears, and it is difficult to remedy that.
Then, when such a case occurs, you hold your hand over the orifices of the artery, and place it there firmly to strengthen those same points for several minutes until the flux of the blood has subsided, then remove it, and let it not come out.
And then place the large and small olive cautery sticks in the fire for a few moments, by number of times, and blow on them until they are heated.
And then take one small or large cautery stick according to the location and area where the artery is ruptured, place it over that vein vigorously after you have heated your own as instructed, and hold the cautery so that it narrows and restrains the bleeding.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you heat your own as instructed and tighten the cautery, then take another cautery prepared from those that are in the fire, and continue to do this repeatedly until the bleeding is restrained.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, if it is not possible to restrict the bleeding with a cautery as we have said, then especially when the artery is large, you must use one of four methods: either with the cautery as we have described, or with extraction when it is not extracted, in which case when it is extracted, the ends of the artery are cauterized and the bleeding is restricted, or with lixiviation using vinegar or with astringent substances whose virtue is to restrict the bleeding; they should be strong and bound with a pulvinar for proper constriction.
More than that, he who administers restriction decently to the limb and by constriction with cloths or by position of causes burning and similar, will not fare well.
More if this should happen to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open gently with the finger indicated over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the wound has been left from the upper part of the swelling, and over the arch let the finger not be removed; and over the arch let water fregid (strongly cooled) be sprinkled after the wound is closed and swollen; and more often anoint with cauterization or with medicine as necessary.
Of incision and perforation and venous punctures and of bloodletting and of wounds and of their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those of the forms of cauterization; and I have ordered the chapters from the upper part of the head to the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved, regarding what he has requested.
And before you begin this, heed, sons, that in this chapter, we treat of what is caused by fear as mentioned in the first chapter on cautery.
And heed, that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, multiple instances of evacuation are necessary. If the condition involves life-threatening issues, you should apply the venesection from the vein, or incise over the abscess or puncture for drainage or purgation of the wound, or extract an arrow and incise the boil, as well as similar procedures. And all of these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
And I advise you that this applies to you in the situation, for at times, mishandling such matters can lead to patient complications or illnesses. And from them some you will visit and they are sick but light of death, and thus for the vehemence of what he finds of their illness, and for the length of their illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
And of those, some give their name and say, you hope for that health, and their illness is dangerous.
And therefore you should consent to the one who comes to you of which this is the manner; and your caution be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which by succession commendable success may come.
And use in the cure of all your patients by prognosis and indication of which health is converted, for in that you have help in the acquisition of fame and memory, of commendation and glory.
O, children, God inspires His own understanding in you and does not take away your direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cauteries, for the cure from head to feet, so that you may be eased by what you ask about and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head during nursing.
And sometimes appears for a hidden cause which is not known.
But I see this illness only in children; and in all of those whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus it is left to me to work on them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more so because the moisture increased within as death approached.
And this humidity or is added between the ligament and the bone, or is added by placing the bone on the cushion.
And if the operation in that case where the humidity is between the ligament and the bone, and the abscess is small, then you should make a slit in the middle of the location on the side, and let the length of the slit be about two finger breadths so that the humidity flows out, and this is the form of the spatium:
And therefore, if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here you should make two slits in this manner:
And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you see the edges of the wound open from all sides and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand at the inner parts, and this is not what you expected. And you should make three slits in the middle of the location on the side in this manner:
And remove all the humidity by the incision; and strengthen the slits with bandages and feathers; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it with wine; and later remove the bandage and heal the wound with lint and ointments, strengthening the ligament with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And there is another way of incising, which consideras concerning the size of the abscess and the collection of the water, for in some occasions it may be more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling of the water appear, and do so according to what is most possible for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and strive for flows of blood and let gangrene proceed through this flow of blood by evacuation of humidity.
Chapter II.
When we encounter a catarrh or wound in the ear or foot, it is customary to treat this, and you should not rely on the cure of medicines for it; rather, the proper treatment involves incising these two arteries.
And when you want to incise where the illness reaches its head, then rub the area with a rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and tightly wrap the neck of the patient with some cloth; and consider where the pulse is in the vein; and the places over which these are close to the temples pressing, and they are hidden for many people.
And tightly hold over the artery with your hand, and incise each one with a sharp blade along the path leading to the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the blade to cut the artery and transect it at the incisions above its parts.
And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which flows out frequently.
And if the artery does not appear in the incision, then measure from the temple the width of three digits, and hold tightly with your hand, and make the incision into the mouth.
And what flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pound, and more or less it flows out of it, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the fullness of the artery of it.
And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains over the bone, then incise this so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and pieces of linen, and place them inside to keep it clean while healing.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute migraine occurs due to humid climates and the quality of the air in the temples, or is a strong old condition similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, if this does not provide relief, then we have resorted to the extraction of the arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is concealed except in a few men through the force of cold.
And if it is concealed, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum from which this is the form: And then you insert the needle there easily until you reach the artery; and then get oil in it and extract that into the upper parts while you remove this from the codena and discover those of the tunics, leaving that, from all parts.
More if the artery is fine, then enclose it at the extremity of the oncii, and then incise a part thereof according to the quantity for which the extremities of it are long and contracted, and there will not be a flow of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the vein one. into three.
And if the artery is large, then you should divide it into two locations using a double strong ligature or long cords, and do not tie it off until after the consolidation of the wound to ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the excess fluid between two ligatures; and do so at that time or soon after another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the incisions are made, and it will serve in place of that metal work.
And it is better to do this work if the patient has fever or is from a chill complication; for a cautery helps with the final humidities, and therefore it is better in recovery.
And then you should ligate the arteries that you have placed at the proper location, and tie them off above the dust properly made, and soon after apply a cure with dry medicines to cause flesh to grow and with ointments until it is healed.
And if during another operation there is a flow of blood from the artery, then you should restrain that blood, or with a cautery, or by filling the place with cotton, and strongly hold your hand so that the blood is restrained. And if any cause of this is not at your present, then hold your hand on the place until the bleeding congeals, and pour water of strong coldness on it until the sharpness subsides, and strengthen it as needed.
And for this lighter case in the extraction of an artery, you should cauterize the vein with this cautery, having two scissors ready, after you have marked the two places with your fingers. Hold some ignited material between your hands until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the ends of the vein can be lengthened, which are not completely cauterized by all of this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two scissors must be checked. But if the acute pain is like that of two knives, it is better, for if such sharp pains approach each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
Then, since there is some swelling, hold the heat from the fire at those places and the flesh is incised lightly.
And this work is better in all works and more light.
And let the space be which is between two knives the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.
For the cure of bodies with sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body of those veins which are on the temples of the head throb and do not offer any cause for the cure from medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a walking sensation on their forehead as if it were ants crawling, and the eyes become weak, mucusy as if the skins have been worn thin, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, they apply antiseptic remedies in the cure of those from this operation, and name that cure "spassa.
And you command the patient to pull back the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal, and the third from the other part.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjust.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them where the bleeding stops.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, of which this is the form of the incision: that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions near the cavity which is above the bone, and then do so for the middle incision into the second incision. Then incise this space and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a cuttelet, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then place the blade of the sharp instrument against the adjacent flesh, cut the tissue inside the bone, and insert it so that it reaches the middle crack, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do so in the middle crack between the other crack.
And when the bleeding has equalized, squeeze the areas of the feet where the clotted blood is located.
And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place over those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, and hope that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a large fomentation of warm orboce water, and then cure what with an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of catarrh and secretions from within the head.
When there is an acute catarrh that continues, and the secretions from the feet are reduced and weak, and their appearance shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and of their condition the skin, and in the forehead there is a sharp pain and intense swelling as a consequence, you can see from these symptoms that the matter and catarrh do not come from veins within the head.
And the best cure in such cases is this: command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small crack along the middle of the forehead, about the width (beginning from the left temple between the right temple; and make the incision into the bone; and extend your hand over the temples which are painful you should cut deeply), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the crack with a piece of old cloth or a cloth strip. Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that it does not develop into an abscess.
And when you open it and see that the abscess has diminished, then rub the bone where the new flesh begins to form, and then cure that part with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to mature, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a paste and apply it to these wounds of the flesh's origin.
Capitol. VI.
Of the cure for what attacks the ears.
All cause that attacks the ears is of four species: either it is mineral grit or a cause similar to grit, such as iron or sand, or it is from a plant, such as cypress or fennel, or it is a fluxible cause, such as water or wine and their like, or some beast.
And when gray hair appears in the ear or another cause resembling those causes that do not grow or thrive in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the gray hair, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then administer the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where spots have appeared as a result of these causes.
And if it is not cured, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, the form of which is as follows:
And if it is cured with the gesti, well and good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a fine subtil onion of small duplication.
And if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of reed and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not too tight but only the cannula. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
But if it is not successfully reduced in this manner, then take a hot flannel or a previously prepared pad on which the thighs are placed a quantity of ice, place that at the extremity of the thigh, and then wrap about that adequately. And then insert that into the tragus of the ear with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And so, if it is not successfully reduced by all the causes we have recounted, then you cut to drain that which will develop into an abscess or spasm.
And the way to cut it is that you begin by incising the malade of the phlebetic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of its virtue, then make a slice between your thumbs and turn the ear upwards, and make a small fissure in the back of the ear and draw out its grease into the well-compressed spot. And if the crack has a lunar shape and reaches the heel, and the heel is rotten, block it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, when treating the crack at that time, do so with urgency, and cure it while it is still fresh.
And if the cause lies in the ear, being one of the waxes that collect and swell, then administer the treatment and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your attention, then take thin subtle spatum according to this form. And administer the extraction of that wax which is lodged in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, but place it on fine wicks, and during extraction use either gentle gestures or a incision as we have described, for this alleviates the extraction.
But in the water that has entered into the ear canal where the patient frequently sneezes at the onset of illness, and fills their ear with some old wax, place a hot piece of cloth over that ear containing the water. If this is done effectively, it is good; but if not, then take pieces of flax or linen according to the length of the finger, and heat them in the fire for a little while. The patient should insert one of these into their ear canal and shake out a small part of it onto a separate piece of that material and strike it against another stone above the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying the compress until all the water has been absorbed.
Do not stop applying the compress until all the water has been absorbed. And when the water has been completely absorbed, take a piece of paper or cloth, put one end in the ear, and extend the other end into the fire until the material is burned.
And put another piece of cloth and do this several times until all the water has been absorbed, then squeeze it with an aspirator as previously described.
In the extraction of a small object entering that ear, do it more gently and carefully, treating it as we have previously described. But if it is a large object causing immediate symptoms, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, as the cause is less severe than other causes found in the ear.
In the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have described in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then look into the ear in the sunlight.
And so if there appears any cause of worms, then extract that with grippers or fine forceps, but if no cause appears, then take a cannula and open it wide from above; this is its form: And insert the fine end into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck it out forcefully with suction, performing this several times until all the worms are evacuated.
And if it does not obey to your aspiration, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been prepared for the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your aspiration be with which you will infuse medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, whose form is as follows: And make it of silver or copper, straight, with a small hole, and a flat surface above.
And thus they should push so that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand on that with a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should already be heated over fire for a little while. And make sure that the medicine you will distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines do not tolerate that.
Capitol. vii.
On the cure of ear abscesses.
Sometimes infants suffer from abscesses in the flesh of their ears due to their parents not piercing them, and this occurs in some adults as well. An abscess in the ear flesh can be caused by an infection or lack thereof; sometimes such abscesses form near the opening of the ear canal without causing immediate symptoms, and at other times they occur in the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the groin, which does not affect the appearance, is in the major disposition of difficult recovery.
And in that where you can see the swelling, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if there is apparent swelling, open that small abscess from which this is the form:
If the extremity of the abscess where it has little width, one part being acute and the other not; and the pus is of two lion's teeth sizes so that it does not irritate the ear.
And if the swelling is due to hidden flesh in the ear or on the body, then you have those small sharp lancets and incise there with great facility until all the flesh is exposed.
And if the swelling is in the groin of the ear, then take a small lion's tooth and heat that needle slightly with fire, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And therefore, if you sense an abundance in that which the patient experiences with ease, due to the heaviness of rising up, relieve the oppression with ease; and be sure not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth on the ear according to the amount of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the abscess; or that you inject it with a syringe and sprinkle it with dried trisast powder, using it. And if you see the ear already protruding, then extract what you have damaged and replace it with another liquid which you wrap in lint soaked in olive oil, until the abscess is drained; and cure it as it heals.
And if a hemorrhage occurs, then submerge the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it over the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the treatment of athetosis which affects the eyelids.
Athetosis which affects the eyelids sometimes is moist, at other times it is dry.
Then take those emplasters or ointments, and apply them to the sores of their rash, and place your hand over the areas treated.
But if there is pain with a flow of scalding blood, then apply the cautery to those areas with a thin cautery.
And the best cautery is applied near the incisions, and the sores return only when there remains any cause of their rash; and when they are cauterized with fire, those sores are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment of hives that affect the eyelids.
Motes viewed often in the eyelids of the heels due to some cause which is similar in its strength and hardness, and because of this size it is called.
And it is an aggregation of coarse humidity in the eyelid, below and above.
So the operation in them is to consider whether the swelling originates from within, coming out of the eyelid and affecting all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
So make a slit there for the width, and then open that from all parts with ease as it evacuates, and suspend that and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the eyelid is prolapsed to the inner parts of the eyelid margin, lift the inner surface, then turn back the eyelid and suspend the prolapsed part with a needle, starting from the outside, pressing it from all sides, and if the eyelid by itself becomes stretched, this we do not notice for any reason.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a solution that should be healed.
Capitol.
For the treatment of an eyelid wound.
Axcirnath is gray matter that is generated in the tunic of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates the wounds of those affected and causes death through their catarrh; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun for this reason, and tears congregate in those areas.
And for this reason, they often have them weep on their cheeks all the time, and they sleep with tears on their cheeks; only on the eyelids of their tears are the brows wet, which already show inflammation and the apparent imminent occurrence of axcirnath in the wound; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel the axcirnath between them.
And some method of operation is in that the patient pauses his head on your knee, and places a cloth between him and you to act as padding, and makes it into a circle according to the quantity which contains arthnach from all parts, and places this over that and presses on the knees called from all parts so that it may be added arcernac in the middle of the circle, and then in the middle of that moisture lets an incision descend by breadth, and the fissure not be greater than the fissure made in flaubotomy.
More in the preceding cavity where you make the opening totally until you perceive arthnach, for in the more depressed areas process arthnach by fissure according to the form of white grease.
Therefore, extract those cloths from the knees which you have wrapped around the parts outside and mix between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And make sure you do not press on the fissure so that you do not obstruct the moisture and let it flow.
But if it does not appear in your alternative at the beginning of the fissure, but you adjust a small piece of facilitation between the alternations; then extract that as we have said; and submerge cloths in wine and vinegar and place them over the area and strengthen those with powder.
And then sprinkle salt and place it in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains of that humidity is absorbed.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that area, then cure it with flaxen plasters until it is healed.
Capitol.xi.
Of the ways of touching all.
When in the eyelids of the eye, the natural skin is pressed and becomes old, then those nobles of the eye and make it become ways of maladies such as constant tears, softening of the eyelids, and tissue that causes destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: either with a cautery by fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said earlier in the Capitol of cauterization; or it is done through incision and suturing; or with cantharides as I will say.
And thus ensure that you place the head of the patient on your right hand; then turn the eyelid of the elder with your left hand, and if it turns, good; but if not, insert a needle into that where the thread is tied for the cut, then let go of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate the thread above, and this should be—near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises—the skin, and pull the thread upwards above the eyelid, and turn it.
And then cut inside the eyelid, adjusting the skin against the tears from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal; then extract the thread and place fine powder of coto or cloth over the eyelid, and cover it with a tent, as shown in the figure of a mirt leaf.
Nevertheless, ensure that the figure is according to the amount of levation of the eyelid, for this already varies in women, for those among them you need to cut a significant amount from the eyelid according to the amount by which the eyelid becomes softened.
And then make the incision along the two lines you have marked, starting from the major lacrimal gland between the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin lines, such as the width of the king.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the wound, and scrape that area completely, then suture the two edges with a needle or fine wool thread, and clean the wound, and apply the excess thread on two sutures for some viscous conditions, if you want to do this, otherwise, you do not need to treat it.
And then let the thread sutures remain for three to four days, and then treat it.
And if you wish, let the wound dry and heal on its own, treating it with something that dries and constricts. For an elevated eyelid, you should apply the dressing of the wound and the addition to it; sutures are better. Therefore do this as instructed by the ancients.
But if it is necessary concerning the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of applying it is that the leaf of the laurel figures as a leaf, and then lift the eyelid by three hooks arranged and gathered in this form:
But if this is not possible, take the hooks, and since this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and insert that in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, lift the entire codena over which it is placed as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs, make your incision or cut, stitch that abscess with thread and match it in appearance, and apply ointment.
And sometimes over the eyelid that your skin be converted, then use there what we said about incision; but suture in those places where it is more artificial.
To treat the canna (likely referring to a joint or limb) in this manner: And you convert the eyelid and incise the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two canna or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width be one third of the width of the space. And you have already incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add some thinness over what you have excised from the eyelid of the whole, and tighten the canna of each part with strong tension, and leave it for a few days; so that the bond due to the tension will die and be rejected, and will fall off as it does by itself.
And if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and immediately treat the wound until it is healed.
Therefore, when it is healed, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not punctured.
And this is the method for two canes which you will make according to this form: and has the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol. xii.
For the elevation of punctured skin on the heel, use an awl when the skin is tense.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins on the heels, for the operation, you should use a thin awl and place it in that fine fiber of the skin. Then, carefully adjust the ends of the thread in a very subtle manner. And the length of the fibers should be the width of one palm.
And then you compose another fine cloth and place it briefly, using the ends of that if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in a towel, and close to the sun so that your work is revealed, as it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the cut in the tight cloth that has been adjusted with forceps, and make it penetrate deeply into the eyelid between the time you withdraw it from the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, ensuring there are one or two or three pieces of skin and not more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is flapped out into the incision in the eyelid with alcohol on the eyelid and the natural skin.
More if the skin is flapped with alcohol and not moved out, pull the alcohol-laden incision cloth to the parts leaving it on the fine cloth you have prepared, so that in this way alcohol from the wound will remain.
And while holding the view of the wound, you will then fix the ligament, stitch each part and close the wound, and let it remain closed for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of skin from the natural hairs, elevate it at that place, or let it remain until it stretches somewhat over the space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of the swelling that appears in the upper eyelid.
When there is swelling in the wound, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that contracts toward the top, or to the right or left side, due to poor consolidation of the wound, section, or cautery, it is called leporina. This swelling can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of the wound, sections, or cauteries, or resembling them in its effects.
May the manner of the operation in him be that you make that consolidation and separate his labia and place in him at what is between those a mechanical strip of cloth and tie those together until they are healed.
And ensure that you use the cure for him from the causes which dry up, compress; for if you do this it will return to gout worse than ever without any time having passed.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it has been boiled and its seeds, or ointment of yarrow, which is liquefied by some of the oils, and submerge the mechanical strip in that, and apply it there.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with any tool that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said is nothing but some correction of gout that does not return the form of the area according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the cure of an extraction performed on the eyelid, let this be known.
This extraction performed on the eyelid is known as an ophthalemic extraction; it can be either natural or accidental.
More often it is caused by a wound, a cut, or a cautery, or other similar reasons.
The procedure for the operation is to take a needle and make a double thread, placing that needle in the flesh, and making it pass from the left lacrimal duct to the right lacrimal duct, ensuring that the thread reaches both ends of the tissue.
Then extend the tissue at the upper parts near the needle and sew that with the needle, making an incision with a wide blade. And therefore, if the figure of the eyelid returns as it should, that is good; otherwise, take a ray and place that in the split figure, then convert the eyelid with that, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, are to be treated by making an angle between them so that when they come together a figure is formed.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then close the flesh there with the amount that is the length of the sharp point left from it, which serves as a stitch.
And then adjust the separated parts with the silk thread; and apply those treated with what we have said about the softening medicines and ointments until it is healed.
And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And then apply the ointment between two folds as we have said.
In the sum of the discourse on incising when above or left behind, let it flow in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of an incision, and that is in the form of varied spots.
And the wise craftsmen at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to return the figure to the natural form or near that, and that malady according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol.xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in a man's eyelid, one should try to solidify the eyelid above by fixing it to the tarsus, prohibiting its ease of movement and the natural functions. Therefore, you should insert the outer corner of the ray, place the eyelid within, and elevate or extend it to that side.
And then you incise the adhesion with a thin blade, which should not be of acute incisions, having an obtuse small opening so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid to maintain its acuity.
And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adhesion so that the eyelid returns according to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then put in the wound enough salt water to wash with; or distill it from zinc dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with a cloth. Place over the wound infused wool in cow's milk, and for several days use conservative treatments until it heals.
Capitol XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital flesh.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, resembling a thin hard thread; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it can be divided, and the incision should not be too deep.
And both species do not start until the major lacrimal gland, which gradually covers the eye and prevents light and the movement of water.
The manner of acting in the incision of the eye is that the patient keeps his head in your lap, and then open the eyelids, and lift up the upper eyelid with your hand, and collect the eyeball with one finger and extend it to the parts above. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair from a horse or a bull or a cow, or from a sheep, or from strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the eyelid, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the eyelid with thread; and extend that to the parts above, and scrape off the skin the secretion from the eyelid which is the pupil. And thus you follow that under the skin into the inner part of it.
And then you incise the conjunctiva at the edge of the lacrimal gland with a thin spatula or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on pitch, as we have said, and then it is excised with lion's tooth, which is the form of it:
And be careful that with the lion's tooth you do not touch the clear coat, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then sprinkle a little saline or cerate of lead on the wound, and leave it in for another day; and take care that what goes inside heals.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this kind of treated nail to be cured with medicines, and it is healed as I have described in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and use a fine lion's tooth cauterized according to this form: with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarified and confined within the tissues, then spit into the hand of chafed cloth or of roasted cloth or of salted cloth, and apply the hand to the other side.
And then repeat the operation over it until everything from there is removed, but if contrary pus forms in the hand, then leave that and cure the beginning of the pus until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation over it until it is cured.
The gland of the tear duct, if noticed in the hand causing great discomfort, should be suspended by a needle; and incise that part of it, but do not complete the incision so as not to cut off the flow of tears.
And then spit into the tear duct a handkerchief of chafed cloth or of soaked cloth until it is healed.
Capitol. xvii.
From the incision of gualardenic and of what is born from flesh pressed in the whole.
In the heels of some, flesh has grown rogue, and is pressed over covering the pupil, or strengthens near the eyelids and lightly compresses the eyelids at the outer parts and is assembled to the edge of the balcony.
More so, the operation in it is that the patient lies on his side; and then opens the heels of that one and collects all that flesh with convenient incisions, and has it with forceps or with tongs; and then incises the flesh at the beginning as long as everything is finished with the scalpel, and guard well from the heel that you must not lose any part for your operation.
And your incision should be along the one you made on the side or on the back where we have recommended in the incision of the elbow, or with small pincers through which the flesh is removed according to the form that will come in this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is cauterized, fill the wound with salted brine, or distill into it rogue powder resembling those corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally as on a piece of cloth until it is secured against an abscess.
And if any cause of swelling and suppuration is suspected, and you fear an abscess, then let the whole and cure that abscess with what will yield that abscess, and place it over that again in operation until it is healed, and similarly do on the flesh adjusted which you have encountered in the healing of this kind.
But you must know that all healing of swelling by natural means or by accident is achieved through iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that the limb is suffering from this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge regarding swelling.
Knowledge is that veins should be sought which are rough on the swelling and to prohibit their operation, as they will increase the swelling over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the swelling in which knowledge is sought is strong and if there is no other illness present, then you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and wipe the scab hour by hour, while encouraging those veins to swell and be rotated.
And be sure that you do not apply heat to the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the morning before the sun, then remain firm in your operation and do not go beyond those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the scab verdant vinegar or wine so that with its heat it corrupts what is swollen from the gout.
Moreover, if this is not possible for you at that time, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is assured.
And then iterate over it according to how the patient handles it as they are cured.
This is the form of the forceps:
Capitol XIX.
For the reduction of dislocated bones in the nose.
When you treat dislocated bones in the nose with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case precedes and it is not healed, then do not engender anything in it but make incisions over the abscess and allow it to mature. And extract all the moisture which is in it until the bone is uncovered.
And then, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, you must treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named "sharp head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, like holding the one which is made with points through file work or delicately pierced (as in the following form).
And place him over the decayed part of the bone, and then rotate that area between your fingers, and press your hand little by little making sure you know that that decay is superficial.
And do this several times, and then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive factors.
So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the healthy tissue is separated from the diseased part and it remains clean for 40 days, and does not become inflamed or infected and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you uncover either the bone with forceps or with sharp instruments, and once the bone is uncovered, then take hold as follows:
Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be slightly narrowed towards the tip as you can see.
And then place it over the bone, which is near the lacrimal bone; extend your hand a little forward, and then rotate your hand within the forceps to penetrate the entire bone, and the pain felt by the patient indicates that the forceps have entered properly.
Then restore the area with drying styptic medicines as they are accustomed.
Then when the flesh and the area are hardened, the material which was infiltrating into the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter over the patient.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the hernia.
When the hernia protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the patient, subsequently apply gentle scarification and suction on the neck six times, and then place a liniment made of acacia, aloes, oaks, and gum arabic. Finally, firmly apply the plaster with powder on the hernia.
And the method of applying the powders is that you take linens soaked with powder, and each linen should be folded into four parts; then use those powders.
And then place those over each other according to the quantity that it has of the whole necessity. And then strengthen the bandage with a hard knot; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and after place the cups and leave them tight all day and night.
But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then make it tight again.
And place the ligament tightly during the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the knot and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol.xxI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is a disruption in the uveal membrane, and then this prominence protrudes and processes outward like a degree of retraction, and its form resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the slit of the uveal membrane from the part left in the upper part, and then place another needle with a double thread from the part of the lacrimal gland, making the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle according to its position; then incise the location of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane around the needle's circuit, and strengthen this area.
And then extract the needle and place yourself over the heap of infused wool in honey and let the thread remain in the wound.
And then cure the heap with what will comfort that which the wound has healed.
And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth at the center of the heap, and then perforate with a fine needle that comes to the core of the heap, allowing the humid matter to drain and descend, and exit quickly.
And then strengthen it while it has healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called ulcers is nothing but putrefaction which settles in the wound like water flowing down and is not the other.
The method of treating it is to position the ulcer on a prepared and straight surface, then hold its edge with your fingers in two parts, and move it where you see the putrefaction reach the parts left, then dry it so that it does not descend, and let the light be, as the ulcer will show the causes thus as you can see.
And if it does not descend below, know that it is water.
And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the surgeon sit between your hands and approach taking a thin spatula and place it over the panniculus, circulating a little of the conjunctiva onto the cornea in the socket (into the site of the wound), ensuring that the wound is cleansed.
And since it is cleansed, then you drip in the good water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol. xxii.
Of the cure for water descending into the wound.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is suitable to puncture when speaking, according to its nature.
When you must separate the patient's thighs on your knees over a cushion and tie it firmly in place.
And then place your left hand near the corner of his eye where the water is; or with your right hand if the water is on the right side.
And then with your right hand take the basin, if the water is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the water is on the right side.
And then place the extremity of the basin near the crown due to the size of the infant in the water at the corner of the eye from the lower eyelid, and then press the basin with virtue and turn your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the basin is already permeated due to virtue.
And you must ensure that the depth of the basin is appropriate when pressing, so that it matches the space between the pupil and the edge of the dark part; which is the corner of the eye. You will then see the pupil clearly through the clarity of the corneal membrane with the vision of the eye.
And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then you draw it down one time and another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then see the patient there where his sight falls upon quickly, and hold your hand in its proper place.
And then rest for a moment; therefore if the water has descended, then you draw it down another time in front that the hand be not thrown off.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and turn your hand a little by little, and then dissolve a bit of clear gemstone salt in the water and use that to wash the place inside; then return the liquid completely, stopper or infused wool in olive oil and album of egg and bind it with that the liquid remains.
Moreover, we and those of our time bind it with egg white.
And if your hand does not obey to the instrument of the liquid due to its hardness — which is common in some men whose skin is very hard —, then take the spittle which is named albedine, and this is its form:
And therefore pierce at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small incision in the locus.
And then introduce the probe as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient to sleep in a dark house where he lies on his back, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the wound to allow its natural healing, and do not disturb his head towards the right or left side entirely.
And let the suture be according to its disposition on the third day.
And then take the patient out of that dark house and expose him to fresh air, and make the wound heal by some causes, and then return the suture on the seventh day.
And do not make this at the time of the cure or shortly after the infusion. Having a cavity that you separate there so that water may pass freely by great and violent effort.
But if a boil occurs, having a cavity that you open on the seventh day, and correct that amount which yields to the boil.
When you have completed the wound and place your hand on the face of the wound orally, for which it may heal, leave it for a few days, allowing it to remain in the more shady area.
And gradually let it heal and change in its causes.
And know that in surgery it is permissible for the apprentice to have a few views, and then you shall be attentive to the operation.
And we have already been cured of some of those which are in the Artach, and some say to make fire in the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drained.
But, however, we have not seen anyone in our land who has done this perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it be about those who ignore those:
And they are made of iron or copper properly, and their ends are to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus as that is the form.
Capitol.xxiv.
For the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various hidden flesh masses, from which arises some cause that is combined with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of this kind; and this illness is called polypus, which is similar to that kind of polyp represented. And the flesh is carcinous, dark in color; and from it comes the flesh like a lion's, not dark in color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh masses neither fraudulent nor carcinous, make the wound heal between your fingers and expose it to the sun, and rub the nostrils with it, and apply a mixture of honey in those flesh masses. And then extract it from the incisions outward, and divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been separated; if any remains due to some cause of which the separation is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division for any reason. If the wound is infected or an abscess has formed, then pause at that which is covered; or if it is a malignant abscess, then incise and cauterize it, ensuring that the abscess is divided and all the cavities are exposed.
And then insert in the nose near the incision either some water or wool. And if the nose is opened and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no pus but only bones of the nose to which the incision has not reached.
When you find that an object has entered the body of someone who has a lump, use needles on it, and place the quantity of a finger or less between each needle, and extract the evil by inserting an end of the cord into the nostril with force or for some other reason which is possible to do.
And once this has been done, let its odor enter before it reaches the nasal passages, and sit over his bowel, for too many children at schools laugh at this action, and it is a light matter for those who wish to do so.
Then place the two ends of the cord, one that hangs over the nose and the other that enters into the nose, and then apply a ligature of flesh around the needles in the cord, and do this before you can feel that the flesh is around the needles of the cord.
Then extract the cord, and place a plug in the nose near the opening of the nostril with a wick, and do this for three days or more until the salve dissolves everything that is rotten from the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
But if you need to induce sweating for cure, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal drops in which oils and medicines are distilled in the nostrils:
And make it of silver or copper, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for making nasal drops flat and open; to this, attach a handle at the rear end, with which you will hold it when you heat oil or water from the glands and causes that are sucbiblable.
Chapter 25.
From the lips to the ends of the nose.
Pimples appear on the lips and at the ends of the nose, and they become prominent and are palpable within a few days as the swelling is noticeable upon examination.
And because of this, you should intervene at the beginning of its appearance, and extract all of it. Then place a cauterizing instrument or medicine over the area where it was located.
But if the extraction is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider whether it is ripe, hard, of dark color, and has little sensation. In such cases, do not touch that with a needle as it is a dangerous abscess; for pimples should be extracted to prevent such great harm to the surrounding area.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not of a dark color, and if complete extraction is possible throughout, then drain the poison and extract it without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
For the suturing of the nose and lips when the continuity is dissolved by wound or by similar injury.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much trust in that operation but rather in several skilled surgeons.
Then, when it comes to any of these causes, consider whether the wound is fresh or has begun to heal. Then, adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to cure it until it is healed.
And if the edges of the wound where continuity is dissolved are already separated, and each part is made healthy, then you should remove each part from its apparent edge until it begins to scab. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them. Over them, sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and spread three layers of transparent paste or some other consolidating plaster. Let this mixture remain for two to three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster, allowing the wounds to heal until the threads are absorbed on their own. Continue to treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are told to do.
Chapter XXVII.
For the extraction of those causes that venous problems occur in the two lips within the internal parts.
Spots appear within the internal parts of their lips, causing hard abscesses similar to lard. Some are small and others are larger.
Therefore, carefully incise all parts of the lips and the cavities of each hardness, and then fill the wound with three layers of cloth while the wound is constricted, and subsequently wash it with wine and treat the area with water that has a收敛作用，直至愈合。
Chapter XXVIII.
For the incision of flesh adhered to the gums.
Great care should be taken over the gums of flesh-bound which the ancients called albulus, then cut that gum where you have it bound with a thread or where you hold it tightly with forceps and incise there its reason, and let the healthy blood flow out or the pus.
Then place something warm on the area for three days or another stimulating powder.
And if that flesh returns, then incise there again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth pain.
When on the surface of the teeth at the inner parts and those from the outer side, and between the gums, there are sharp edges, cracks, and some times black spots that appear yellowish or greenish, you see through this corruption and the teeth become weak.
And thus, you must cut the patient's thigh and place its head in a basin of water, and rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear with some substance so that no part breaks due to any cause, and do this for the blackness and the yellowish color as well as other changes if they have occurred.
Then if what is in those of the beginning of the reason is good; and otherwise, then you iterate the reason on those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have often required cuts in various forms and of different figures according to how your operation is prepared. And so, with the razor by which the tooth is cut from the inside, another razor is used by which it is cut between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors should be prepared by you, and you will see them often.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Choose to cure the tooth of its pain with great care and take your time in the entire extraction, for no cause can substitute the necessity of the cut when it is extracted, for a substance is refined during the process of extraction.
More carefully choose when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, for firmly you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many cuts relieve the pain and mistakenly involve a healthy tooth, and upon extracting that one, the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
Then you must determine which tooth is painful, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth with some substance in which there is virtue, within which it is dissolved from the root of the tooth by all parts, and then slowly between those ties or fine scissors at the beginning.
Then moisten it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between those ties below that you must hold well to prevent moisture, and then extract the tooth according to straightness in a manner that does not break it, nor give greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it well on the patient from all sides to facilitate the removal, doing so as it is done at the beginning.
But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then you must completely wrap it with cloth and tie it tightly at the fine end to prevent it from breaking during your manipulation of it.
And make sure that you operate meticulously around the circuit of all parts of the gums and keep your strength so as not to break any part of it, and return over the illness because its mischief is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their puncture and audacity regarding the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised; which leads to great illnesses coming upon men, which are harder to treat than a simple boil. The causes of their failures are all, or some of those, or that they extract from certain bones of the mandible as we have testified with many instances.
And for the eradication of it, wash the mouth with vinegar or water mixed with salt.
And if there are discharge of pus for this reason, as many times happens, then take some vinegar and sprinkle it over the wound. If this does not help, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and fine tongs used to extract a tooth at the beginning should be long and thin, short and thick, so that they do not bend when you have to work.
And thus whenever you use large needles where they are not folded, make them short and pointed.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and pointed at the tip. At the tips of these, there are teeth that interlock and hold firmly by descending construction, and some times the tips are in the shape of a heron's bill, called a ciconia, and they are of strong construction.
Chapter XXXI.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of fractured jaw bones.
When you need to extract a tooth that is fractured by some cause, first ensure that you apply pressure firmly over the area for one or two days until the location becomes softened; then insert forceps or tongs whose tips are shaped like the bill of a heron (called ciconia or guanta), and have strong construction:
The tips of the forceps should be made inside like a file orawl.
And if your attempt with these forceps or tongs does not obey, then open the wound over the rectum and separate all the flesh and insert the instrument which is named atrial, that is a small lever of which the shape is this:
And let it be briefly that the large end is small, and not bent so that it does not get stuck.
So if the rectum is perforated, that is good; and if not, help me with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular-ended, in which there is some swelling:
The form of the second instrument is triangular with a finer end.
And now help me with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the next line: And with other instruments which will be used for rasuring teeth; since this instrument is made for the youth, which resembles a large钳子，其形状如下所示：
From the triangular extremity that is twisted or bent, which is some kind of swelling, and not engorged so as not to be taut.
And another note that the tooth instruments are similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves methods according to what the operation and various ailments signify to them; for there are ailments to which the ancients would neither refer nor use a specific instrument due to their diverse forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth is tauten, or if it breaks, then place weight on that area at what is convenient for the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of roots of teeth, and the help to do this is as follows:
And let there be some small swelling gradually, and it should be pressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee while the bone is completely drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
If in the bone there is a small ulcer, first remove that ulcer and its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth above others.
When teeth are prominent not according to their natural order, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old women; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it cannot be separated or removed with a file, then extract that tooth. But if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut out that tooth using an instrument whose shape is like the head of a pig, made of steel from India with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your cut be such that you extract that tooth in multiple days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that it not be any different from other teeth.
And if the tooth is prominent and needs to be filed, then file that tooth with a steel file from India, whose shape is as follows:
And it is all made of iron from India and the margin edges; and it is of small wooden points thus as with a file on which needles are made, on which the tooth is filed little by little over days for ease, so that there is no other sharp tooth. And then mark that one at the end, and shave that one with some razors.
And if the tooth is such that a part of it is broken and the tongue lides over it, then you should file that part so that the sharp edge of that fracture is hindered and equalized, and made full so that the tongue does not cut it nor the word be corrupted.
Capitol.xxxiii.
For the restoration of decayed teeth with gold or silver foil.
When the front teeth are affected by concussion or removal due to impact or a fall, and the patient cannot strengthen over what is missing, and you have treated this with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold foil rather than silver, because silver becomes loose and may come out in a few days, but gold does not change at all.
And let the bile be in such subtlety and coarseness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the bile and hold twice its amount between two healthy teeth, and nearly when it grows into two twists of the bile between two molar teeth, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth from the other side. And then push the tissue into the part from which you began, and strengthen your hand with ease and skill until it is not mangled.
And let your compression be such that you hold the bile tightly without letting it escape from the roots of the teeth.
And then divide the excess parts of the bile with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and convert those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it remain thus stretched like a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen it or them with another ligament in such manner throughout its entire time.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these bindings:
When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the mouth, and they have grown back as we have described, and they are replaced.
And it is not done by anyone other than skilled artisans.
And sometimes it is suitable for certain causes of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them in the form of a tooth, and is placed in the location where the tooth failed, and is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol. xxxiv.
On the incision of the ligament where it is in the language and forbids speech.
This ligament which leaves a mark on the tongue for some days or is natural to it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
And the operation is that one lifts the mouth of the patient, their existing head in the lying position; elevates their tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its resting position.
But if there is any hardness or tenacity in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer of flesh, and incise here to avoid a flow of blood.
And then wash the wound with wine or vinegar or with hot water; and place a pad on the tongue to keep it moist. If necessary, leave the patient's tongue out at night to prevent it from healing again.
If there is a flow of blood, place a vitreous glass over the area; if the blood persists, then cauterize the location with a pointed cautery suitable for this purpose. And then proceed with the other causes until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a cyst, use the tongue.
Sometimes, when an abscess in the tongue occurs, prohibit the use of the tongue in its natural operation; and greatly enlarge it until it fills the mouth.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient sixty degrees facing the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of a brown color or black, hard, and the patient does not feel any sensation in it, then do not touch that part which is diseased.
And if it has turned white, in which there is moisture, then place the probe in it, and incise that with a fine knife, and incise all of it. And if blood comes out during the time of your operation, then cover it with a vitreous glass, so as to restrain the blood.
And then return to your work after you have brought him to completion, after he has been washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure when it shall be healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
Of the extraction of apstema from two ears and those that are located in the cheek, and other apstemas.
When I encounter a godata (gland) in the cheek, these are glands that are conglomerated like gout, which occur externally and are named as two ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and they do not heal, then consider if the apstema is hard, of dark color, and of little sensation; do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron to prevent blood flow. First, let it mature, and then either you will incise it or it will rupture on its own.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is fine, then it is to be incised.
And the operation on them is that you consider, before your operation, if they have already rested the abscess of their caut fully or if it has diminished somewhat; and then cut the malaise before the sun, their head in your care, and hold their mouth, and the servant holding between his hands the tongue of them takes hold of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be sharp like a knife.
Then as you press upon that tongue and show it to the patient, and cut over that with your quick hand, then take an awl and prick that abscess, and pull that outwards as far as you can. Another thing that you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing that you pull from the tunics, and then incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, except that the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the opposite straight part, and which is sharp, made of iron and bent.
If this instrument is not present, then incise that space from which this form comes: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this method of incision, and near the incision, the malady will be cured by washing with water.
If there is a flow of blood, cure it with water from the decoction of bark of dog's-bane or of leaves of hound's-tail, resembling those of styptic causes until the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure it as it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses appear in the groin or other locales besides the two ears, and incise those according to what is said in the incision of two wounds equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in her groin, which abscess had a dark color, little sensation, had already closed her groin, and the woman breathed freely, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
And the abscess had already been punctured for so long that there were now two fingers' breadth between where it would drain through two incisions.
Then I cut open the fistula fully and placed my finger in one of its openings, then pulled that out, taking with it a good portion, and next incised the other opening from which the pus would drain, and compelled its mouth, grasping its tongue, and finally placed my finger in that abscess.
Then I cut out a large part of it, and from that only a little blood was flowing. Then the well-being of that woman improved, and she began to drink water, and soon eat food. Therefore, I continued incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which kept forming as long as that condition lasted.
Then I began to treat and cauterize her well-being, according to the method; and next I wandered about and did not know what God had done for her nearby.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
When the catarr (catarrah) affects the uvula, and it is enlarged and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part large and round, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and thus often times you know that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then cut the area that is added round; if it is of the length, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not more than an inch, then you must fear the incision of it, for there is fear about the gout.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument from which the shape is derived, and place the ounce in the new, and pull that down and incise the area with one of the two instruments, which are called in the incision of two maces.
And cover it so that it does not exceed what is fitted over the natural term of addition, for if you exceed it, you will lengthen his speech.
And nearby the insertion, use that which we have mentioned in the insertion of two layers, and ensure that it is healed within.
And if the patient is frightened by the insertion, cover it so that you use a soothing agent in the cautery to relieve his fear, and the manner of the cautery on him is simply with hot water. You should place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as mentioned earlier. Take from the water which we said in the chapter of cautery, and apply it to the wound so that it is alive but not too thin or subtle. Use this to fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is:
Let the end of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the mouth of a chisel, and place the instrument over the medicine near the vagina, and the patient should rest on his side so that saliva or mucus from his mouth flows through the internal medicine, so that it does not decrease for any cause on the wound and heals that area.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres inside the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from cauterizing the uvula, and then let it dry and fall off over three to four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it, and after cauterization, cleanse the circuit of the uvula with a soaked cloth, modify that which is in the circuit of the uvula with the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with embrocation, and internally with garum (a fish sauce) until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is safe and free from incision and the fear thereof.
Some cases of the uvula are cured with what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikados arabicum, camomile, grind them and make paste from their parts, adjust all those causes or some of them into a salve, and let them be submerged in vinegar, and bubble; and the salve should be well kneaded with good plaster, and in the middle of the salve put a wick, over which place an arum root container according to this manner; make it of silver or brass.
And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient between where the vapor goes to the uvula over the quulta, while the uvula is moistened.
And then repeat over those cases several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the onset of abscesses, for it would too much constrict the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather declare the case an abscess with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and bind at its end a piece of hazel, so that the mouth of the patient be opened, because the hazel stopper prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a foreign object or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible. Afterwards, place your finger on the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you may discern what is in the throat.
And what is not obvious and is hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of nap or a razit leaf, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge and soak it well in honey, and force that sponge down, as it will reach the location where the thorns are and be extracted. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside the body and secretly extract it; or take a worm and secretly place it inside and extract it.
And if not already done according to the causes we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small finger, and at the end of it have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
And let his head be elevated upwards, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that the doctor places his hand there.
And instead, let the patient himself insert honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause attached and push it downwards, and pull his hand with the instrument towards him, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is fully inserted.
Chapter XXXIX.
For the extraction of gouty blood from the kidney.
When gouty blood is treated with what we have said in the division of the treatment with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the side of the patient's bed in the sunlight, after you have understood the language of the foot with the instrument which we have recommended.
So if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or through fine, subtle means.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the side of the patient's foot. Then place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times as necessary (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the side) and have the patient abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a sponge full of water, squeeze its mouth over the area, and wash the area with it; do not swallow any of it, but wipe the water again on your hand for about an hour, as soon as you feel the gouty blood start to move.
If this has not been previously burned as we have recommended, then fumigate the groin with incense or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
And another method of fumigation is this: you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which there is an opening, and at the end of the instrument, place the extremity; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the groin over the extremity of the cannula, and close its mouth so that the subfumigation is not burned off until you know that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not catz, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and abstain the groin from drinking, eating salty causes, and other foods, and do not drink water; thus, this regimen must be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when it appears; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it. And it is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is compressed, it does not leak.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discussion on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Abscesses are special lumps, of various kinds, according to their nature, and each one in this treatise.
And they are diverse in puncturing and treating them through two methods. One method is specifically for abscesses themselves; the other is for what is compressed by the humors.
And the second method is near the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
And for abscesses some of which cover areas that should not be perforated but rather allowed to mature until the healing is complete in those areas.
So for other abscesses which must be incised when they are ripe and not matured according to their completion, thus for abscesses that are near joints, when an abscess is near a joint, its nature extends into what is within the circuit of the joint, and corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is an abscess near the main limb, and you delay the incision until it matures naturally in the main limb; or if it is near the anus, therefore incise what is not yet ripe; and should not be cut raw due to poor digestion, but one near the anus, so that it does not become inflamed and extend inward into the parts of the anus, causing a fistula, or done at a time when it is not healed. You must know the time for incising the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and then the decrease in redness and pulse, and the subsiding sharpness at the head of the boil, and other signs.
And know when to puncture the abscess in the location near it and allow the pus from the swelling to drain.
And the puncturing should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or foot, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and, finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
When the abscess is in flesh, it is better to delay the puncturing until the digestion of it is confirmed according to complement, as we have said; for if you puncture it too soon, it will prolong the course of the pus and misthick the walls of it so they become more hardened and deep.
More abscesses should be perforated according to the width of the flesh or body if necessary, or according to that from which the member suffers.
And ensure that you administer a small perforation in large abscesses, or a large and wide opening or multiple sections according to the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done as if with a bandage or string, do it thoroughly, just as you would in cases of tumors and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which the incision is made as the figure of a mint leaf, as with abscesses of phlyax.
And of these, those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, similar to those.
More so for those in which no such thing is done, as with superficial abscesses of lions, ensure that you perforate them with a superficial or flat perforation only.
And when the abscess is large and has collected much healthy pus, that you puncture it and do not hesitate to extract all the purulent matter at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day incise the abscess further, extracting a larger portion, and proceed in this manner making punctures according to degree until it is fully evacuated.
And especially if the patient is of strong virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decline, for the animal spirit has resolved into the exit of the healthy matter, and greatly alleviates the illness, and you may openly perform.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you perform your puncture on these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or if it forms a flat section. Then administer either hot or cold applications accordingly; if the abscess is large and the openings from the puncture are painful, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have separated a part of the cord or have concave it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold flax or with a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out blood or roots, to maintain their humidity; strengthen it on the seventh day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate with ointments until it is healed.
But if you should happen to have a flow of blood during the hour of your operation, then administer water infused with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you should administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in many places of this our book and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you should infuse powders with wine and oil, and place those over the areas.
And if it is in the summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place powders infused in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this be steeped for three days, as we have said, and then you should incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it whatever is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses in what manner the cure of each one is treated individually.
Chapter XL.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the chain of the head.
In the chain of the head, small abscesses occur, and these contain nodules which are formed by their own tissues; the nature of these nodules is spotted.
And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain humidity resembling lime. And among them are those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hard and calcified.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there should be no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of those without.
And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called a lancet, until you know it contains pus.
And if what it contains is humidity, then section that along its length by superficial section according to this form:
And begin in the section of the line B. into the line G. As the moisture is evacuated, then you scratch that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause of it all, for if many times returns, if it remains of that any cause.
And then immerse it carefully in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; and fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with it you will dissolve all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly treat that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you feel the need for it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if an abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, and cut between the two sides of the section, and draw out all parts of it, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunic which contains it.
But if your artery opposes you, then do what I have recounted to you first.
And similarly, treat the abscess incised and for its healing as we have said before; the incision on an incised abscess should be lighter, because it has little bleeding and little moisture.
And sometimes the abscesses in the head of some people have no moisture at all; the cause is that I cannot incise an abscess on a woman's head. Instead, I must probe it with a hard, rough, and white probe that could not be twisted, and if any part was affected by this, it would be damaged.
But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter. Instead, the treatments for abscesses that occur in children's heads and ears should be applied, but the incision of all these should be a superficial incision.
And place the incision of those in the lower parts below the area so that it alleviates the body of the disease to the lower parts.
And then attend to what needs to be done for the sake of the cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Signs of suppuration occur in these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groin; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the signs that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these arises in its own membrane. Just as with the nodes and abscesses on the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are signs. Some of them are lumpy, some contain humidity, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Therefore, in that one which you perceive to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the archery, and is not edematous, cut that one with a superficial dry incision from above the part down to the part below the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it out completely, and extend the lips of the skin outward with a scalpel or small cuts if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not cut yourself with your hand in the process, or ease the patient's suffering, and cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then pause on the affected area with vitriol trissa or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that within which is at rest the acuteness of the apstema and makes the wound softer and begins to suppurate. When the blood is incised.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulas, and then incise those and cleanse them.
And if it is near the vein of the scrofula, avoid incising that scrofula from its origin. Before you cut where the ligament is strongly folded, leave that [space] so it falls by itself.
And then fill the wound with old wool which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you incise the scrofula entirely, then adjust the two edges of the wound and stitch it tightly so that no excess tissue remains.
But if you see that there is excess tissue due to the size of the scrofula, then understand to incise its edge, remove it, and administer stitches as stated.
And for those scrofulas containing humidity, make a superficial puncture at the place where it appears, and pause the puncturing of what is the pus base beneath the body, as we have said.
And then administer the puncture, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it dissolves what is rotten from corruption. And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of生成中，请稍候...
And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of generative flesh within which it should heal.
Of the section of the blister in the abscess under the sole.
They say that the ancients performed this section of the blister in the epilhit, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
Yet in men with stiffness, a cavity should be avoided during the removal of the blister, for if this is not done properly, it could harm all the veins and major arteries of the thigh.
Yet in those who have abscesses on the mouth or sole of the foot or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the blister to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, incise the epilhom, leave three or four small circles of the epilhom's circles, or a quarter section between two circles in quantity, so that the section is chapped, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for the section, which is devoid of flesh and the vessels of its blood are lifted.
And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the cord of the gallbladder with forceps, and then cut the cord before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And then incise the cicatrice as we have instructed; and it is significant about the section of the channel by the flame which is of that eye and of its disordered state and by the absence of voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two ligatures of the wound's cord, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
And Albucasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is merely that you may see some of those abscesses have already drained pus, and the patient has come out of danger, with the vein cut off, and some went on to incise the epiglottis so that the patient might breathe over the site of the wound through a single breath, and thus be saved from death.
And for this reason, I order to leave the wound open until the malice of the illness is consumed; and the malice of it lasts for three days; and therefore then I order thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in the patient's wound and incised there a part of the root of the lung, and I was called to treat the patient, and examined the woman as she moaned like one who has died, and uncovered the wound and stopped the bleeding which was coming from the small wound of the wound.
Then I confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her with what became healed.
And she did not suffer any physical injury nor even in her voice, and soon returned to her usual state of health.
And now I say that in the case of the foreskin, there is no fear.
Capitol. XLIV.
On the section about an apostema that occurs on the shoulder and is called a hernia of the shoulder.
This apostema, named hernia of the shoulder, is a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not allow him to make presumption as if he were a master only in the one who is small. And you probe that area and investigate the one he points out. If you find a hard lump, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise that area like a node, extract it from the skin and bursicle it; otherwise, you thoroughly examine his entire condition, and place the affected area in such a way as to facilitate healing until it is healed.
Capitol. 45.
Of the sections on the species of nodes.
Of the joints, there are various species, and I have already described all the species of nodes in the division.
And you must note that I distinguish between nodes and hernias in such a way as to avoid any doubt.
Therefore, I say that in hernias there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the excess is subsided; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
More often there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that lion's skin which is on the back.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a stain and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that at its beginning from the flesh which is called intermuscular, according to how its form will appear in the caput, which is nearby this.
And this is the method of inquiry for abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this flesh and insert it where the area is most humid, which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the flesh has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand near the size of the abscess, and extract the inserted flesh and consider what is found in its wake.
And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I have said in other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intruding substance, then you know it is fatty.
And if dry on the surface with a section forming a cross as shown: As I have shown you, suspend it with a cord, and carefully strip the skin off all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract the clean part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract the clean part, and many clots will remain. Then you extract it in pieces to ensure it does not break for any reason.
But if it breaks for any reason, whether little or too much, the node returns as best as possible.
And if you see that any part has broken slightly, then fill the wound with some corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, place it over the area where an abscess is suspected, and cure the rest with the other treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not large, then you close its two lips and cure that which is within.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with one-third zegi (a type of glass) that is vitriol, and let it remain open for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood stops; and then return to dividing what is torn from the node.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
Make them of iron, of lead, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument remains in the abscess.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called Albed, and one of them is called Berid.
And it consists of three spices, of which one is major, another minor, and the third a small amount.
The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
The form of the experienced minor, is as follows:
The form of the experienced small, is as follows:
It is proper that they be used for those abscesses, discharges, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are from the bones or other causes.
And they are made round, large, like large needles to which threads are sewn, and they are made of amber, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of amber.
And blackbird experiments are performed, which they say must be open for those in the cavity where their reflections are reflected due to their lightness to those reflections.
And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the large blackbird experiment:
Form of the medium blackbird experiment:
Form of the small blackbird experiment:
The forms of the blackbirds are of three species. Some are simple long ones, which have only one curve, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium.
And they have curved bodies, which are of three species.
And those blackbirds having two curves are of three species.
And from them you have three curves, and they are of three kinds.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single slight curve, like this:
Shape of a single great curve having two curves: Shape of a single moderate curve having two curves: Shape of a single slight curve having two curves:
Shape of a single great curve having three curves:
Forma of an uncia woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and apothemmas are incised and excised, and they are of three species, one of which is grand, female, and pauc.
Forma of the grand scalpel:
Forma of the female scalpel:
Forma of the pauc scalpel:
The extremities of those from which section is made are acute, while the others are blunt. They are not kept in such a manner, but rather so that it may be done juvantly (juvente means health or vigour) during the excision of nodes, avoiding the risk of incising a vein or nerve. For these reasons, the condition is cured and there is a little tranquility due to the heat which results from the excision of the apothema.
And these are the forms of algamids, and they are of three species: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
If they are made of wool and resemble rays from which alcohol is made.
And it is at the outer edge punctured with spatum hidden there, and runs to the inner parts both inside and outside, as you want, as you see.
The forms of spathims, which are hidden between the fingers and involve the perforation of abscesses without harming the patients, are of three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of vents, in which the flow of blood is cut off, are of three species: large, medium, and small; the forms of which:
They should be made of lemon bark, round in shape of some length, and subtle.
And ensure that these cups are of different sizes, large, medium, and few, so that through those cutaneous areas the flow of blood can occur with speed in necessity, and when you first apply them there should be no medicine.
But do not use them to obstruct the flow of blood throughout the entire body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as the inner sides of the knees and thighs, the armpits, the breasts, the abdomen, and similar fleshy creases.
And sometimes small instruments resembling scissors are made for these purposes; through which the blood is obstructed when performed by venesection, or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this manner:
Capitol. xlvii.
For the treatment of men's testicles which are swollen.
Some of the testicles are swollen in certain men. You should advise them to change their sleeping position, as the testicles begin to become hard. Soon the testicles swell, and the women's testicles, which are similar, also swell.
And for those who have this condition, cut out the affected area according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G. Then remove all the tissue, and fill the wound with red medicine. Next, suture the two sides of the wound together, and treat it until it heals.
If the testicle droops towards the groin and becomes softened due to its size, as it often does in women, then cut it out into two layers, each section resembling a lunar shape. Each should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from line B to line G. Then remove the core which is between the two sides of the wound, and drain the pus. Administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary for the treatment until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision that should be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until the flesh around the fat is eaten away, and then remove it when it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of carbuncles where pus leaves it titillates.
When carbuncles where pus leaves it titillates, it is due to the species of scrofula, tumors which contain a boil that is drained.
And of those some contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised at the lunar quarter according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the carbuncle of the boil has been evacuated, then you complete it with fresh incisions and leave it for another day.
And then the wound is to be dressed with suitable ointment and left to heal.
And if the abscess of the lymph nodes or scrofula is, then you incise there in such a way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the ulcer is extended to such an extent that it becomes gangrenous, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have said earlier.
Book XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
When an arrow breaks the artery and the chain (likely referring to a tendon or ligament) is consolidated over it, then dark motes often occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein are: when an abscess is due to the artery, it is long and extends along the course of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a stridor (likely a gurgling sound).
And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance along the course of the body.
And the section over this abscess is error, and especially in those who have armpits, in the groins, in the neck, and in other parts of the body; and it is great, therefore we must ensure that its cure is avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head must be particularly avoided.
More about that which is due to the inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the cord; and place the incision near the artery, and deliver the tunics where they will be uncovered.
And place an needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double thread in two places — which cause you to demonstrate in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And place a point in the location which is between two threads with soldering to ensure that the wound in it is closed, and that the abscess is dissolved.
And administer cure in which oil is applied while the threads are being removed; and treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to venous dryness, then you should hold your hand where you think the abscess is located by its root, and insert the needle at the place you have held with your hand, making that penetration; and take out from one side what you put in from the other side, and ligate the abscess well with good lint as I have said before in the vine fiber of two parts along both ends of the thread.
And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then insert the wax at the needle and with all the abscess, you should make the incision of the first needle, and strengthen the four threads at the places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when it is sitting at this place, you should make the incision of the root, and leave what is wet.
And then place the powder you have submerged in wine and oil, and proceed to administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the abscess which has occurred due to twisted nerves.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
It is most frequently found in the areas of the joints or the thigh, or in any location where the joints are weak.
It is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the larger parts of his body system, and when it is pressed with firmness, one feels in it the patient's sense of stupor.
It is not an abscess that extends to the upper part of the body, and therefore he is weak in all parts and does not move forward or backward.
Therefore, that which occurs in the joints should not be considered caused by iron, for strong pain indicates contraction.
More severe is that which occurs in the head or on the forehead, causing weakness through vomiting. If the abscess is small, then apply heat and incise it with a scalpel.
If it is large, then suspend it with forceps, and incise it, and clamp that part; and adjust the wound with stitches, and cure it until it heals.
Capitol.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the cheek affecting the abdomen.
Some people have large swellings in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These tumors are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the tumor itself is subtle, but its head is large; and their lips are conversed, both those that are small and those that are greatly magnified.
And I have already seen one, and in its abdomen there were two tumors which resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those whites, of subtle origin.
And the lips of those tumors were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them at all times.
Then I incised those and opened in the one foot having eighteen inches, and the other having six inches.
And in the operation of their incision, you should consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the tissue is white, humid, with fine particles; then you incise it with a spatula, and immediately cauterize it in the fire, for the section must be expelled without infection; and if you see the infection, cauterize that.
And if you see the gout painful and frightening, avoid incision with iron; rather, when you take lead juice from fresh molten lead, strengthen that tissue, the manner of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead greatly within the tissue, until it is incised and falls off by itself.
But if the tissue is of coarse particles, then in the incision of it there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in those that are in the abdomen.
It might be possible that you incise the mass of it, and then cauterize it to prevent it from returning.
And then cure that within which the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not incise any part that is of dusky color, with little sensation, and soft to the touch, for such a part is likely cancer.
And I will provide a reminder of the disease nearby.
Capitol. lii.
On the cure of hernia of the navel.
Hernia of the navel is caused by various reasons; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the abdomen, and protrudes through the skin or intestine depending on where the other ruptures occur; or by a wound that flows from a vein or artery as mentioned before, or by constricted fatty tissue.
If it is due to a diaphragm fissure and a deficiency in the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, and often appears in various locations. And if it is due to the exit of the intestine, then place that part as we have recounted in greater variety of position, and when you press that part with your thumb, the pain is concealed, and then return; it is strong upon you so, and you must make a significant incision for bathing and intense work.
And if due to humidity, then it is painful and not concealed when you press it with your hand, nor is it strained or relieved.
And if due to scald, then at these signs the abscess appears in blackish discoloration.
And if due to nothing in the flesh, then the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is applied according to a certain quantity.
And if due to windiness, then the touch of it is painful.
And the operation on it is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an arrow wound, or a vein, or due to windiness; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and terror in such cases, as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses due to arrows and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the fabric, then command the patient to lie on their back and extend; then place your hand around the circumference of the navel, and command another person to stand between your hands behind them; then wrap a piece of linen around the circumference of the navel over the spot you marked with the probe; then extend the size of the abscess upwards by one finger's breadth; then fill the circumference around the area you marked with the probe with strong paste or cerate and apply it in an appropriate manner.
And then extend the middle of the abscess over the flannel and insert your finger in that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already palpated it and guarded it with the flannel, then carefully extract it and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have palpated the fabric, then take it with one finger; incise the excess parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that mark, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put them into those strong threads, and insert two needles into the circumference you made around the abscess in the shape of a cross, making sure they penetrate; then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, stop the needles and let the area between them allow the extended flesh to fall by itself; or incise that which is subtle and can be pushed, and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the eminence of the navel is of flesh neither in it nor by humidity, then you should treat the abscess as we have said and drain the pus or humidity which you find in it, and then cure that with ointments to consolidate the area.
Capitol .liii.
Of the cure of pain.
We have already said, in the division, of types of pain and in what manner medicines are used to treat it. And we have stated that pain is avoidable if it is not ulcerated; and we have said that pain is generated during the manner and care of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some types of pain are in a location where the eradication of it is possible, such as with headaches which are in the breasts or in the groin and their equivalents in other body parts, to extract all of it, especially when it starts small.
When it is old and hard, you cannot expect it to have properties like that, for I cannot heal such a case nor have I seen another, nor has anyone been cured of this.
And the operation on it is when it is allocated as we have said, that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile several times, and then drain it, if found to be clearly filled.
And prepare the patient for the operation in which the preparation is located, and proceed with the incisions which apply to it; and concave from all sides with the probe so that it does not damage any of its tissues. And let the blood run, and do not abscess it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the gross blood with your hand or an instrument that is within your reach.
But if you find it contrary to cut deep for veins or arteries, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another treatment until it is healed.
Capital. liv.
For the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is nothing but the species of althitas alone, and it is not approximately treated with iron for the species of tympanites or the species of hydrops, for that is fatal.
And when you have treated this species of tympanic dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility from another illness, or another dropsy, such as in their cough or abdominal condition and similar to those, then do not treat them with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you see the illness due to excessive virtue, and in them there is no other illness but dropsy solely, neither child nor old man, then the method of operation for it is that you lift the illness between your hands, and apply it closely to their abdomen with your hand, expel the wind from their body, and push the water to the outer part of the thigh, and then take a spathula thorn in this manner:
It is long of two sharp parts, with sharp extremities like a spear; but rather it should be in the latter somewhat brief little by little, so that in the operation you do not pass into the intestine, and let it alone.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you feel that section you move away from the navel by the quantity of three fingers to the sides leaving, on the right side above the pubic bone.
But if the generation of dropsy is from kidney disease, then your section should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation is from the liver, then your section should be on the right side.
And do not feel your section on the side where the pain is felt, lest the superfluities flow to that place and cause harm.
And then puncture the instrument along the length of the cord, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with a spear between the cord and siphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or so.
And then perforate the scrotum so that the pus reaches the desired location, which is the water. And then extract that and insert an instrument of this form: And it is similar to a fine silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised like a feather pen, as you can see:
And at the end of the instrument there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, that part quickly rises to the surface, thus evacuating a small quantity of water. If you evacuate more than what fits in the ring within the hour, the patient may die due to the resolution of his animal spirit, or be close to death.
But evacuate according to the quantity of the virtue of the fluid and according to how the signs of the patient's condition suggest based on the pulse and the quality of the fluid.
And then extract the instrument, and stop the water which causes it so soon is stopped by the cord which I will pull that is above the chip (or notch) of which you have perforated it according to that manner.
And then iterate the instrument on another day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and beware not to be submerged in the water but only slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in dry sand, and washing in cold water, and in the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what was previously mentioned.
Capitolium.
For the treatment of children whose urinary passages are not yet perforated.
Sometimes some of the child is expelled from the mother's belly and the opening of her uterus is not perforated (or is torn straight or is not in its place).
So the genital opening is perforated shortly after birth with a subtle blade according to this form:
And then insert a thin lead nail and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate he is relieved and urinates; then return it.
And if you do not tie the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will prevent this from closing.
But the one that is torn should be treated with a lead nail, as we have said, for several days before it is stretched.
But those in which the tear is not in its place, as said, the cause is due to those where at birth the tear is located at the end of the head of the vagina so that she cannot urinate from inside; while lifting her hand to raise the vagina above; and it is not a generation issue, for which the sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is an illness that lasts.
And the manner of the operation is that the patient lies on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand in strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perpendicularly, like cutting a feather, or any part you do not reason to cut, so that the vein of him comes forth resembling the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle place according to what fits.
And observe that in your operation for the flow of sand, whenever motes occur, pause at them where you are cutting the sand, and dress the wound so that it heals.
Capitol LXVI.
For the case where you encounter discoloration, decay, and adhesion of the foreskin at the head of the penis.
Motes (or particles) appear in this case on the penis and on the prominent flesh.
And of these two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cover that which contains all of that evil with a thin cloth and cut into it; then place yourself over it immersed in Egyptian ointment; then, cure the wound with fine ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a bad color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
If the abscess is in the foreskin of the penis of an uncircumcised person, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part outside, then you should remove the part inside at the beginning before it consolidates; then cure the part outside. For when you cure this together with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be trapped.
And we have examined accidents in the testicles and in the black foreskin, such as corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkening and that which is about to腐化或已经腐化的部分；然后在那个地方敷上一层蜂蜜，它由陈紫罗兰粉、碎玫瑰花瓣和筛过的盐组成。
And then attend to that one among the other treatments when it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is in two parts together, used for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is broken out.
And if the head of the ulcer is corroded and is destroyed entirely within an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease excretes through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce (where this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce is torn, and circumcision is not required over it; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you should excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue dissolves and the head of the ulcer is completely removed.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the ulcer and the prepuce. This is because when the prepuce is thin and delicate, a slight perforation can be made through its thinness by the blunt instrument.
And then separate between the prepuce and the head of the penis a thin thread, which is already moistened in the moist cloth so that other layers do not adhere.
And then apply a styptic cloth when it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity as with other wounds: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of the others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to it the better operation and the lightest way for the sake of health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision among any of the free peoples, for they do not use it in their laws, and this practice has come to us through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with rods; and they use lint with honey and incisions with oil.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification with scissors, or with honey and vinegar in the modification like ointment, because you will see that the cord persists above, because the cord of the foreskin has two tunics, and weaken the tougher one and leave the softer one, and make it light enough to be forced into another incision and cause certain pain. And in the modification which is done by excision, and is digital, of which cobblers use it, it is not secure regarding the incision at the extremity of the male member, because it forcefully enters the vein of it.
In the operation with ointment, you must use iron and corrupt your operation. And the cord of the child is short by nature, and most do not need to be modified in this manner, and I have seen it.
More of the modification that is done with scissors and honey and vinegar, the quality, experience describes to me, for the scissors are of proportional incision, therefore the sharpness that is above is thus as the sharpness that is below; and so when you press your hand proportionately on two sharps, and incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of honey in a figure containing the cord of the foreskin from all sides, with which no error can arise.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child stay mainly if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do otherwise than to tie the bowel in its vagina only, and leave it until the next day.
And then prepare that in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place that between your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the vagina and blow into the cervix, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the vagina, and then modify that which is added to it with sordicity.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the fingers are not sharpened at the tips and the others are sharpened, let the stem of the key be placed between them, and let the length of the two acute parts be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, the mistake in modification is that you might lift the intrinsic nerve entirely or partly, and you must incise it.
Therefore, make sure that you extend the one of your hour along your finger before the incision site and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your finger, then extract that one and incise it.
And if they have passed three days, and remain what is swollen with the sore suppurating, then you let it be until the abscess is ripe, and puncture that one for ease, and incise it according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the sore, for it will not be in that one.
And therefore treat that with what the plague consolidates from the powders we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the instructions above, this will not harm it.
And therefore treat that with what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an overflow due to a stone or a burning infection, or by pus or flesh, similar to those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly consider the cause in the patient. Then know that you should perform a surgical extraction using an instrument called a siringue, of which this is the form: It is made of silver and is very thin, similar to a long quill in thickness like half a palm's length, with a fine tube at its end.
And the method of inserting urine is that you take the flax folded and tie it at the end with good ligature; then insert the ends of the flax into the part left by the ring, and cut with scissors if there is any excess cause of the wool, more so insert it in the cannula with force. Then draw the ring close and with a waxed thread.
And make a cesarean section on the mother, and apply the bladder and vagina with a mixture of olive oil and ointment.
And then insert the ring gradually so that it reaches the opening of the vagina; and then fold the vagina upwards at the place of incision; and then push the ring into that; and then push that so that it reaches the bladder, and that is set in the mother to be reached by the desired cause, and if not done in this order, but the meat where it is twisted.
And gradually insert the flax into the wool, for urine dries the wool.
Then extract it for treatment with urine, and use a lancet. Do not cease to do this until the bladder and malady are thoroughly relieved.
Capitolium.
Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder, we must use and prepare instruments which are suitable for this.
When accidents such as ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or corruption of the tissue occur there, and you wish to distill waters and medicines into it, then a special instrument called a clampcedra should be made. This is its form:
so that in the extremity of it is closed, so it is sealed. And in it there are three holes: two on one side, thuswise.
At the beginning it is concave, in which the substance to be inserted is placed. Its capacity should accommodate the quantity that fills it, and when any cause causes the humidities to be drawn out from within, they are drawn out, and when expelled, it draws them back in; and when expelled for a long time, it acts like a clampcedra, upon which naphta is placed in the battlefields of the sea.
To prevent humidity in the bladder, insert the end of cedar into the humidity, and pull out what is pushed upwards, for the humidity is drawn into the cavity of cedar.
And then insert the end of cedar into the urethra as we advised in surgery; and then push the humidity out with what you push, for that humidity soon reaches the bladder, and gout centers there.
The form of the subtle cristera in which the bladder is cristeralized, and that is the form:
And let it be made of silver or tin, of which the head is either like a small feather, and place reed inside it.
And then take a bladder from a mouse, place in it the humidity you want to cristeralize in the bladder, and then tie it tightly with double thread over a fire.
And then insert the end of the cristera into the urethra.
And then strengthen your hand over the bladder with moisture having structure descending where the disease centers as that moisture has already reached the bladder.
And if you do not find the bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make from that circle; and perforate it completely round; then insert strong wire through those cuts, as they are turned; then place the circle so that it is placed, for you pause in that which you want from the humidities, and smell and pour.
And then you place that in the instrument and do it thus as you did with the bladder, and keep your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of kidney stones.
We have already discussed in the division the species of kidney stones and their treatment with medicines, as well as the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have said the pear in which we make the cut and section.
And the pear generated in the bladder is that which is inserted into the bladder.
And I am now narrating that in the exposition manifestly and briefly.
Therefore, I say that the pear generated in the bladder mostly goes to children; and its signs are that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar in subtlety to water, and appears in that sand; and gout rubs its knee, with greenish patches appearing, and soon becomes swollen; and thereupon the buttocks are affected in place of those.
And the recovery of children occurs within about four years; and it is a difficult cure in old age. More in the young, it changes through that which is between them.
And of that which the pear is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, cut with a christeri (sharp instrument) which extracts all the opening which is in his intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the passage of the stone, leading to its inquiry.
And then place the patient's foot and make it bend and flex in order that the stone descend into the bladder, or may pass from that location or some other time.
And then place that cushion you have prepared between your hands, and let the other servants hold the patient's limbs, so that the bladder is made to incline towards the positions left.
And then apply pressure to it and all that area.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply pressure to it.
And if you do not feel it completely with your touch, then cut and apply oil to your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or to your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into his anus. And because of the heel, after you have placed as I have said, let it be. And convert that little piece gradually to the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it as I have said, and expel that to the external parts, letting the fluid out of the area you are treating.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the legs upward with his right hand, and with his other hand lift the curtain which is behind the legs, in the area where the operation is performed.
And then insert spathum; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, before the left thigh; and let the section be over that heel as I have said is in the anus, and let a transverse section be made, so that the section outside is wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the heel being possible, and not greater. For if the section of the one in the anus, which is the heel, flows too much, you should make the section, and it will be a perforation-removed as its ability.
And be aware that there is sometimes one in which the passage is difficult due to this.
And of that one, it resembles a lion's testicle and is round, and through it a light passage is made.
And if that one has angles and margins, adjust it in the fissure.
And if it is not thus cut out, then you must either probe it or strengthen it with a proper gesture, the end of which should be like a rasp over the stone, and not escape from it; or you should insert a thin instrument with a curved end into it.
But if you cannot do this, then you expand it a little, and if you want a flow of blood, cut through it with a strong incision using vitriol trioxide.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and soon cut over it; and soon push a little there; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, then ignorance leads you to cut out that great section, for which happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or tries to achieve a continuous urinary discharge, by which means the area is not completely consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is outside, or use forceps in the fracture of the limb to extract it from the wounds.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over that soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and wrung water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then lift the patient's leg on its pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the third day.
And when you have removed it, moisten the area with water and some oil, and then treat it with ointment containing diafinicon and ointment containing diabazilicon until it is healed.
But if in the swelling you encounter an abscess that is hot and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, through which urine is prohibited (and this is known by the excretion of blood with the urine), then insert your said instrument into the swelling and extract that blood, for if it remains it will provoke the bladder to corruption and its putrefaction.
Then clean the swelling with vinegar, water, and salt, and oppose all spices, using what you find suitable for the cure until it is healed.
And mark the hours of the entire cure that you will perform between the patient's thighs and apply the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine excretion is prohibited, then cure it by applying what I have recommended before you reach the section; for too many applications of this treatment are accused of causing dryness. And now I advise you to use a wire drill, the shape of which is as follows:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the foot.
And then take filings, and tie it around the swelling, place the stone under it so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the needle into the swelling, piercing easily where the puncturer will reach the stone. And rotate the puncturer with your hand around the stone little by little, and complete the puncture on one side before you make it penetrate on the other side; so that the urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is left of the stone from the puncture in the swelling, for that is cracked, and is washed out by the urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not effective for any reason that prevents it, then tie a bandage around the stone, and another above the stone. And then bind over the stone in the swelling with two bandages. And then extract that. And then untie the ligament and modify the sclerotic spot, which is done on the lesion.
And there is no need to tie with silk thread the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other ligament above this, for when the silk thread is untied near the injury of the kidney, the cord returns to its place and heals the lesion.
And for this reason, when you tie the silk thread above, you must lift the cord to the parts above, or return it by making another knot, and the lesion will heal as we have said.
Capitol. lxix.
On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Kidney stones in women are not commonly generated.
Yet if there is a kidney stone in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that a strong young woman is a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a good woman who can describe herself to the doctor whether she is chaste or not.
The third is that you cannot find a good woman who knows this art, especially the surgical operations.
And the fourth is that the location of the section above the ankle in women is far from the location of the ankle, so you need to make a general incision, and there is danger.
But if necessity compels you to do this, then you should seek out an old woman who is well versed in these matters, and such a person is rarely found.
But if you are lacking in such a person, then seek out an old and subtle woman, or present an experienced mature woman who is skilled in dealing with women's issues, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Then have her present and command her to do everything you will tell her, from the examination of the ankle to the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, so she should put her finger into the woman's vagina and feel the ankle.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to lie down on it.
If it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the vagina and inquire about the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it well with good compression.
Then if you find it, gradually irrigate that from the bladder's orifice to the parts, and keep his urine abundant so that it reaches the patient's thighs.
And then lie down on that application of the padding, place the patient's thigh in that part, and keep his limb from being compressed by placing him in a position where the stone is located, so do not cut him.
And the section be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if you feel the stone, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the grains of pepper are small: some are round and pungent, long and oblong, and having ridges.
And know how many spices there are of the pepper that you signify about what you want.
And if you want to promote bleeding, apply vitriol triplex to the area and keep it there for one hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation once the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare among your instruments those that you mention in the extraction of pepper in men, so that you are assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want to promote bleeding, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area and strengthen it with powders and allow descent; do not repeat this. Leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strongly loosening it will kill the patient. And then cure the wound.
When the acute pain of the leg subsides after several days, then you return to your operation when the swelling has subsided.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Aguilous hernia is nothing but the addition of moisture in the white fibrous tissue, which is left by the cord of the genitals containing the humor, and it is named fibrous.
And sometimes it is in the proper fatty tissue, which nature prepares at the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and it is the cord of the genitals between the white fibrous tissue, which we have said, and it is not this but fatty.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which occurs in the genitals, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the genitals.
And this moisture having various colors, its color may be yellowish, or bloody, or red, or black and floury, or watery white, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located: if it is in the scrotum, which we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like an egg, and one can see the swelling, for the humidity within affects all parts.
And if the humidity is in the own scrotum, then the abscess is round divided from the egg and thus one estimates that it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the scrotum and the white scrotum, then cut away the scrotum.
And to know the color of the humidity, you draw the color of the humidity in the abscess through a small incision from which the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the treatment of it, you must command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
And then lift it slightly onto its back on some cause a little higher, and place the head under some pillows.
And then set yourself on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who extends his cloth over one of the sides at the thigh and the part of the miracle of the belly.
And then take a spatula and split the thigh at the midline along its length close to the pelvis.
And make the section according to right measure, equally distant from the line where you should split the skin of the thighs, until it reaches the white fat layer.
And excise that, and observe it, and guard it for this: do not go deeper than that; and your incision should be as narrow as possible, and you should examine the excision carefully according to the quantity you can manage.
And then puncture the fat full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps, and extend the incision upwards; and do not touch the nerve at the base of the genitalia, and incise the incision in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its thin edge, for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
But if you proceed with that from the outside of its nerve during the time of your operation, when you have completed the incision of the forceps, return inside that, and properly suture the two lips of the genital nerve, and properly care for that as with the other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the vein corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the spermatic cord, extract the vein, and properly care for that as we have said.
But if the fluid is present in two parts, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part just as you did in the other; and if it is apparent to you that it is an operation, then you perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert in the sections submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over it which you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over two genii and the miracle of the belly; and place on top folded cloths and powders, and lay those over bran which is according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fill them with well-combed wool according to this resemblance; and make the ends which are pressed with a small stick or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end holding the buttocks inside the other, and the second holding the upper part of the groin, and place two ends on each side on the thighs, and all the structure be secured in the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery at the section instead of using iron; so you take a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and ignite it as we have recommended until the white chifac containing the water is uncovered, and then you use the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then lance the blister with needles, and excoriate it with needles, and then cauterize it with a fine cautery ignited; and incise that part according as it is possible so as to eradicate all of it; and guard well from the smoke that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the risk of infection, better than an incision.
But if you encounter a contrary condition such as an abscess during the time of incision or the time of cautery, or the risk of infection, then handle it according to the treatment that is appropriate for the abscess as described.
But if the patient is afraid and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I will advise; and when you are certified by what we have said about the signs, that hernia is dangerous.
When you must suture the wound on some elevated part, then perforate the abscess at the lower part of it with a spatula, and place the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the view be wide enough to contain all the water.
And place your hand firmly over the area, close it, and leave it open, so that the water continues to flow. And place it over the area where the wound should be healed.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white linen in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prevents the entry of water, then you must put into the wound a needle or instrument from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is described; or apply a small pessary to the region of the wound.
And you must know that the water returns, and is agueguada (probably a term for reabsorption or return to normal) in about six months or until it disappears; and when it has aggregated, then perforate it according to this method, so that the gout passes its days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, one must fear great harm if not treated properly; for I have seen cases where it was dismissed and only saved by the best treatment.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses are found in the tissues where the genitals are composed, and this is caused by several reasons: either due to acute aggravated superfluity, which infiltrates the genitals, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and there is no pain in it; it is a severe abscess.
And the abscess is hard and encapsulated, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it occurs due to the concretion of arteries, and due to inflammation of those arteries, as one can recall, or due to inflammation of veins.
More than that, which is due to the inflammation of arteries, it is known by the dispersion of the apstema when touched there among your thumbs; and note that you should not touch it.
More than that, which is due to the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed; leave the compression with your thumbs.
And it is possible that sectioning be done on this type and on the other muscles; for you must incise the cord of the testicles, then extend the skin above, and extract the one from the white scrotum, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have delivered that from all parts of the skin.
Therefore, if the skin has already adhered to the muscles, then you must extract the skin and incise it.
And if there is an adherence due to any cause in the scrotum, or between what is between the testicles, then you must deliver all that adherence and incise it with a round incision.
If it is a native flesh at the place of adhesion which is behind, then incise all of this that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with lanolin soaked in olive oil and vinegar; and then cover it until it heals.
Capitol. lxiv.
Of the cure of hernia that is external.
It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope similar to a swelling of the testicles, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking difficult on the afflicted side.
And in the cure of this illness there is fear of what preceded it, bringing to mind what comes before.
However, incise where we will perform the operation after making the initial cuts.
And I say that you should cut the afflicted side on an elevated cushion; and then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts left; and place the codena of the inguinal region on your thighs, which are proven by trial. Have another minister assist you, and extend those on strong extension.
And then incise with a sharp knife through a transverse section along the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you have incised, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location through a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added by the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that it releases the vessels which I moisten with one of two spirits, which is not bad for this.
But if you incise all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they shrivel due to the incision of the vessels, so that it is deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be atrophied, or that they wither on their own.
Capitol LXV.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm, which is located above the abdomen, from the inguinal ring. Because of this rupture in the abdominal wall, some of the intestines protrude through it.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision. These two types occur due to various causes: through a blow, by jumping, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar actions.
The sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the pleural cavity, causing the diaphragm to compress the intestines.
The sign of this is when it is due to the diaphragm's rupture, as at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the nearby visible one, which is due to the intestines' prolapse, and the body shows signs around the areas outside the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this greatly disturbs the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is feared that the examination in that area should be avoided.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of its cavity if he obeys, and then tie it over his collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's chest.
And then open the cord which connects the cord of the testicles above, and incise the cord of the testicles completely along its length; and place it in two flaps of the cut section according to where you need to open the section.
And if from that section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to let of the humor.
And then excise that cyst which they leave the cord of the testicles, while the white hard cyst of each part is exposed.
And then you insert your finger into that which is being excised from the testicle, into that which is between the white cyst, which leaves the cord of the humor, and between the cystic duct, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the humor.
And then hold the cord of the testicles at the front parts, and with this extend the white cyst in your left hand, and raise the humor to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the humor upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
And seek around with your fingers that there be no cause of the intestine enveloped in the white hard cyst. But if you find any cause of it, then peel that away and leave it in the abdomen.
And then cut along the part below the scrotum at that section where fluid flows, as we have described in what we have said about this.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, place it on the wound; and apply the salve which we have recommended (and some times the white wax is cauterized, which we have said near the incision of fear of blood flow, for many times accidents occur there) and leave the salve between so that it may fall.
And if the application is delayed, then pour water to wet it, and place it over that so that it may fall as we have said.
And then cure the wound with another treatment for wounds as it heals.
Capitol lxvi.
On Hernia Ventosa.
In this hernia, it is not seen that anything has been burnt during the treatment of the wound.
And the first doctors said that it should be done as we have recommended in the hernia that is present; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over which there is ease; and then dry out the middle part by applying a poultice with what operates on it, so that the vessels may fall.
And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the tendons.
Sometimes there is a rupture in the tendons as we have said, and apply a poultice to the area.
And the surgeons give little cause for concern regarding the intestines; if they do, it is rare; and return them to their proper place at all times.
But if the time is prolonged, there is an adjustment in the cavity where you are placing the intestine; and this occurs due to the extension of the cavity, which is in the tendons as we have said. The cause is that the cavity is stretched, and the area becomes softened and develops into a carbuncle, so apply a poultice.
And the treatment for it is with a cautery as described in the previous narration of it.
And sometimes it is cured by fire according to this manner: and it is that the patient lies on his side between your knees, and soon the place of the rupture of the abscesses dries up by evaporation according to the width as much as three fingers.
And soon strengthen the white cloth that is under the bedsheet once it is uncovered.
And soon take the wick and place it over the area where the cloth is raised, and press it against the belly button.
And soon prick the two raised areas over the end of the wick of the cloth, and adjust one to the other for suturing.
And soon pull the end of the wick out, and do not leave the cloth completely open, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause like this in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And soon treat that in the treatment of wounds, and after cutting the edges, cleanse it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and the raised area of rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more conducive to health.
Capitol. lxviii.
Of the mollification of the scrotal skin.
Spots on the scrotal skin in some men are caused by the softening of the tissues between them, and it is believed to be due to excess moisture.
Then it is necessary for the one who is treating such cases to judge when to remove the scrotum according to his skill, and entirely over the softened part of the natural scrotum; and then adjust two flaps at the suturing.
And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterward, care for the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches dissolve.
Chapter LXIX.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause I am reminded of it in this treatise; and the reminder of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is so that when a physician is questioned about it, he knows the treatment for those to whom it happens; and the other reason is that we may have occasion to castrate other animals for our young ones, such as bulls, goats, pigs, and similar to animals.
And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by excision or by making an incision.
But in that which is done by excision, the way of the operation is to kill the beast in warm water so that its genital parts are softened and relaxed. And then take those out with your hand so that they are resolved and no marks appear upon touch.
In castration performed through incision and extraction, make sure you have the animal and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those glands that you have excoriated. And do not incise any of those on the scrotum for any cause, but incise the thin one which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles so that the animal desires copulation.
Then care for the wound until it is healed.
Chapter 70.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where there is a streak or appearance that indicates space in the cord of testicles, in which something resembling female characteristics appears on the skin.
And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that vein which is in the cord of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and the vein of the woman around the clitoris is thus like two testicles of a man, a little more round like the scrotum of a man with its two testicles.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you should cut those tight flesh areas where the pain escapes, and then treat those with the cure for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine comes from the cord of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is done on it.
Chapter XXI.
On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Labia majora tight and firm are placed over natural causes where it is stretched and made lax with a view; sometimes in some women it is enlarged so much that it hangs like in men and expands during intercourse.
Then ensure that you have the phlegm on your hand or a cloth and wipe it off.
And do not finish with a cloth, especially on the sole of the foot, to prevent a flow of pus.
And then proceed with the care and treatment of the wounds until they are healed.
More hidden flesh is flesh that does not appear in the horror of the mother until it fills that space, and a strong cord is tied around the parts outside according to the likeness of the cord (and for this some first called it "caudated evil"); therefore ensure that we cut thus as we cut phlegm, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids are when the vein of the woman is perforated, or is slightly inflamed. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a bad fortune that has preceded, and that is caused either by flesh not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chifac.
It is found in the swelling of the thigh, or in the ribs of the patient, or in the upper part of the abdomen, or in the lower part of the body, and you must prohibit coitus and impregnation and childbirth, and strongly you must prohibit menstruation.
The diagnosis of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, palpate carefully; but if it is not obvious, then you examine that with your fingers or by touch.
But if the obstruction is due to a subtle chifac and is close to the two lips, then you separate and dislodge that.
And you place powders on the two lips, and then place your fingers indicating with both hands close by.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips forcefully until that subtle chifac is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and immerse it in oil and place that over the area, and keep a person there to prevent the incised location from being consolidated.
And if the abscess is large and thick, then you must incise it with a spatula or leaf of mint.
And if the inflammation is due to a carbuncle, then suspend it with a clamp, and incise it.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as mercury chloride, dragon's blood, and ashes, mixed with alum.
And then administer an open lead tube to prevent the wound from being lightly consolidated.
And keep it for a few days and administer boiled water.
And then treat it with the other consolidation remedy once it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you must incise according to this method. If this is due to an abscessed boil, for the abscessed boil which is in the majority do not let any contrary operation be performed in any manner.
Capitol LXXIII.
For the cure of hemorrhoids and of itch and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins that constantly bleed within certain areas; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed by ulcers.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive treatment and which do not receive treatment.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and ulcers when they are in the pelvis and do not appear in the sensation, then for those do not perform any treatment.
But those that are in the openings of the pelvis and on which there is sensation, are those that are cured.
And ensure that you insert the woman into many frictions and then widely extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
And then powder the areas where the blood flows from one of the incisive powders over them, doing so as if it were a kiss and with a similar appearance.
And then scrape their feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then apply that plaster in a decoction of sumac and of roots of millet grass and of squills and with a similar appearance.
And then take flour of orchid and mix it with honey and wine, and make a plaster with this over his back.
And if the blood is incised, that is good; otherwise, apply it to two flax seeds, and to the breasts perform scarification.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of centaury or in the juice of hyssop in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; and then dress the area with ointment until it heals.
And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Chapter 74.
On the perforation of the eye in the vein.
Various special cases of abscesses occurring in the vein, such as cancer, abscesses with hardness, ulcers, adenitis, erythremia, fistulas, gangrene, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and their special cases, as well as the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
And see that I mention in this treatise on abscesses how to use the cautery for one that occurs in the vein when it is among the abscesses that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is performed, I will tell you.
Then consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is sharp on percussion and fever, and sometimes that it turns red and if there touches over it the sensation, while noting no perforation of it, and cure it with what helps during the maturation until the acuity of the accident ceases.
Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her upper body and adjust her legs to the part beyond the abdomen, and spread her thighs apart. Place her hands over her hips, and support her knees with your hands. Liaise the quascus with liament as needed.
Then the midwife should follow along the rectum straight and administer the instrument through which the opening of the uterus has been opened, the shape of which will be described in the causes that will be given soon.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the lower part of the uterus of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the uterus should not be more than the lower part of the uterus and push through the malaise. If the instrument is larger than the size of the fist, then cover it with powder on the surface of the fist so that the instrument cannot enter the space of the fist.
Cover the fluid that flows in the blade of the lancet above and ensure that the minister holds the blade and rotates the fluid until the pores of the fist are opened.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and becomes hot and moist, then cover that part by applying a cold compress to the head with spit from the lancet.
And when the phlegm is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in olive oil or green oil in which there is some astringency; and place the wick in the area of the fist.
And place over the fist and on the woollen cloth submerged in water in which mallows are boiled.
And it is usually cured in about two days by applying ointment which you apply while it is healing.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed with an ointment made of honey and vinegar, then immersed in water in which lemon or aromatic herbs have been boiled, and then returned to the ointment.
And if the wound is inside the liver and hardened, then carefully observe that you refrain from treating it with force, taking care as we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to properly treat bruises when they occur in an unnatural manner.
Necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by signs, and when you see the woman expressing herself at the openings and desiring to smell the air, and being refreshed by what is over her, and hastening the emergence of the bruise, then you can perceive that this part is according to the natural figure, and its emergence is over her head, and the second one is either at or suspended below the navel.
When you see those signs, then hold the patient's abdomen so that the fetus descends slightly; when it is on its head, place the second stage, and this is purified from those superfluities through good purification.
That which is another from this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the patient is situated in front of the head of the patient and its feet, or one of its hands, or at its foot, or the head of the patient and its hand, or its abdomen, and strongly it is turned over its own neck, resembling unacceptably the figures of the patient.
For necessary causes, the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of those, and what each organ is in them so that it is significant and placed there.
When the pain is situated on its head by natural accident, and it is violent for the woman and made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of her already weakened, then apply that sezer, or what women have her, and evaporate the concoction with fenugreek and with humid oils.
And then insert the probe between his so-called small spout and open the second one, or dry that one with its joint inside where flows what is within it of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen so that the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be anointed with almond oil and fennel oil.
And then command him, by the Christ, that he be immersed in warm water and make him sneeze by blowing into him; and keep his mouth and nose closed for about an hour, until the fetus comes out quickly.
And if the two parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation. But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and quickly hold the cushion over the ground; and make sure the woman does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is not closed, then incise there and extract the fragments of the wound or lay the body on your cloth and extract that equally, for that will be thoroughly cleaned.
When the wound extends over its feet, then scrape those parts within it, and soon make the wound smaller, and soon cover it, and soon take a piece of it and extend those parts little by little.
More when it extends into the thighs, then command him to express it, and do that externally in conditions, for it will be thoroughly cleaned if God wills.
And if it is not thoroughly cleaned as we have recommended, then return the wound little by little until you cover it according to the natural figure, for it will then be thoroughly cleaned with slight scraping.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and pound it thoroughly in the mortar for good pounding, and line it with the inside of the woman's skin, the lower part of her abdomen. And then make that cut in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts around it have become numbed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it. And when you have performed the fumigation for an hour, then make that incision over a basin, and immediately perform that snuffing and extend the mouth of it, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will cause the wound to soon become almost unnoticeable.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Support the hand of the patient in reduction, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her stand.
And if standing does not help, then apply the jazer to the wound, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous concussion, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if the childbirth has come, then apply the sizer over cloth, and then study the reduction of the hand, and close the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself while the wound is not forgotten.
Lift the patient's leg wide and extend their hand while stretching the foot surface towards the thigh. Have the midwife hold the patient's hand and gently rotate the small part little by little, so that it becomes easier to facilitate.
And when it is equalized, then place over the wound what we have recommended of oil and ointments.
And then command that a small amount of warm water be given little by little. When you have done this, place the compress on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be well wrung out; and make the compress moisten with condiment. The fetus's exit is prepared on the side.
When the horrices of the mother occur according to this manner, consider it, and then incise the second one with your finger so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the one that is causing the obstruction, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you place that according to what fits, and order the woman to strain herself several times, and it will be easily delivered by gentle pressure, if God wills.
The exit of twins or many fetuses. Know that twins or spots of many fetuses are naturally born, and sometimes nine or ten, but more than this is strange and needs to be investigated. Yet the causes are mostly natural, not supernatural.
And concerning these, whether they be multiplied, one second, and are separated by ciphac, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each. Sometimes they are easily delivered as if one fetus by natural passage, and some remain for several times through an unmanageable delivery as we have reported.
And if they are difficult, some of them you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then you treat those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and does what she does with ease and subtlety, and with delay, and be ingenious according to all figures as prepared by her leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Some pregnancies are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more up to ten. You must verify that a woman who aborts has borne one, another all of them formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife, for she must attend to it carefully, and then place her hand on it so that it is proper.
Capitol.lix.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus where we have said in the division of medicine and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery manually. You must consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and is not among those conditions for which her life is feared to be endangered.
When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
And the minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tie it to the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
And then moisten the mouth of the patient with olive oil and honey and juice from alfalfa and flaxseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honey, and place her hand with facilitation on the patient, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the wound.
And place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the wound is prepared to close over its own edges, and then place the fingers in the folds of the skin, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or on the palate, or let the beard be, or on the collarbone, or on the proper locations of the ribs, or let the hypochondria be.
But if the descent is on his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And make sure that the thumb is with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the underlying cause.
And then place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that it is an equal counter-pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And let it be held in all parts, so that the pressure of it may be alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
And make sure that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the retention occurs.
Then if the part of the fetus is left out, let the fingers enter where it may be pushed in; and do so until all the fetus is expelled.
But if the hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all is expelled, and incise it at the junction of the hand or near the elbow.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it experiences constriction during extraction, or there is fluid in its head, then you must insert a pair of forceps between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the fluid, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it, the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And similarly, if the fetus has a naturally large head: then you must incise it with a gematius knife, or use an alundat instrument as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and compressed, you should open the furcifer, when the humidity from the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor swollen, then you incise the head as soon as it suits you.
And if the abscesses of the abdomen are suppurated or in it, then make sure you perforate it where the humidity is present.
And if the fistula is on their feet, then the traction of it is light and the direction towards the mouth of the major vessel is light.
And if it is swollen, you should incise the abdomen and feet, when you extract that piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and feet where the fluid flows.
And if the other members are reduced and the head returns, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the major vessel is opened, then he should insert his hand into the groin, and seek out the head, and throw that into the fingers into the mouth of the major vessel, and quickly insert one or two fingers, and pull them out with those.
And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted by an abscess, when it happens to someone, then make sure it is not treated excessively; rather, administer an effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the fistula is on the side of the body, then it should be punctured if possible: and what we have said about the living fistula should be administered.
And if this is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract it.
And make sure you do not leave any cause inside the second incision.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses caused by an abscess of the main vein.
And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and near that fire another pregnancy had begun, and the fire is dead for the other. It happens that after a long time a boil appears on the arm; and it swells up into an open sore, and begins to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I placed my hand on it using strong adhesive plaster, and pressed with one bone, and after some days, pressed with another bone; and I was too amazed, for in the abdomen there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I incised the wound, and extracted the bones of the dead fetus, the woman having been in her abdominal convulsions for a long time, and had already miscarried in this manner many times, and cured her of a small arm complaint.
And I do not refuse it because it is strange, but rather because in this there is science and aid to what the physician provides through treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the libres, at which equalization there are two vertigos at the two ends of two wires. However, let this vertigo be more subtle in structure, and made either of ebonite or of young wood.
And let the width of each wire be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; and in the middle location between two wires are two adjustments of that same sized wire which are already fastened, the length of which is about a palm and a bit more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a bit more.
And these two additions should be inserted in the mouth of the womb so that they are open when you rotate the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one similar to that, very subtle and light:
Make it of fine linen or of wool according to the likeness of forceps. However, at the extremity of each, there are two additions as you see, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her back with her feet hanging, and open what is between her thighs. Then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the opening in the mouth of the womb, so that the forceps does what you want.
The form of virtue which the ancients would say:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fist:
Form of dressing in which the large head is contained:
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fishhooks, into which is inserted and contained. Form of dressing for the hand:
Form of a hand having a spine:
Form of a hand having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities in which the head is incised:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of such exist, the craftsman should prepare them, making their operation lighter and more convenient for the user.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor, while commanding the patient to hold her breath, and then perform that maneuver with caution, and strengthen your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient, and if by this it comes out successfully, that is good.
And if not, then take a needle and perforate in the cover one hole and pause there on the burning herbs to cover the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, camomile, scirpus arabicus, and cinnamon. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the needle, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold that there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that sneezing operation as we have said before, and the second one should be done quickly.
If this remedy is not effective after performing it close to this cure and it does not work, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that hand into the womb and search for the second one, as you have found the first. If it is attached to the mother's hand, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, remove it little by little so that the mother does not fall due to the strong pull. Before you move it to the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended the cure with sneezing and treatment of the womb with herbs.
If you do not exhaust all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue it in repetition of abstraction, but instead apply what is effective from it to the mouth of the large intestine and to the cleft of the woman, and then chrismate it with ointment and tetrapharmcon; for that will cause it to be reduced within a few days and will be forgotten.
When you permit it to pass, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; then ensure that sub-fumigations and suitable remedies are administered for this.
Moreover, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nard and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menstruation and the second product:
It should be made of iron or copper.
And the thin end should be placed in the chimney, and the wide end over the fire, and the sub-fumigation should be placed on the coals of the fire.
And hold that there while the subfumigation is consumed and they iterate another.
For the treatment of an unperforated anal condition.
When the child is born and the anus is not perforated, which have already been treated with a fine ligature. Then have the midwife perforate with her said ligature; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp needle, and take care that it does not touch the membrane.
And place warm wool in oil and wine over it; then apply ointment to it while it is warm.
But if you fear it is ligated, then insert a cannula for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
And if an anal fistula occurs due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
For the treatment of fistulas that discharge pus.
The fistulas that discharge low pus are often large, and those that discharge similarly are near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is either a fistula or a boil.
And when that infection is old and flows from watery white moisture or subtle suppuration, sometimes these are from such fistulas, some penetrating.
And those that penetrate are known by what happens from them through the discharge and by wind condition; sometimes the patient uses the site of discharge, and a strong smell is emitted from such boils.
And from some of these fistulas, sometimes the penetration occurs into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and from those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the hip.
And to determine whether a penetrating fistula goes into the buttocks or not, you should insert your finger into the buttock, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no pus.
If there is hardness, then insert a thin probe of lead or horse hair into that probe feeling the thread or the hair in your hand.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor proceed from any cause of excretion, worm, or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrable, and now your treatment is complete.
And when the fistula is penetrable into the bladder or into the flesh of the penis, then the significance of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
And if it is penetrable into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the affected area; and that it remains red for some time; and that it does not respond to this treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrable fistulas, complete cure is not achieved, and the cure of these requires the labor and skill of the surgeons over which they preside.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, cure with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and what already exists and precedes.
And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between his hands, the thighs inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and then insert a lead or iron tube, if it is in the tortuous fistula, into the place where the patient feels the pain.
And if the patient feels the pain around the throat, then you must insert the thumb in the throat.
And if you feel the pain in your thumb already by itself clearly penetrating, or something between your thumb and that siphon or flesh, then you can be certain that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no cure there, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is cured in some men after the third day.
And for the treatment in which hope is placed for recovery, you must heat a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as is precedented, and insert that heated instrument into the fistula until it reaches around the throat; and then repeatedly do this two or three times until you feel that all those flesh-flaps adhering in the fistula are firmly closed, resembling the feathers of a bird's wing.
And then cure that which is full of veins wrapped in skin where all those tissues are swollen, and then cure that which is with medicines the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is cured, well; and if not, then it is not cured within some time by another cure.
And if the vein enters but does not penetrate inside, you say that which is in the anus, and between it and the veil-like membrane of flesh or skin, and scrape the fistula in what dries the surface of the anal canal, then dry the anal canal from the beginning of the fistula, and you should dry the vein itself, and let it be inside the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the vein passes through, and through the vein it is relieved and cured.
And then cleanse those fistula tissues which are similar to the canal of an ass's penis and do not rupture from any of these causes.
But if a flow of blood comes between you and your operation when you have exposed those tissues, then let it be as much as possible and for the light pus, use a cautery with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery with fire adjusts well two habits: it is the compression of those tissues adjusted, and the removal of blood by the exsudation of moisture.
And then cure that which is in bags wrapped in skin or cut threads between the area that gets red, and then cure the wound with ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And in those medicines where there is stiffness and excoriation; when the restoration occurs, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire there.
And if there is a tent and between you and it is a veil of cloth or flesh, and it is close to the penetration, then do not perform an operation on it but rather according to the way of faith and hope.
That cause is to administer one of three ways in it: either cauterize that as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that you can introduce the necessary instruments and cure it willingly; and do not proceed with cutting for fear of damaging the muscle containing the nerve, and act against the will of nature; then cure it according to what we have said, which will surely be healed; or extend that veil and clean that until it is dry near the buttock as we have said, or by tent or another instrument of acute extremity, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the secretion near where you can prevent crustation; then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by secretion, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and rupture the open fistula at the part of the buttock, it will be easier for nature. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and place it in the fold behind the surface of the body near the buttock margin, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the wounds according to this form:
And insert the probe wrapped in several threads or around them; and then insert the probe with threads into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the buttock inward, then you extract the thread in this way that you insert your hand into the buttock; and you extract the end of the thread and adjust both ends equally, strengthen each one, and leave it for a day or two. And when more flesh is incised, strongly reinforce those areas where the flesh has been incised between the two ends of the thread.
And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula openings are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is done gently so as not to tear the skin. Then proceed to treat that area until it is healed.
The shape of the pointed probe for which the fistula is split: the curve of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so as not to tear what is unnecessary, thus you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be of two kinds: one where the area between the buttocks resembles charcoal, or those that are like the fat of a raisin. And of these, some are small and large, and the pain from them sometimes occurs intermittently or constantly, and affect the anus, as well as its extremities.
However, those that affect the anus are generally due to lesser humidity, from which yellowish water or a little blood flows continuously, and are characterized by the color of the skin.
And the cure for that which is inside the belly is that you command the patient to lie down and squeeze between when the belly relaxes and the veins appear before your eyes. Then you sit down and suspend your arms with those that you have at your fingers, and subsequently apply those to their sides.
But if your fingers do not have those arms because of the moisture and softening of those, then take those with a rough cloth or hard or flaxen string, and extract those with the tongs called tieus, and subsequently apply them and powderize over them some powdered cauda near the application, so that they may be applied as if by cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterizing. And then cure those with the other treatment until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not yield to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of a cautery, and wash it with that water which is in the belly and which yields slightly to evacuation when the patient squeezes.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, and the cause is slight, then you should grasp them with your finger or grasp them with forceps, incise them, and cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
And if you have made an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and carefully extract the hemorrhoids from those parts, and make the thread penetrate through the opening of the other part, wrapping both ends of the thread around the part past the needle, laterally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from there.
And place a warm cloth soaked in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then leave that which is inside; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or some other treatment until it is healed.
And since they are old and not useful in medicine, when you need to treat them, do so with the point of a needle or with your finger, making them moist and then covering them with a dressing that prevents their consolidation; then treat those that have consolidated.
And when you treat them with stronger ointment than the first, once they start to scab and become excoriated; then treat those that are healed.
Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it appears as a round swelling according to the color of the body, resembling a knoll. It occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains, you should lance it.
And then ensure that what is within the circle of the key is cut out, and held with forceps or tongs, and eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as described in the said chapter.
More commonly, a small sharp rounded pimple appears on the surface of the body, and red spots from veins are often seen in children.
And the treatment is to extend and excise it, or to tighten it with a needle or with thread that holds it. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a large pimple or fistula protrudes on the surface of the body, often accompanied by pain. When you touch it, it appears to be stung like a bee's bite, and it forms around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a penknife or a lancet, strong, and place it over the blister between which you contain the circle of the knife's edge; then return your hand around the knife as you enter what is in the circuit of the blister, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and eradicate the blister from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a lancet of iron according to this form:
The upper part of the lancet should be fine, blunt (i.e., non-piercing), wrapped so that above it the learning mark may be concealed and the rotation of that [lancet] may be performed.
And if you wish, cauterize the blister as described in the cauterization of athyld in the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the cruciform cautery.
Sometimes the cruciform cautery is made of silver or tin or forged and beaten iron; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those that you administer, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and of those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cruciform cautery of those should be small.
The form of pressing great and slight:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and let it be placed in such a way that the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted in the anus, should be closed (not open) like a lion, making it subtle; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and let the width of the opening be according to the size of the rays, with the larger one being a little smaller.
And let the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed be one palm in length.
And let it be pierced with several openings as if it were twisted; and the space which is between the openings should be the thickness of a finger.
And then insert into these openings strong raw honey or around them; adjust the bag to that. When the bag is placed there, make it straight in the head of the cannula between two separate points with strong constriction, and then cannulate each opening: More importantly, the quality of cannulating each one is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and ensure that it is neither too thick nor too cold.
And the patient is supine on his back, elevates his legs and places them on cushions; another servant holds his chest and holds his hands. Then he applies oil or honey or fenugreek paste to the tip of the cautery; then inserts it into the anus facilitating its entry, and the minister takes the bag and expresses the contents into two more and we maintain intensity until all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the basin; then remove the basin and the patient lifts his legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to vomit, have it as much as it can bear; and if it sleeps all through the night, it will be better in health.
And if you perform an operation on the patient for belly distension and vomiting of its contents, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a fine cautery, among the cauteries on which children are tested.
Of the treatment of the plaigues.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plaigues what pertains to the free and to medicines according to the completion.
Therefore, it is said that the plaigues are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the area on which they fall.
And the causes why you see the plaigues are thus: from kidney stones, or a stab wound by a knife or sword, or a blow with a lance, or a strike with a stick, or an arrow, or similar to those caused by such motions.
More specifically, the plaigues that are on parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, or similar to those of the limbs.
And I shall now recount the treatment of some plaigues, by which you may apply that reasoning and rule to other plaigues.
And I will begin with simple headaches, for the recall of compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third book.
So say that when there is an accident in the head causing a simple headache and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to the impact of a stone or similar object, and has already struck the brainstem just severely and is a large headache and you fear the imminent onset of an abscess from such injury, then you should examine and incise the cephalic vein immediately, without delay; and extract from it as much blood as its virtue requires if no other reason prevents venesection, especially if the blood that results from the headache is limited.
And the venesection is from the opposite side of the affected area; and one must prevent the patient from filling up, from drinking, and from eating heavy foods.
But if some cause prohibits the venesection, then reduce the food intake and do not approach meat or wine.
And place your hand over the headache if an abscess is suspected, applying heat with olive oil or with wine that has been steeped in herbs.
If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if recent and the blood has not changed, apply the powder I will describe shortly.
If the air has already changed it, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to a deep cut and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the suture method I will describe.
If the wound has already exposed the bone and pen, and it is not due to retention but a small suspensorium, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh nearby in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he takes pleasure: meats and vegetables resembling his usual diet until it heals completely.
If you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that area and drain it, and cure it accordingly.
If in these swellings the artery or vein through which blood flows and can lead to bleeding cannot be prevented by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut part, you cut it with a knife or ligate it; if necessity prompts you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood is being shed.
If these swellings are simple and small, the cause of them is light; try that you powderize this powder over those, which hardens before the air changes those.
The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, gall three parts not extinct; let all be mixed three times and sieved, and let the swelling be filled with it, and be confined by good constriction over that which adheres it, and coagulate with the blood.
Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not absorbed, for the medicine will not work until it is healed.
And sometimes one does this cautelously alone when no burning material is at hand.
And this operation is performed on large wounds when you deem it necessary to close them up straight and to leave the recent wounds, which the air has not altered.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is summer, then I do not place this powder in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try placing your hand on those cleaned and cooled dressings, or place your hand on those powders of wheat flour in water and honey that promote healing; and place the other cure until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
And I will describe the treatment for fractures of the head in what follows.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between the head wound when it is simple.
If the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, if it is a nerve, it should not be sutured but rather avoided, with vigorous compression, as described by Ziniar and Zege who say it is vitriol and similar to them in causing damage to the nerves and opposing those. And do not place any cause over the wound from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is in the brain, which is the core of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as when washed with cold water twice, occasionally infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thuya when washed with cold water and the other herbs mingling according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
If the wound is large, then suture it, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently treat it with powders until it heals.
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part of the abscess, then perforate it at the most depressed location.
If the wound has already incised an artery and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or tie it up, or cauterize it if necessity demands it.
If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or totally cut, and the veins of the neck have been saved, then you adjust the edges of the wound and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; bandage it and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen it with proper structure for a few days; and apply ointments in which there is stipticity and excitation until it is healed.
If the wound has already penetrated the bone, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from it; what cannot be reached, leave it until the wound suppures, and is separated and the inflammation around it subsides.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle it with the powder which has been recommended. And if a fistula is formed in the wound, then treat it separately, and the cure for that will be described shortly in its own chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and you measure its depth, then consider more whether the wound has any swelling when the patient faints; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder to it for the first hour, and do not press it too hard so that the blood does not get retained in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which might cause further harm to the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment, and remove the powder after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound as long as necessary so that what comes from the humors may flow; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is in it may run out.
And if since the wound has passed three days or more and no spasm or tremor of the bad heart nor constriction of the windpipe occurs, and you use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then cure that with quills and another treatment until it is cured.
And if the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time it remains open, you may know that a fistula has formed; then cure that according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is due to a sword or knife incision and is superficial on the foot or thigh, then cure it according to what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
And if it has already inflamed the bone, and you have incised several times, then you should stretch the wound and tug at it to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them as they are to allow the plague to drain out, which makes their extraction easier.
And for other accidents of the plague in other members, the treatment in cure is as what we have said.
Of the plague in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either great, little, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and I believe that their reduction becomes more difficult if you do not immediately prevent the intervention in them from reaching their place, as they open up and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the stitch of the abdomen is according to four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching the other parts of the body.
And two other stitches proper communicate with the other parts, but more properly own in the stitch of the abdomen.
And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine is pushed through it, and it becomes difficult to return it, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is swollen due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you apply the attempt you submerge a sponge or a wet cloth in pure water alone, or you take squill, cyperus, and spikenard, and mix them with the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
And sometimes in those days I saw this done with astringent, it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which almond and mallows are steeped, for by this it is alleviated with little cause.
But if the intestine is close to this cure, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument on which veins are inserted.
And the primary cure is better when it is proper that it is not sectioned, and does not occupy too much to dry up unnecessarily and cause deficiency.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not sharp, and the tip is subtle, but not so subtle as that of a spatula, somewhat blunt.
And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, then ensure that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over this, for it is better.
When the rupture is wide, and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must place the patient's back on the chair, and position their legs further apart than its shoulders; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place its head and feet further apart from the sides.
And if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the wound is may be further apart from the other.
And you must apply this to large wounds and to medium-sized wounds.
And for small wounds, pause what you have prepared and then ensure that the administrator stands between your most skilled assistants, who hold the wound with their hand and adjust its edges, and then uncover it to show where the suturing is needed.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then leave the end near the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or another that you do not put a thread in both ends of the needle, but in two ends of the clip that is left from the disruption on the inside, before making it penetrate from one side. And you have already added two ends of the thread and two ends of the clip, and so four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; then let the thickness of the digit remain and put another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And let the needles be medium in thickness and subtlety, for the fine ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are difficult to handle in suturing, therefore it is best that they be medium in thickness and subtlety.
And it is not good to place the needle at two nearby ends of the suture, for fear that the flesh be lightly penetrated and that the wound gapes before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound does not prohibit its healing.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not penetrate too deeply and harm the patient's depth perception; place powder from all parts over the suture, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you can tell that the wound is already healed.
And these kinds of stitches with needles in what manner is more convenient for small wounds, because only one needle or two or near those is enough for their suturing.
And the second stitch is made as follows: and you perform the suture of the four extremities, from the thread and two extremities of the needle, in one go, with a needle enveloped equally in subtlety and thickness.
And then, when you have the needle penetrated these four extremities, you withdraw the needle from that thread where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the surface of the wound, so that the suture resembles a stitch in cloth where the threads are tightened.
And place the distance between each suture equal to the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture I know for men.
And with this suture, I healed the wound which was inflicted upon a man in his belly, where he had been stabbed by a knife, and it was the rupture of a major wound about two palms wide, situated around the middle intestine for two palms from the center. And it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part after the intestine had been outside the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the swelling is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal that and it is cured; then that viscous fluid by natural means, and it is converted into its natural state.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not cured; and by miracle of fire, since I did not heal that without ointment, for it was in a place where ointment could not reach nor any medicine, but I placed my hand over the swelling as an old woman applies it twice a day and kept applying moistened water of honey until the fire healed.
And I will say two species of suturing properly according to the narration of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside of the other side.
And so, as the needle penetrates through the chain stitch and along the thread in a straight line throughout the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside out through the other end of the wound.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that same part externally to internally from one side to the other; and leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and penetrate the needle into the other internal part from externally.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate into the probe at the end of the needle which is in the part of the body until all that penetrates.
And then start from this lateral side, and with the end that is of the probe on the other side, extract the needle which has penetrated, and return it to the sheath with the end of the probe that is on this other side; and extract it from the sheath which is on its part.
And do this one time and another, and do it one more time or another time until you sew all that is external according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a thread of skin, on which you sew the skins, ensure that you sew the probe one time from the part of the end of the sheath, and leave the other time open until you finish attaching it.
The second species of suturing which Guilia teaches and is based on her experience, is that you suture it according to semilunar form which many doctors suture in this way. They attempt to join all parts to their corresponding part as nature dictates; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the wound, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your own side of the part from which it is drawn, and make it penetrate into that part from the inside. Leave two ends of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside into the two ends of the thread.
Then turn those threads, and make each part penetrate from the inside into the part from which it was drawn through the other extremities of the wound on the opposite side.
This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suturing method of which I have previously reminded you.
This is Gualia's saying
And sometimes they would say, the stitch of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and starting from the introduction of the needle as you should, make that one penetrate into the other layer according to the stitches which equally join the layers.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, then the stitch there is more difficult than in other parts of the abdomen.
More the judgment of plague medication is the judgment of other plagues.
That cause is when you obtain the recent plague from his own venom before the air alters it, and you reduce the intestine, suture it, and properly dress it, then place it over that carnate powder.
And if the air has already altered the plague, then place it over that, some ointments which are present among you until they make hard scabs and settle the threads, and be consolidated chapped and inspected; and cure it in this way as the treatment of other plagues until it is healed.
If you do not have the medicines at hand, then pause over that for now, until he begins to sweat much, and continue alternating it twice a day as I have shown you, until he is healed, for you will not need any other medication in small doses when the illnesses are simple.
But if you fear that the illness might spread to the main limbs, then immerse a lion's wool in good-quality olive oil or in refined oil, and place it around the areas between the thighs, leaving the axillae exposed.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, for several days you should apply this, then compress that with a piece of black styptic wool, especially if the inflammation has reached the intestine and caused an ulcer penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that the swelling of the large intestine is less severe and quicker to heal than that in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal because the intestine called "gungun" does not receive healing from any illness that affects it; this is due to the great number of veins in it, its large size, the subtlety of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
If what you are treating is the skin, and you have reached that recently, reduce it according to your skill by which you return the intestines equally.
If it has passed into the space and is already red or black, when you tighten that with astringent over the area that is darkened, so that it brings forth flows of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
Then incise what is another in that ligament, and place two ends of the astringent hanging from the cut part of the wound, so that above you it may be alleviated the attraction of the wound; hence close the opening of the skin and discharge of the wound.
Remembrance of the wounds when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a disruption in the intestine and it is small, then it is possible that it may be reduced in some people, for I saw one who had been wounded in his abdomen by the thrust of a lance, and the wound was on the right part of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, and it healed from the operation and distension.
Then I pursue the cure of him whether he was not constricted in the healing of him, but seek to subtlety place that which is healed by fire and the area is consolidated.
And when I see the area already consolidated, I proceed over the patient that you avoid the accident of harm in his own belly; and do not harm any by this evil accident and rob in their meal dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into bath and exercise in his speech.
And some experienced ones have said that when an inflammation is in the intestine and it is small, then you must tie it according to this manner: and you take fireflies from large caps; and then adjust the two lips of the inflammation and place one firefly of those which has the mouth open over the two lips of the inflammation; therefore when it takes on those and strongly closes its mouth, you cut off the head of it, for it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another firefly near the first one, and do not cease to put fireflies one after another according to the quantity of the entire inflammation.
And then reduce that and the wound; and drain those attached nodes within the intestine until it is healed; and do not harm the patient with any injury.
And it is possible that the intestine has been tied with fine string made from the intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should grasp the end of these strings of intestine, making them somewhat raw, then tie the end of it with fine string wrapped around, and insert that fine string into needles and into the place where the intestine was, and reduce it in the disruption.
And this method of suturing with needles is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no injury but only inflammation, and it does not heal from it completely.
Of the cure for abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any wound or abscess when it is wrapped and allowed to become old, and forms an ulcer, and does not heal completely but continues to discharge pus constantly, wherever in the body it may be, is universally named a fistula and we call it an abscess.
And according to truth, fistula is a hardened, white node, from which there is no pain and which is cavitated like an abscess; therefore it is called a certain root or branch, that is, an abscess.
And in some people it is wet, from which the branch flows; and when the wetness is strong, it is expelled within a few hours. And in some cases this wetness is thin, small, and fine.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and their cure by medicines in this division.
And thus cover so that I make you know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with my hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for those are fistulas that extend to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus like the hand and foot; and these are those close to the main part of the body and similar.
And thus of these fistulas that occur in this manner are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation; for such is labor and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope and trust in its cure, and want to gain knowledge of it, then take a试探或铁器，如果瘘管按照直线延伸，那么你可以触及它。
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light of its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has horrific movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then cristelize the orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you cristelize that one will flow from the others.
And then inquire exactly, according to the manner by which you can know if here you have a vein or a nerve, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or close, or it is a fistula with only orifices that you treat completely with your strength, with your inquiry, with which you inquire about the patient, and with your compression on the area by your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the accident in the apostema.
And when you have been on all those causes at a true station, then proceed to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if the fistula is apparent nearby or in a hollow, distant from a joint, or from a nerve, or an artery, or a vein, or one of the areas which we tell you.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of rotten flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that entirely until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the preon until it is as deep as possible, and thoroughly remove all rotten flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
And do this with that several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about it and dry it as we have recommended, provided that you do not prohibit any cause related to a vein or a nerve or a main limb as we have said.
But if the bone is uncovered and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must rush into that where the corruption be halted entirely; and then care for that as soon as the flesh within it is healed.
But if it is not yet healed and you graft it thus as you do, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then uncover again over it thoroughly make the rationale of it and the purification of it with your last strength, and then restore that.
But if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, you should leave it alone.
But if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to pull it out, then you should pull it out with fine forceps that fit well.
But if there are many bones, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any due to lack of your strength.
But if you encounter any contrary cause of the humors, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to expose the bones at your turn, then pause over the wound that allows the wound there, and leave it within which is near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and secure the section which you have incised in your operation.
If you fear, pause over the cut submerged in a hot bath of oil, or a cut submerged in Egyptian ointment, or in some of the green ointments. When these ligaments will have healed, and the bones are separated from them, then the inflammation is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or rib or similar, and what decays in it affects only the surface, then quickly drain it only behind where the blackness and decay are stopped, and then restore the wound.
But if what is from it has rotten greatly, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise all around into the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that after it has consolidated.
And I advise you when examining a man in the thigh to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom occurs pain in the thigh, and within the parts is gout about the material inside the body that has reached the thigh, and the material is a great abscess, and it is not due to an external cause.
And then the abscess was allowed to expand due to the error of the doctors until it matured, and the materials within it began to pus. The cure for him was nearly completed when the leg became fistulated, and you made openings in the ulcer through which pus and bodily fluids drained.
And then the treatment lasted for about two years, and they were not skilled in the art at that time, until I was called.
And see the vein and the materials that were flowing from those openings throughout the body; and already the condition of that man was completely stabilized and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the mouth.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones were connected to them from all parts of the vein.
And then I examined and incised over one of the openings through which I could describe a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupt, and discolored; and a part of the vein that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I cut out what was not in the bone but that corruption which I clamped and cut away, and I had already reduced it.
And then continue the restoration of the wound with conservative medicines for a long time, and do not allow it to become consolidated.
And then you should examine and re-examine the bone after the initial examination, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And observe what appears to me of that corruption, and then you should proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you should examine it on the other side and not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and proceed with the restoration. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and that extracted its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of the vein, but rather due to the position of the ligature and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, since it accedes continuously in all hours due to excessive evacuation causing bad fainting.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of the flesh durable; and it is done well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is converted in his dispositions and not made contrary to him in movement nor damage in any cause.
And if the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then you must correct it in this manner: You should grasp firmly and strongly that part of the prominent bone at its extremity, and command someone to extend that part. Place a thicker woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone was left, and stretch the extremity of the bandage so that it draws the flesh towards the left area. You uncover the flesh over the location you wish to cut for the blade not to cut through the flesh.
And place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut through the flesh that is damaged.
And you must ensure that the cut is small and gradual over the damaged area, for if the corruption is within the bone's cavity but does not appear in its visible manifestation, you may need to make another incision.
And if the bone is corrupted and not protruding, there is one continuous part connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; then place fustes, and next saw through that part where the corruption is, so that the closure of the other part remains continuous.
And the closure should be made according to the location of the corruption, as we have said, slightly smaller.
And if the corruption is at the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but irregular.
And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and drain that area according to any disposition which is within your ability. In every case, it should be corrected as you see fit, provided it does not interfere with veins or nerves.
And you should know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; because you must prepare for every species of operation an instrument convenient for that operation.
And you should know that that operation means to you regarding the species of instrument of which you will need; when you have great study, length, and knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of illnesses, so that when you have them, you can choose what is convenient for it from the instruments for all illnesses.
And you should at the end of this chapter form an understanding of the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones that you will proceed with according to your prohibition, which you will experience with others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another shall be great:
Forma of ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the form of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the form of the stellar points.
And you should not insert anything but that the heads of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or the large mouth be widely opened.
Forma of razor smaller:
Forma of razor broad:
Forma of saw another properly made: let it be made arc of it mostly over and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of well-made pointed blades. Forma of it:
Forma of razor in which it has a cavity:
Form of a razor, or another fine:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its end is like a point, and it is used in several places in the proportion of the bones:
Form of a ray which you apply in proportion to the one that is pierced into the bones:
And its end is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
For the incision at the end and the sawing of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and if the corruption does not respond to your cure, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member you did not perceive any cause for, then you must investigate that member internally to reach where the corruption resides, in order to expel the malady by death or malice which is a greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of that which has been affected is that the member turns black before it is touched, as if burned by fire. You may notice the blackness within that part of the member that has turned and has taken in all the body; therefore carefully investigate that part.
And similarly, the cause of the corruption may be a percussion by some venomous causes such as those from a scorpion, viper, or rue.
And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you must cut the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it does not enter your hand.
And when you reach your hand, cut that of the thigh, and do not give space for corruption to enter within where it might take hold in the arm's brachial region.
And if you prefer that one, then cut the arm between the shoulder and the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the shoulder, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause other than this for cure is a measure of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption prefers the sole of the foot, then cut that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then cut the entire foot. But if it enters the heel, then cut the leg between the joint of the heel.
And if corruption has already reached the heel, then there is no remedy but dismissal, and to leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the ligament in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another ligament over the place; extend the minister a ligament to the parts left, and extend the minister another ligament on his side; you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments so that all the flesh is uncovered within where it will be cut or closed.
And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides over it so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound heals, it comes together properly without an abscess forming.
But if there happens a flow of blood while working, then you cauterize the place frequently, or apply some constricting powders over it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then tie the injured member with a ligament as is convenient, and treat it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if someone has an injury on his foot, this incident which we have recounted, the one that often occurs in him a blackness in his foot due to burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within said entrails where it tends to the flesh.
And then that man prepares himself to wait until he sees the cure go to the member with the urgency of his pain and from the inflammation of his flesh, and the infection enters the joint, and the flesh is healed.
Long time that corruption accidently affects the thumb of the hand.
And then it comes to me, and so I force it to reflect on dispersing that excess around what is retained over the hand of the medicine; near the purification of the body; and the excess is not reflected but begins to go into the other thumb where it began in the hand.
And they make me incise the hand of the patient, and I do not want to do this hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the cutting of the hand of the patient will lead to death, as the virtue of the patient is overcast.
And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and tells me that man prepared and incised his hand entirely, and he was healed.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide so that it may be understood and acted upon.
On the care of colic and the quality of lavage with medicines.
When an apostema occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the apostema is prolonged to collect pus, and then it breaks and is perforated, and the pus is drained, and the area remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is so fine that no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve nor in sinew, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Moreover, if the space is prolonged to the extent that corruption imprints in any member, then it is called a fistula and we stop.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is fine and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the string will adhere and that the corruption has not reached an irreversible consequence, and on the string there has passed through, then you cure it with a cleansing enema.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the wound has an unpleasant odor, then treat it with an enema using a medicinal Egyptian remedy which consists of oil and wine mixed in equal parts, placed in a vessel, and heated over a fire until the medicine boils and reaches a specific point similar to honey.
And then you take what is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; then treat the sinus with this, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the swelling subsides.
And sometimes an enema is performed with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take the ash of vetch, put it in water; then extract that and perform the enema until you are sure that the sinus has been cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with a third part of wine, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to modify and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an excess of dryness and drought in the wine.
And when you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is already healed, then administer that mixture with water that causes flesh to grow in it.
And you take ointment of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with oil rubbed and wine dried; or you administer that mixture with several medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus's orifice is wide in which the clister tube cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron instrument, and place something cold wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment while enlarging it.
And if the aperture is large, then you should suture the lips of it and leave in it a quantity in which the enema will add to.
And if the aperture from which the fluid flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the fluid can flow into it. When the aperture is narrowed in the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus within the area below according to your wish, then you should puncture the member with an appropriate preparation so that the fluid flows slightly from it according to what you are able to do and without any obstruction of the fluid.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out of place on the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And thus you consider the location of that sinus, whether in it the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see that the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or is approaching adherence, then at once remove it or let it dry for a day. When you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May it be that from the sinus, there is a subtle infection spreading. Therefore, do not worry about its adherence, for the healing of it approaches. For in some people, the generation of flesh in their poultices takes longer, and in those, you must do the opposite.
And if from the sinus for several days it is situated near the brach and indigest, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are wet in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as an ointment ypaiychicon when there is an excess of addition of zegi.
And the best remedy for what is cured, is that you take an ointment of ypaiychicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and mix it well in its substance, and apply it carefully, and use this one.
And make it seem in that action when there is no brach, ypaiychicon ointment, honey when it is cooked until it thickens, and use this one; or take myrrh and aloes and incense, mix them all together and powder them over the honey which is on the fire, and then line it with cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it thickens, and powder it over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered to him some long leaf of aristolochia and a root of lily celestial (and the lily celestial), and flour of arsenic and centaury, and use those simples either adjusted, press them and sieve them and powder them with honey which I have recommended; and use of this.
And if the sinus is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the root of it, and you should investigate in the bones or other hard members or the ligaments; then you cure it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of gangrene, nail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Gangrene is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is severe in other fingers, and when prolonged and its cure is less valued, it becomes a septic apostema or corrupts, and spreads into the arm where it corrodes the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that entire area, and spreads its corruption to the bone within which it gives off a foul odor. The extremity of the finger is then amputated, and the color of the wound becomes dark.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not compare your cure, then cover yourself to remove all the fluid that is released from the joint and place a cautery near it, for a cautery movement is beneficial in this.
And if the bone is sound and the joint is healthy, and the adducions of the joint have already compressed the flesh at its internal divisions, and begin to prick and lead it, then cover yourself by placing a fine probe at the angle of the joint that pricks the flesh, and push that out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh as the medicines corroding and comburentz are fully absorbed; then cure that with ointment once it is healed.
And if the corruption has already reached the bone, then incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will be healed that is in the corrupted bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then incise there in one of the joints according to where its location is remembered, and cure that once it is healed.
If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then you at the beginning phlebotomize the patient, and subsequently dry the joint with a sharp spatula in a transverse section above in juice, and guard that the drying does not penetrate into the flesh left by the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient severe pain, which is due to the natural state of excessive flesh adjusted in that place; and then treat that area with what relieves the pain.
Moreover, the adjusted flesh, which is found in many people, is very fatty throughout, and very light in their bones, or very soft in their joints.
And some of it is found in the soft part of the joint, or the natural state of it is located in several nodules of the fingers. Moreover, that which is found in several nodules of the fingers is not soft, and this which is found in the joints is very soft.
And for those that are naturally fatty, the drying is light, and you should incise it with a sharp spatula.
More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is hard; therefore, guard yourself from its removal.
More difficult for those born near the kneecap, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around in a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those suitable grooves for this, and then cure what is inside until it is healed.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers among their joints due to visible motas, or by birth where the person is born with them, or due to consolidation of plague or combustion of fire, or similar cases, then ensure that you treat this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place between their dressings what you have infused in olive oil so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead until it is consolidated as necessary.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and shape it to fit the figure of the limb.
Of varicose veins, these are the symptoms.
Varicose veins are these, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic superfluities that flow in the limbs of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of travelers, workers, and carriers.
Then you should administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and subsequently draw blood from the patient at the basilic vein.
More importantly, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and remove that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: apply a poultice to the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved, which is due to the groin, and then strengthen the patient's thigh above the cushion on the side opposite the abdomen with a bandage. Next, secure the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide application of dryness, and using your hand, elevate the black blood from below the groin area upwards into the limbs, until you have expelled the quantity you desire and that is sufficient to counteract the malignity.
And then bind her, and command her to abstain from foods generating black choler.
And continue the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you raise the leg of the patient, if there are marks on the skin, then place it in hot water and wrap the leg with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise it forcefully if hot water is not available, until the limb is flushed.
And then dry the cord along the vein by sectioning it lengthwise or at the rear of the limb you should lance it, or at its lower part you should cut it.
And then cut the cord and scrape the vein from all sides until it appears by sensation, and you should notice the color of that rope turning to black.
And then, having freed the cord, you see that white which is the cord.
And then you place that cloth elevated and folded from the thigh, suspending it on an iron of lion's tooth.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then expose the thigh from above the vein as it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the thigh, and then extract and elevate it as it is inserted through the second section, and then extract that which is above that.
And do this as you extract that which is in the section that is more above or higher than all other sections, as it is inserted entirely; then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that cloth over the iron and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loose. And be careful that it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that mass and has come about due to damage through that incision.
And when the entire part is fougated, then pause over the place of the wound linen submerged in wine and olive oil, both roasted and unroasted, and cure that until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity in which there is an envelopment at the parts, and it is not according to rectitude as we have said, then cut about that entirely at all parts of its tortuosity and at the places of its envelopment, and suspend that with threads as you lift that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section that you do not incise the vein and that you do not pierce it, for it will be difficult to lift that; use your prudence there.
Form of the incision at which it is dried vein:
It is not as with other threads so sharp nor of acute extremity because it will not pierce the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; having this in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the calf vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands of calves as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, in dry and barren places with little tenacity and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And elsewhere in the body, this vein is generated other than in the calves.
And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom within the body turns into serpents, worms, and lice that generate between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this condition is from this vein: when you touch the calf, there is intense inflammation; then the area becomes swollen; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that swelling, seeming like a plant.
And then, as the extremity appears, cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachma, or two drachmas, and press it there, leaving the lead suspended from the calf.
And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside has been entered, for if you incise that which is inside, it will contract and enter the flesh, causing an abscess, inflammation, and a bad ulcer.
Because the abscess must be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, without any cause allowing it to re-form in the body.
And from this vein, one has been cut in some men whose length is about five or six palm lengths, and I have already been informed that one was cut of twenty palm lengths.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that which is long in the body, until all that is in the material is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then cure it through the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings to it many orifices, and is situated from each orifice.
And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and called the bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands the bovine disease. It is caused by worms that frequently appear among cattle, and one such worm is native between the skin and the flesh, and ascends and descends throughout the body, and is evident from its movement from member to member, breaking through the skin and coming out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, snakes, maggots, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this frequently occurs.
And when you want to cure that and extract it, then do not perform it if you do not consider its natural movement and appearance through sensation, then collect what is upon it and what is left from it in liniment and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting that.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you find it to be near the heart, then strongly bind over the eyebrow with a strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; and consider that the disease uses modification of its body through medicines that expel putrid bad humors, and abstain from foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section on the illness of the nafir.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some parts of the body, and often is transmitted from one part to another.
And I have already seen that which I will recount to you. I have been called to a sick woman in a village, and examined her arm where I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I observed that this swelling went up like vermilion, though less intensely than feared, as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then I noted the pain in that area and placed a compress on the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
And then I moved to the other side of the body where I applied it to the other arm.
And then I was told that she should move her body all over; and it was too marvelous to see the change in her and the speed with which the pain moved from one part of the body to another. And I had already seen this before in my hands according to that manner, but I have seen many cases where it is found that pain is permuted from one limb to another. But not all have such heels as in the female.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the female had a thin body and exposed veins, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that swelling changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are delicate and have soft, engorged veins.
And when you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, if it does not appear on the heel as we have said, then strengthen that area and let it be slightly and gently over that until the swollen swelling is inserted, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it on the heel, then cure that by excess of the body and by what you expel of swelling, and administer those that stink in pills and those of serapie and similar.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they occur; for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and blunt, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues, and of those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of the arrow is when it strikes the skull, which is above the brain, for it happens through the intense and violent pain, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the eyes, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and there is a white moisture in the area of the wound resembling dust, and from it appears like an excess of flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it has entered the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and you can feel a hard lump there, which is not visible; and strong movements of the arrow seem like movements of the pulse, and flow of the black bloody wound, and there is a coldness at the extremities, pallor appears, and syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends completely.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the throat are constricted, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes great pants or gasps for air.
And if the arrow has entered the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, it causes a great and violent pain and heavy breathing, and not all the members are relaxed in the muscles.
And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then strongly extract any undigested food from the wound.
And if you find an arrow in the abdomen, and it is embedded there, open a wound in the wound, or the tissue, or the intestine which is ruptured, and there is no hope of its cure by extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder, and it penetrates through urine, and the process comes out through any opening, and there is strong pain in the wound, then know that it is fatal.
But for other members such as the face, the neck, the shoulder, the arm and its helper, the vertebrae of the back, the clavicle, the thigh, and their counterparts in the limbs, they are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery, nor is it a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this concerning their treatment.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck his eye in the lacrimal of his left eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, leaving his ear bone with its grey matter intact, and he recovered without injury to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the eyeball, leaving only the eyelid; the arrow was hidden and could not be removed except for a small extremity which adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron without any ear bones.
And the Jew recovered, and was not injured in his eye despite the serious injury.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ear bones; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I carefully separated it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was lodged in his belly, and I perceived that he died from that; and therefore, after thirty days had passed and no change occurred due to his disposition, I incised over the arrow and extracted it, and he recovered, and was not harmed by this accident.
And there was a man in whom an arrow had struck his back, and the wound had healed over. After about seven years, incise the arrow near the thigh.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow had struck her belly, and the wound had healed inside her, and there had been no change in her disposition over time, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural operations.
And there was another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow remaining broken inside. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others in this regard.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal subject, who had an arrow lodged in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly deviated to the right side. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him near the arrow wound within three days.
And then you will find the arrow wound with your hand stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels subtle, and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and let go of his right ear, and then you will suspect that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply a poultice to the place you have applied, which has attractive and digestive virtues, trusting that this place will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries up there.
And do not neglect the significant location where the arrow has hit; and continue applying the poultice to it for several days without neglecting this; and during this time, the wound consolidates, and the bad effects of the extraction last for several days until one day I feel the arrow within its shaft and recount this to me.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And touching it, you will find that, and feel the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time through the space of time between four months.
And then, when the wound is broadened, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that, and without hesitation, I did not cease to refine and invent methods of this kind. Until one day, using these methods, I managed to grasp the object with descending forceps, as will be described at the end of this chapter; after which I extracted it. Then I restored the wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, without any defect in him for any reason.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning behind what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor are they comprehended by the free ones.
And the wise artisans compare a little about motion; and with that which is present about that which is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And thus I say that arrows are not expelled from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place into which they entered; or by the contrary action of the other part.
And that which is expelled by the place into which it entered, or is an arrow penetrating flesh and then being thrust in and out.
And if it does not obey the impulse of the hour in which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and reduce the attraction to it and its exit.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and does not obey your impulse, then leave it for a few days and apply attraction and motion on any day, and it will be expelled.
And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then you should know that you perforate in the circuit of the arrow at that bone from any part moving subtly where the place is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area carefully, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot extract it due to the thickness of the flesh and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither bones nor nerves nor veins, then you cut into the flesh where it can be expanded and where the arrow can be extracted.
And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you excise the flesh in which it is embedded as much as possible with all the skill you can; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears or in their torsion where compliance is required.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use the grip of your hand with forceps at all parts where it makes that comply; and with subtle skill ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easier for its extraction and for that extraction.
And if you cannot do this at that time of your hour, then you leave it for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then return to that which is alleviated. But if it makes contrary evil flow of blood, then you administer what we have said about cure in its chapter.
And keep your virtue in the incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the evasion of the arrow; and do this with facility, tranquility, and tardiness as I and you have recommended.
And do this to contract the arrow by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for it is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are redirected contrary to the other part, or that you have already treated some part of them on the external parts, or cause obstruction in the tip of the arrow by the sensation of the part more superior to the arrow's base; then you dry over that; and the drying should be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it is made light by displacement.
If it is retained in the bone, then twist the ligament according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and gradually enlarge it, and then extract it.
If not, let that remain for a few days, and then repeatedly apply it to where it hurts.
If the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
If the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it is stubborn, create a concavity with your finger so that between the concavity of the wound and the arrow's head, then push it into place.
If the arrow is concave, then push it with strong pressure into place, as the arrow will expand due to this.
If the arrow is poisoned, then ensure that you indent all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it there, then extract it while it is dry, take care not to injure a vein or nerve, and after closing the wound, treat it until it heals.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends be curved like the mouth of an ass, so that they can grasp the arrow and not let it slip.
And of these forceps are made special kinds, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of the wound.
Thus, so that it may be alleviated for the instrument in the concave groove and is pushed towards that.
Of femoral venous puncture.
Of femoral venous puncture. The veins from which it is customary to perform phlebotomy are the femoral veins, which are located in chapter XVI, and they consist of two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Avicenna; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temples; and two veins under the eyes, called aspients; one vein in the middle part of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two jugular veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins behind the tongue. But the veins that are punctured in the brachial region are five; of these, one is cephalic, and is from the wild basilisk; and the people call it "the vein of the head," but it is sorda, a midline vein, composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call this one by the people "the vein of the whole body," and the basilica is the vein that is from the domestic basilisk and is called "citillary," and the vulgar call it "the vein of the belly"; one from the funis of the arm, which is placed on the axilla, and it is this in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is this that appears above the armpit by its obvious appearance; salvatella, which is the vein between the said auricular and the smaller said, and it is in it two branches.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild deer's neck; and the second is sophena, and its place is given in the thigh of the domestic deer; and the sciatic vein, and its place is given in the thigh of the wild deer; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrh, migraines, meningitis, and old bad ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sanguine in those veins is as I will recount to you: it should be drawn from above the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the occipital region where both veins are with a wide cloth for good friction; then strongly hold the patient by their neck with a band through which the two locations near the ears appear in two pressed areas of the head; and you should take that from what I said, and if you feel the pulse of those at your own wrist, here it is tried.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be used for incision, and insert it into the vein between where the phlebotomy will reach the bone. And then lift your hand to the vein and its parts above, and cut the vein with an incision inclined upwards. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
And then sprinkle powder and leave it there until it is healed.
And already it was mentioned at the beginning of this book about the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arteries, which supply the temple with blood for the femoral venesection, is the ancient and evil emigranea (likely a misspelling or variant of "hemigranea," meaning one-sided headache) and continuous cataract and body full of acute effusions in the heels.
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on these is as I will recount to you: tightly bind the patient's thigh with a ligature until the two veins appear clearly by touch and the pulse of their location is demonstrated by your finger; then you can proceed.
And then you raise the codena above the vein at the parts above as you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidently, and raise the vein in them; and cut that as you did with the two other veins, and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your need.
And then release the compression of the thigh, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a compress and powder there with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And then the recollection of the wound, and after that the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the book.
And therefore the treatment of bleeding from the vein in the forehead is similar to the bleeding from the cephalic vein for ancient illnesses of the face, and for headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the bleeding from the vein is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient tightens his thigh with a bandage where the vein appears; and then take the instrument, which is called a fosseri, the form of which is as follows:
Pause the puncture at the point which is at the top of the outlet over that vein and strike it either from above or according to the manner of the limb, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
In some cases, the space is opened with a large incision for bloodletting, but I do not know if the bloodletting incision should be of acute extremity as with other bloodlettings, it should rather be of lateral extremity, and cut transversely, because the bone is close by and strong; cutting the bloodletting incision would likely break the bone when it is thin.
More importantly, the young vessels that are at the inner corners of the eyes through the skin of the eye by inflammation and swelling in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the bloodletting is that the patient strengthens his own column with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting, while you stand over the patient's head.
And perform the incision for venesection according to the transverse length a little, making only a few venesections, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection is fine, firmly secure the extremity of it.
And then let the blood run until it is as necessary for you, pause over those cuts, and strengthen them with a new bandage, and then remove those.
More so, the incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and severe toxicity, as well as maladies of the face such as migraines and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the incision for it is that the patient supports his head with his left hand, and you take the fine long venesection and place it in the middle location of the nasal cavity according to the correct direction, for the vein does not appear here, and thus the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover your hand with the venesection little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after a night, for that is quickly restored.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to a constriction of the leg and a beginning of leprosy and various illhealths and bad ulcers corrosive like herpotromeno.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels intense pain in his thigh; and the surgeon is over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually incise the vein along its length for a femoral incision, making it wider little by little; and extract the blood according to the season in quantity or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
And gradually remove the lint and strengthen the two veins with a midwifery thread so that the patient does not become overheated, and leave within the flesh until the plague is healed.
And the youth of the femoral incision for algiric veins, apply to small abscesses and pustules from the mouth and corruption of the gums, as well as bad ulcers and fissures, and those bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the groin, strengthen its neck with a bandage, and then turn the labia and look at two veins, one on the right side of the labia and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so is found in the circuit of those small dark veins; and then cut each with a cutting incision.
And if doubt exists, you, and you do not know which is which among them, then proceed with the incision of the larger one, and the more obvious one among them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the upper labia.
And of the two veins that are in the lower labia, the treatment for the tongue's benefit is close to the femoral incision at positions that are in the scrotum, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of performing a flebotomy is to follow the patient's leg in front of their groin, elevate the tongue of the leg, and observe the tongue, from one side of the vein and the other side of the vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then perform a flebotomy on each; and make sure that you do not end the flebotomy on those, for they are arteries.
And your veins that are flebotomized in the crease are those in which blood flows customarily in all men, and the flebotomy of them is done according to two methods: either place a small mirtilo or olive stick subtlety; or perform a surgical flebotomy with a lancet, and call it alnessil. This is the form of it:
Let the wound be as you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of large visible branches, and those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this femoral incision is of lesser width and more delicate extremity, and it suits the femoral veins that contain subtle citrine pus.
And the youth of the femoral incision from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood from the bad illnesses that affect the knee and the foot, and from what taints the leg and the abdomen.
And it suits the phlebotomist, when performing that phlebotomy, to be well aware of it and to be overly cautious, for if he errs in the puncture of the phlebotomy, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood, so that it is necessary to ensure that you do not phlebotomize there before cutting as with a lancet.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by a clear manifestation, then you should leave that and change to another, or search for some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is manifest, and do phlebotomy with a lancet there as we have said.
If you want the femoral flebotomy, proceed in front of the stricture of the thigh where you feel the location of the pulse, then place your hand on it to hold; then lift the thigh and make a concave incision along the vein as we have said before; be careful that you do not percuss too much over some space of the artery's location.
When you press, as you tighten the ligament, inflammation occurs in the location where you held it with your hand, then that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
And if the blood flows in the femoral flebotomy as it does from a child's wound, thin and rapid, then you know that it is the blood of the artery; then compress and hold your hand over that area for a long space; near this hold your hand, and if the blood is divided, four or five drops are divided, then strengthen the thigh and leave that.
And keep the patient from the moccio of the wound, and have no fear of it, but do not wet that for a few days until it is healed.
But if the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must not perform this for lack of present medicine; then when you incise the artery, if it appears to you; for its extremity is constricted and the blood is stopped; or take some from your fist, and do that, and take half and strengthen that over the place of the vein at strictura descent with liament and powder between on another day.
But if the blood is stopped, that is good; and if not, then cure that with what preceded in the remembrance of the place of the powders stopping the flow of blood.
And the stopping of the blood in such small areas is difficult due to the size of the wound and the possibility of applying powder from the arm.
But from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part that will ascend to the head and from the part left below the body; for this is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And cover the incision after the phlebotomy where it is over-tremor in the phlebotomy of him; for that one is a nerve; and then if he adjusts at the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, there will be stupor to him, and it is difficult the healing of him, and not strong he is healed completely. This nerve motions sometimes appear in sensation; and if it is hidden at some men and is subtle and is not shown, then cover the phlebotomy that you make by section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve by your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein in length.
The purpose of the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw the blood from the head and relieve the ailments of the heels.
And cover this properly, if you want to make the phlebotomy puncture at the olive phlebotomy or at the mirti phlebotomy; for it is the safe place of all veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve are found there.
Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not lanced in the first percussion, then do not mark it again with a lance.
The first of these is that you should know that an incision should be made only to maintain health and with hope for its successful outcome, and with caution regarding the occurrence of illnesses. And that the incision should be made on one of the veins that are in the thigh: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the incision should be made at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before eating, when signs of congestion appear.
And a femoral incision should be made and on the seventh day or at the first hour of the next day, three hours should have passed.
The more frequent the femoral incision is administered, the more it should be done when it proves convenient and necessary, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times.
And let a boy not be circumcised before he has four years, and a girl that is pregnant should not be circumcised but only in the fourth month before the seventh. And women should not be circumcised those which have passed forty years.
And when anyone wants to be circumcised for any reason, let them modify their intestines before the circumcision by applying a lion's suppository, if there is an obstructed wound, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluid during the circumcision of the intestines, which are purified and do not affect the principal members.
And let no patients who are seasick, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness be circumcised until they have fully recovered from such conditions. Nor those suffering from dropsy. Circumcision should be more feared near colic pain, near vomiting, near abdominal issues, near the multiplication of coitus and work and exercise after fasting or watching over, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, either corporeally or spiritually.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the wound is large, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
And then enter the bath if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise for some reason that the wound may be subtletized.
And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so when it is around the hour of three, as we have said.
And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be protected on that day from all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil and excessive labor, copulation, and things similar to them.
And at her service, have ready the causes in the use of which custom dictates the presence of aromatics and odors, and balms according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the scalpel two or three times; then tie the thread with a strap and wrap that area two times.
And if the stricture is tempered, that is, when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is due to mollification, and then prohibit the body's release of blood accordingly.
And when the stricture is near, have those who are to perform the incision rub their hands together between them as the veins become swollen and clearly discernible.
And when the scalpel is about to make the incision, apply a little antiseptic oil properly to it; then place your left hand's index finger on the vein, positioning the location for the incision so that the vein slightly expands and becomes more evident. The incision should be made where you find the vein similar to a fleeing cord, as this area is full of venosity. When you pause the incision over that area, the vein contracts, and the scalpel reveals its position. If the incision does not open the vein, it should be tightened; if it opens, the incision is correct.
And thus, one must ensure that the phlebotomist is fixed and stimulated in all these causes.
And then place the phlebotomy, but if the vein is not opened in one pass, that is good; otherwise, you repeat this or another pass, letting that area a little more, or over it apply warmth, if the area is not infected.
And if the area is infected, or the patient faints, then you let it be for a day or two, and do not bind it tightly, for it would force the infection out through the wound, nor immerse it in water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the vein is thinly situated, and you fear that it may not yield enough blood, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the appearance. Do so with warmth before the area becomes infected, for an infected area requires less bloodletting.
But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not operate on it, for no excuse would serve your cause; instead, place yourself over some part of the wound, for it alleviates the body's pain. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, in all phlebotomies where the veins are cut to prevent blood from flowing back into the body, administer oil as a substitute. They use tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over the area, for the blood becomes subtle and is circulated when it is thick.
And if a large abscess forms in the phlebotomy site, where motas (blisters) occur, especially for those who have not been bled recently but during this session, or near the appearance of the small vein, then you should apply and place a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, strongly maintaining it for an hour, for it dissolves.
And make sure to do this near the termination of the vein with the help of it or another vein.
And if there is any blackness or greenishness in the area for a few days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that area some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or vinegar or its semblance.
And when red spots occur, you should perform a bloodletting of the basilicus vein.
And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply your compress to that area, as this swelling is bad and harmful; then be sure to place over it some cause of what we have said, for much fluid will flow from the femoral artery.
And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, so that the area may become harder, and then treat it with another remedy until it is healed.
And ensure that you draw from the vein according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the prevailing color over the blood according to how it appears.
For if the blood is black, let it remain until it is resolved; similarly, if you see it thick, let it remain until it becomes thin; similarly, if it is sharp, let its acuteness subside.
And when one is full and strong and has the need for a single session of bloodletting, then enlarge the incision in the vein and let the bleeding be free.
And when one is weak, do the opposite, and let out the blood in several sessions, and that it be gradual.
And the best that is administered in venous bloodletting is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of bloodletting avoids the flow of blood and the cutting of nerves, and is more commendable and safer than bloodletting according to length and width.
And in which it is accustomed to occur syncope, before the bloodletting, place a small amount of powder infused in milkweed or simple oxymel; and let out the blood from the arm in three or four sessions.
And if there is a swelling or complication, before the bloodletting, take a powder of myrrh in oil or an aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and sweet-root, or an aromatic and fragrant honey syrup.
And if you happen to encounter a fainting fit, perform a femoral incision, as it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then cause him to drink water from meat and essence of a subtle fragrant substance; use aromatic substances like almond oil, and anoint his foot with that.
And use the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter on fainting fit for evacuation.
And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, perform a femoral incision on him, as the purpose of which is for gradual evacuation, and its virtue is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if one wants to cool his arm and circulate his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral incision.
And if one wants to direct the blood from his body in the opposite direction of which it is flowing, then do this after it has been cooled on the second day or the third.
When that body in which there is hot blood already inflamed causes fever, ensure that the blood is expelled all at once and in large quantity, and intensify the perception so that a syncope does not occur before; yet you must have preserved all conditions for phlebotomy; and placing your hand on the pulse of the patient, drain the body of blood, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope, since many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to separate the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as the venous orifices are already closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that with great force and slightly extend it, for this is too harmful.
Leave it until the phlebotomy is performed again; or wait for the coagulation of the blood in the venous orifices due to the acuity of the phlebotomy; or place your hand on a part of tyriaca alfarach or sagzenea, and keep it with light compression until the blood has settled.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the scab accordingly, and there is no excuse, then you let it flow to that location or to the other arm in another vein.
And when the vein called "funis del bras" is cannulated instead of the funica or basilica, which is composed of those, if they are not easily found or hidden.
And the quality of cannulating that vein is that the surgeon inserts his hand in cold water when the dilated vein becomes clearly apparent.
And then it is tightened around that with liament to prevent migration; and then cannulate according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor in terms of length.
And let the incision be wide, and let your cannulation be in the place where you cannulate that vein near the wrist of the hand.
And if you are to stop the flow of blood, then immerse your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your need.
And if you are in the days of summer, then you may be excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead stop the flow of blood in the body during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it does not have a pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the radial wrist vein is related to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of phlebotomy from this vein is that you strengthen your hand with an amulet or with your own hand, rather than keeping it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then quickly make the transverse incision; and if you cut through it completely, no harm will come of it.
And make sure that you do not place your hand over the fistula, for leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and without flesh.
And then immerse your hand in the running water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not immerse that area in the running water, the blood will clot in the orifice of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted according to the necessary quantity, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it is not completely constricted; similarly, ensure that you do this in all similar cases.
Moreover, for the care of the fistula from the left hand, it is important to address the diseases of the liver.
And do similarly in the fistula of the foot as you have done in the other.
And the care of the femoral vein in the fistula is for diseases that affect the lower part of the body, such as liver diseases, and retention of menstruation, as well as diseases of hernias and old chest ulcers, and their similar cases of diseases.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient inserts his leg in cold water and makes friction thereupon through which the veins appear; and over the joint of the leg he places a cord; and at the location of the vein he cuts it apparently, and from there its ramifications on the face of the leg multiply.
And thus perform the femoral incision wider if you must cut the cord, and at the location cut the addition of it, which is better and more salutary.
And if you perform the femoral incision on the face of the leg, then you must guard the nerves that are left on the face of the leg, and place your incision over the location where you make it transverse, as if you were going to excise it.
And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
But if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you wet the leg in cold water and let the blood flow there as it is evacuated.
If the incision by the ligger is incorrect in the first attempt, then retry the incision there a little more, for the area is salt; and do not fear its mischief, but rather protect yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make the incision on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said before, you should leave the tendon of the calf with the wild artery.
And the pain from the ligation of the sciatic vein is in the hip when it is due to cauterization.
And the quality of the ligation of the sciatic vein is that the patient enters the bath, strengthens, and tightens his thigh with a long thin bandage over the tendon above four fingers, for it does not appear any other way.
And when it appears, then ligate that one according to whatever skill is at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better. Or incise that one with an incision or excise that one with excision, for the location of the vein is salty.
And it is often improved by a slight incision; and if you find it but does not appear in the feeling altogether, then perform a flebotomy on some branch of it, and that which appears at the second interphalangeal joint instead of the thumb and little finger.
And guard the nerves, and let the blood flow in the quantity you desire.
And return the structure and place your hand over the site of the flebotomy firmly, so that it heals slightly.
For ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilation is of corns, or of ears, or of eyes.
And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other way is through ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation without incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And at the vertices where bloodletting and extraction of abscesses are administered, there are four locations of the body, of which one where the vertices are paused is on the occipital region, and is the last part of the head; and the second location is in half of the neck; and abscesses from the chin leave the jaw behind and then the mouth; and abscesses from two spatulas; and abscesses from alohoster, which are above the end of the coccyx; and abscesses from two forks, each being two inches; and abscesses from two cervices; and abscesses from two thighs.
And bloodletting should not extract the abscess but from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this does not lose its virtue through those, as it is done by phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion where the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity provokes bloodletting for an illness or during its continuance, we should administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time.
And therefore when times occur in any of those causes, and precisely if it is in the third or fourth day, then command the extraction of wind to be done more than two or three hours passed.
And the extraction of wind from the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and to what is embedded in the eyes; more important is that this be near the evacuation of the entire body.
And this phlebotomy is at the location of the cephalic vein.
And it is not recommended to use that which causes pain or inflammation, or in which there is a cold, as it would cause great harm.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use those of the elderly, in whose heads there are gouty affections.
But more so for those who have continuous pain in them; and for this reason, you should command the phlebotomist to place his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
More phlebotomy of alkehel is at the location of the femoral and basilic veins: and for this reason, it contributes to asthma, and to the constriction of blood vessels and to the rupture of the vessel walls, and to coughing, and to congestion.
And it is recommended to slightly warm the alkehel phlebotomy, for if it is left cold, it will weaken the body and the stomach.
And the application of algodon confers on headaches and eye pain, migraines, fever, and toothaches; it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And make sure you command the attendant not to press too hard at the incision so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
And the application of heat leaves the chin relieved of alcohol in the mouth, and of gingival corruption, and takes on a semblance to the ailments that are in the mouth, and are in place of phlebotomy of alheric that is in the two lips.
And the application of heat made over two spoons confers on cachapatan, which is done by restoring temperature.
And the application of heat to the two internal parts of the thighs confers youth like phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, femoral, and cephalic. For that attracts the blood from all those veins, more numerous that are in the flesh, and those small veins from the other larger veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the fan to blow not towards the incision, for the area is stripped of flesh, and leave the nerves and arteries alone.
And it is a fan that blows on the thighs, and apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them alone.
And make sure you command the fan to be a large one, made of wool, for the area needs strong dryness; and keep the incised areas separate from the incision.
More fans for the thighs diminish by manifest diminution, for they carry the scum from all over the body, and relieve old pains in the hips and the liver, and of the bladder; and induce menstruation, and relieve both pain and swelling; and stand in place of a bloodletting on two sophenas, and halberds, and of two calves.
But they also thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And of the fans, the halberds are similar to the fans of the two thighs.
And the quality of the position of the fomentations is that you place the fomentation at the beginning widely and apply by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the fomentations, but pause those lightly, and remain those frequently, and that the humors come to the area by chance equally. And do not cease to repeat this until the area is already reddening and swelling, and the redness of the sore appears.
And then you incise and repeat the suction little by little, and meanwhile consider the disposition of the body.
If the person has tender flesh due to cold, ensure that you incise only once and then stop, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the fomentation person to enlarge the incision slightly, and increase the suction with ease.
And if in the sore there is pus, then you must incise twice; in the first incision, open the way for the pus and the moisture. More in the second concerning the thorough examination of the removal of the large bowels.
And if the bowels are motile and fatty, then a scarification should be done on the third day so that it may heal.
And finally, when we want to extract the bowels little by little or a small amount, suffice us a single scarification.
And if we want to extract motile bowels, we make a single deep scarification; and if we know that the bowels are large, then we must perform a longitudinal scarification.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the cut only.
And if the cut is large, hard, dark, and its edges are straight, then the areas for the suction cups should be anointed gradually, openly, and thoroughly; if it is in summer, then use olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violet or two-part olive oil or balsam of copaiba; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or olive oil of lily, or chamomile oil, or bowel oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is large, apply, then oil of wormwood, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or cedar oil, and in their likeness.
And if the wind is of ample ports and has much flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and to these places of winds near the ventilation let them be washed with warm water or with cold water of soladrum, or water of cohoba, or water of bordeola, and similar to those.
And for that of which the scab is due to moist humidity, wash its winds with wine, or water of myrtle and sumac, and similar to those.
And for that of which the excesses are large, wash its winds with old wine, or water of santisc (which is marigold), or decoction of cedar, or chamomile, and similar to those.
And it should be ensured that the ventilation is protected before bathing; having this, it should be administered immediately after bathing for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the ventilation.
What must be done that the wind-dispeller and blood-letting be performed before ventilation.
When you consider the beginning: when the patient who needs to be phlebotomized or is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take causes that cool down, such as acetic milgrains, endive in vinegar, laxatives, julep, and their like.
And give them foods such as lentils, pigeon meat, and well-seasoned dishes, and those like them.
And for those with colic, give them to drink syrup of fennel or syrup made from seeds, saffron, and wine flavored with migdal between vintage and non-vintage; they should be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like lentils, hemp, pheasant, dove, and pigeon.
And ensure that on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy, their drinking is greater than their food.
And it should be given to drink in some hours for some men hellebore, or medicines of musk, so as musk, or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound be subtle; and one should not apply heat to it.
May the ventilation that is his scarification be ventilation passed over the liver, and over the melsa and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the broad ligament; for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not wanted for them but an abscess of the member's wound, as with ventilation over the breast in illness of flux of blood from the breasts; we use it so that the concretion near the viscera of the member may be dissolved, as with ventilation over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for it rarifies the member and draws it out and relieves the pain by dissolving the congestion.
And it is applied over the hemorrhoids when accidents occur in their prolapse or perforation, for by virtue of its strength, the horehound eliminates the prolapse and eradicates the perforation from its place.
And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should relieve distension in those enclosed.
And these distensions are administered sometimes with suction alone; and sometimes with heat.
And sometimes they are administered full of clear water in the diseases of the spleen.
And this is because the distension should be full and quite large, so it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of the distension administered with heat: let the width of the orifices be two digits, as we have formed them; and the amount of the probe be half a palm; and it should be in the middle of it, in the location that is in the circuit, one-third of its size, I take it to be small according to the amount that an needle enters into it.
Let it be made of ointment of oak or citrus, thick and strong, equal and smooth so that it does not lead the limb to deviate from its position over it.
And place a candle at the middle of the patient's thigh, either of wood or iron, where it is placed on the fire.
And let this larger cup be greater than the one we have used; and according to the illness and the condition of him who uses it, let there be a small amount.
And the cups for children and those who are weak are different from the cups used for young and pregnant women.
And the quality of placing this cup on the limb is to extend the skin over the fire of decently sized wooden charcoal, and place a small wax candle at the middle of the thigh transversely in the middle of the cup, so that the fire is ignited around the placed part to prevent the body of the patient from burning.
And place it over the limb of the patient, and let the fire be placed as we have said, such that when we have the cups and do not need them to remain on the limb and to avoid burning the skin with the vapor above that fire, then the cup will soon dissolve.
And then heat the iron according to its manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
In the case of ventosa (cupping) used for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for as long as necessary.
And this is the form of it: And this cupping device, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members where the position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the palate and similar parts; or in a limb devoid of flesh, such as the nose and ears and similar parts.
And the quality of using those that you have found to be sanguissuguas in the boiled and purified hot water.
And they should be laid in warm water until they are softened, and no cause of inflammation in their abdomen; then the body should be evacuated at the beginning with venesection and fomentations; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over it.
And when they are filled and swollen.
And if possible, apply suction to the area with a fomentation, it is more effective in youth.
And if not, then wash the area with warm water and apply cold water; then rub and express it.
And if the course of the blood is prolonged to the site of the sanguissuguas, and this is where they accumulate, then you insert a cloth in cold water, and place it there until the exudation subsides.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle vitriol trissat, or powders similar to those of the styptics, over it until the bleeding is stopped; or place hot compresses made from fava beans on the area, and let them remain until the beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is stopped.
And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change them.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle in the areas that retain blood; and place them there until the bleeding stops when felt.
And when you want them to stop, powder the area with a little aloes triphala, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the proceedings of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is known by the doctors, the vulgar practitioners, and those who for a time have not reviewed the free works of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not acquired this knowledge through any other means, but solely through the long study of the works of the Ancients and the study over them to extract the science from them.
And direct my experience and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and about which I have passed my experience; here I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from long occupation; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and show this at the end of declaration; and form this into the shapes of instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
First Chapter.
Sum up and collect the essential points regarding fractures of bones, those for which a preliminary discussion is necessary before we begin the recall of various types of bone fractures and their specifics. Therefore, let us begin this chapter with the summary of the discourse; and those chapters that are necessary for the understanding at the beginning must be well understood by the craftsmen and based on the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting, when you approach the beginning for a flebotomy or to remove that, or anything else at the same time, if no cause is prohibited, such as weakness of virtue, or it is to whom this occurs, or old age in decrepitude, or it is time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And therefore it is well to eat herbs and fowl meats and crab; and prohibit gross meats and full meals of food and all food that fills the veins with phlegm; among which you must be careful of abscess, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the disease.
And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods rich in both moisture and substance, with viscosity, such as foods made from cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, beans, fresh meat, and similar substantial foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly and honey is used.
And know that the bones crack in those men who are in the prime of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their limbs.
But nature adjusts and moderates over the broken bone from any part due to a cause similar to glue in which it thickens and adheres, uniting them together, bringing about the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, in which no cause prevents it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the foot bone is different from the fracture of the hand bone; and similarly all other members are different among themselves.
And I renew my memory of all species of fracture, explained in its own separate chapter.
A great diversity of fractures within itself. And the species of fractures in bones are diversified; for some are caused by an arc-shaped fracture or one that occurs at the stellate structures; and some are caused according to the length of the bone: such as the transverse fractures of the flat bones, the oblique fractures, and the comminuted fractures, proceeding or not proceeding from a direct blow, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there can be a fracture by a slice or disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
And for each species, there is a specific method of restoration according to the memory that will be renewed in its own place.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And by this it is known that a bone is fractured: there is curvature of it, and an elevation and prominence of it upon touch, and its pain when you apply pressure to it with your hand.
And therefore, when there is neither apparent curvature nor pain, you should touch the area with movement and if the patient does not experience great pain, it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is curvature or a small fracture, for which you should touch it with your hand and apply compression all around; then place your hand over the area where there is remembrance of the medicine at that moment, which agrees with the location; and it will be straightened by subtle constriction.
And perceive that the area when it is curved and not split into two or more parts as does not happen in inflammation, for which you should begin your correction of it having an abscess form with a cautery.
And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and skill.
And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the part in which you have incised.
And then strengthen it according to the recall of the remedy that will come.
More if in the bone you have incised, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and your hand.
And place your hand in such a way that you equalize the member according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions with skill and according to any method you can in their places.
And guard yourself according to your strength so that no harm comes to the patient through your operation causing pain or injury; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or create contraction in the member, as we have seen through their improper operations.
The quality of the fracture of the affected limb is what I recommend; so that you may know that the broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, make sure that the wrapping is of soft fine cloth.
And for those that are large like the thigh or the chest, make sure that the wrapping is broad and firm, so that the bandage binds the large and strong limb evenly in all parts around the fracture, ensuring that no mark enters.
And then begin, after your first application of the bandage, firmly tie it conveniently around that, over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps according to the limb's need; and firmly hold your hand a little on the tying.
And then place it at the uppermost part above the location of the fracture, and make sure that your bandage is as strong as the one you tightened around the fracture. And then gradually extend the covering around the fracture site a little, and gradually relax the tension little by little, while you support the area with a significant portion of your hand.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the damaged area over the covering, and gradually bring the coverings to the part of the fracture; and let your operation on the tension of the covering and in relaxing it according to what we said in the first covering above.
And then place the stopa or cloth bandage between the coverings so that it matches the tortuosity of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually match it with these properly made star-shaped coverings as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area; otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the star-shaped coverings.
And the splints of the leg should be well made; or of pine wood; or of palm ribs; and the width of each splint according to this form and figure:
However, ensure that the splint placed over the fracture is thicker and a bit longer than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what is read in proportion to the member's size; then strengthen with another bandage according to your first straightening; and tie decently on top according to what we said about straightening, and it should be your straightening more at the location of the fracture, and the more extended from the fracture, the less the straightening.
And ensure that the wires are medium in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; if the wires are thick, as I have seen in some operations where they used the threads of strings for suturing, it is a great error when the straightening is not at equality.
And such thin wires are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the straightening with them that you want, and it must not be that there is less than a finger's width between splint and splint.
And if the patient is affected by the extremities of the vessels near the stricture in those areas, then place those of stopa leon or fine woolen cloth between them so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are by plucking, and accidents of disruption in the chain, and I will come to recall that in the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for all broken members, they are not straightened by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be held still on vessels but after about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied to fractures and dislocations.
Method of plastering as an opening for the restoration of fractures, convenient for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is made from a powder of molinum, which is the medulla of the flour that hangs from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And you should bind it thus tightly, but sieve the white wheat flour through it, and make the binding neither too thick nor too thin; then use that.
Another way to treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains: prepare a paste with asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, garlic, and myrrh, which is extracted from salvamar (a type of salvager plant), in drachms; myrrh and gum acacia each in drachms 5; alcohol in drachms 20; all should be sifted and mixed with alcohol water or wheat flour if the wound is superficial; then use this paste, which is of good composition, to restore slightly broken bones and apply it to men.
Another way to prepare a paste that helps with fractures and sprains: use myrrh and 10 drachms of white althea; use gum acacia in 5 drachms and Armenian bole in 20 drachms.
All should be ground in a mortar with a pestle, sifted, and mixed with water or wheat flour and administered.
Method to plaster joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidents in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in vinegar and cured oil and place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is not the virtue of restoration, but rather to cauterize and expel pains properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all together and make a plaster from them.
Method of a brief plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of the swelling from an abscess: take root of hyssop, chamomile, flowers of violets, bran of barley; all in equal parts; mix them all together and steep them in vinegar, if the limb is not scabbed.
But if it is scabbed, then soften it with water of fennel steeped or with water and use it.
Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolution when the abscess is hard, during the restoration of the limb: take rhubarb, seed of flax, balsam, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and ground; all should be macerated and then pressed with water of sorrel or water mixed or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
May Icras not place it freely on the limb soaked for the restoration of it, but make a plaster of wax and oil only; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
May Gualia be seen as applied on the broken limb for the restoration of it and in the cases where the drying is of small quality such as myrrh, frankincense, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Method of plaster that comforts injury and pain: take equal parts of mint, bark of cut human skin or pen of hare, herb of althea, and salt; macerate and sieve them, then press and make into a plaster.
When the quantity according to which it is necessary to cut the ligature and then disjointed, you should consider if no pain has occurred nor any pricking nor is the bone broken not dislocated, then you do not disjoint for many days. And if pain occurs intensely or pricking or inflammation at the site, then you should cut or disjoint it immediately, and apply a plaster to it.
And take a cloth and sponge of the sea, both wet, submerge that in brine water, and apply it to the area until the pricking and pain are alleviated; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover it with wool soaked in olive oil or rubbed oil, and keep it on overnight until you are sure there is no abscess, and let the inflammation of the limb subside, and the pain be relieved.
And then repeatedly apply that fine plaster and do not strengthen your initial bandage too much, but keep it subtle until it heals.
And if you find that the abscess, the inflammation, the pain, and all the symptoms are already well healed, and there is a need for poultice and stricture, then you repeat it as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause occurs in the member of any of those we have said, then you do not loosen it but for about three days or four, or five or seven; and sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how it appears by the loosening of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust the stricture more than in your first stricture, and adjust it to the swelling of the food in the stomach, according to whether the memory of it precedes.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nutrition cannot reach there; therefore, wet that area completely with clear water all day long; do this for three days; and loosen the stricture a little, and through this operation, bring the nutrition to the member, and it will be healed slightly.
More than what the leaf restorers do a second time when the member fracture is not restored to the beginning, according to its place, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises, and if they were correct this would enlarge the Ancients in their books and would warn against doing such work.
And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that this does not work.
Capitol according to: Of fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are cracks, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of a blow, where the blow breaks the bone completely at the fracture site, leaving the bone as if split in wood, and for this reason, this type is named "ascial"; or the blow affects some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not reaching the marrow; and this type of fracture is called "levatio absoluta.
And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon the foot or setting in place.
And this fracture is penetrating, nearly reaching the periosteum which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
And of the fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair-like structure, and for this reason, this species of fracture is called capillary.
And this fracture is caused by setting or percussion of the foot, similar to which, it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave area, as happens with clay pots when they are percussed, and it is a part of their breaking into the internal parts.
And more commonly, this occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as those of infants.
And in all these species of closed fractures, they are thus treated as if by separate stars. And I will come to the recollection of all this in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture by detection of them and by inquiry of their appearance and the corruption of flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered upon the bone, is cleaned, and limits upon it by touch, for the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the signs of illness, and if you see by these signs that it signifies a manifest indication of fear, such as vomiting of colic, extension, loss of understanding, suppression of voice, fainting, acute fever, swelling of the extremities and heat of those areas, and signs similar to them in major dispositions, then you should doubt that it is not healed.
And if you see uncommon signs, you hope for healing, and then you begin the cure of it.
When the injury has come to you at the beginning as an injury and this is during the days of winter, then when you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is during the days of summer, then when you examine the bone before the seventh day, have in mind that what is left of the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the putrefaction covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then you should incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
And when you incise the thigh of the injured patient, uncover over the bone according to custom and your method as is possible based on the figure of the injury, and let it be light over the wound.
And if you encounter difficulty in detecting the bone, flows of pus or abscesses, then you should apply pressure to it as is appropriate, and fill the area with cloths soaked in vinegar and rubbed oil, and let the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and be sure of the flow of pus; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and in its excision.
And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the tissue straight down, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor here, a little further laterally; and this is its form:
And administer more with the incisor further laterally than the second.
And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and should be at the rear of their extremities in sharpness, and made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors, so that the head does not tremble and guide it.
And if the tissue is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circumference before administering the incisors with the superficial cuts, which you call shallow cuts.
And thus they are named so only when those do not pause at the end of the bone where it is close to it, for so that during travel there is a round extremity or margin above that upon which the head of the bone is left acute resembling a small margin or circle, which you must prohibit from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, ensuring that when present in all parts of the skull, the extremity of which is acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and rotate it within those tongs until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, placing there what was between them to carry the quantity of the size of the ray or around that.
And then incise with the incisore in that which is between each part of the bone, and make that pus subtle that you can over it at the end of levity, as we have said, while excavating the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as fine tongs and forceps.
And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the chest.
And since you have circled the perforated bone, and separated it from the chest if it is continuous with it, and have extracted that part, make sure to scrape and smooth that area with a roughness similar to that of the bone but finer than other scalpel blades.
And if you find any small part of the ribs displaced, then reduce it using the tool we have mentioned for the instruments; and subsequently apply a salve to the wound and dress the area as we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which Diyssec Gualia and cuts it with great caution; this is his saying: At the beginning, you must begin by uncovering the part of the bone at the location where the fracture is most severe and most obvious. When you have uncovered that part, pause and use the end of this scalpel, which is slow and cheerful in its form:
And that the lenticular part is lion and does not incide any cause, and the acute part is divided into two halves lengthwise, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the cusp at the face of it incident acutely on the bone.
And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer between which you have incised the whole bone as it is rotated, and you be sure of the panniculus that it does not accede in the accident that you fear in any manner, and if the medicant14 was the purest leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
And if any additional cause affects the bone of the panniculus in some places of the bone, incise that part at the extremity of the incisor lenticular, and deliver that part which is facilitated, for it is delivered from its noxious and fearful aspects.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is abscessed or left of the bone is its face, and remains in it asperities and subtle fibrils, then scrape that asperity and eradicate those fibrils with sharp instruments which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer from them the most convenient parts for that broken bone and the figure of it.
And ensure that you apply with your reason the os at the beginning to the fat of those razors, and then use closely beneath it the thin pus, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the thin pus of all.
In any other small fractures or subtle fractures, ensure that you apply care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
And this is because it is not complicated for those who have studied that art. And place this on what we have written about in great fractures.
And if the bandage is torn when you extract the bone, then you should take a piece of cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge that in olive oil rubbed with rose water, and place that over the wound opening; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth, submerge it in wine and olive oil, and place that over the first piece. Do this gently on top of that without pressing too hard. Then apply a poultice of honey over that, and do not press it except with the amount that the wound has.
Leave that point for one or two days until you are sure of the abscess; then remove it and apply medicines to which superfluous dryness is needed, such as linen lint and err seed flour, powder of enisetum and aristology, and similar.
And you make of these medicines a powder that is finely sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine to which it cleanses and does not irritate.
And preserve it according to its virtue so that the wound in your cure be clean; do not let there be surdicia of ointment or other in it; nor allow virulence to aggregate in it; for when it is applied over the cervele (brain) cloth, it corrupts that and spoils it, and you will injure the patient with this malignant evil.
And you will injure the scalp of the head, as it is modified by the bone and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider whether injury to the patient has occurred as we have said the accidents, know that it is harmful indeed and do all possible to avoid it.
And if the blackness occurs only due to the medicine that is applied above, and it is caused by that medicine, then take part of honey and part of rubbed oil in equal parts, and line a cloth with those lines, and place it over the scab; and cure it with the species of healing that you deem appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol. iii.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose that is broken, but two parts together with some superfluous tissue above them, or one of those few layers, because in the nose there are two bones. The part that remains is cartilaginous and not broken; hence, you do not injure it, but rather apply friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small bone into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your finger, and externally with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this is done for your convenience, and ensure that you do not aggravate the pain in the sick person's thigh during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and cannot reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the nasal bone where there is a swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the likeness of this.
And apply this on the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, soon after the seventh or eighth day, you should rest the apostema with a cautery.
And insert a piece of linen cloth at the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or two slips of leather, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the slip of leather has such a swelling as to fill the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the leather strips should be impregnated with balsam, and used throughout the day. But this is not what I see; instead, you should ensure that the cloth is soaked in balsam of Hungary and powdered alum; and leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage becomes hardened.
And sometimes gout is in the nose, instead of the foot, due to cold wrapping around with lion's skin cloth; and you have already fractured the nose very severely so that breathing is not prohibited.
And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
And if another abscess occurs, cauterize it, apply a plaster to the nose with cerate or with a hot cloth in water and olive oil, or with a diaphyllum.
But if no abscess occurs, when you need to apply a plaster externally use sesame meal and powder of crushed cinnamon in honey; then place your hand on the patient's lion skin, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
But if the nose bones are fractured or comminuted, when you need to split those, extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, and treat it with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for that.
If a plague occurs inside the nose, then cure that with cold waters and administer lead cans (a type of nasal irrigation) when they are all healed.
Chapter IV.
For the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, not completely fractured into two parts, but bent inward in places. In this case, the pain is mild.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger. Push the gelatinous substance of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outside, using your other hand on the part outside of the bone; do this gently until it is in place.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should administer extension to both parts according to the correct alignment, so that their equilibrium can be restored.
And if you encounter a toothache with a fracture, then strengthen those of which you fear will break along the line of gold or silver or lead; and place a cerot on the broken jaw, and place a cloth duplicate, and a large star-shaped bandage properly made, or a piece equal to the length of the jaw; and lift it above according to how the wound is dressed and what you consider appropriate for application, provided that it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and place a lion's flesh broth on his wound.
And if you think that the figure has already changed in any way, then on the seventh day, you should remove it. Then correct what has already changed in him and plaster that area with powder of wheat, chalk of alum, or flour of cinnamon, after you have removed the cerot from him, and place lion's wool over the plaster.
And then, once this plaster is properly applied and the bone's position has not changed, leave it as it is, without removing it until he is healed, and strengthen the fracture; for marks of this fracture will close in three weeks.
And if another time a boil occurs, then administer what we have said repeatedly in the treatment of it until it is healed, and cure that boil.
And if the fracture is open, then consider whether it is a bad separation of the bone or displaced, then you carefully adjust those displacements as needed for the removal of those from the bones.
And if the openings of the wound are stretched, then you enlarge them with the flebotomy according to the quantity of your need.
And then, when you have adjusted those displacements and they will no longer be reduced, enlarge the openings of the wound if it is large; otherwise, place over that one of the plasters that suit and cover it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is broken.
Repeatedly, when the furcula is broken in the front part, the fracture is made in one of three ways.
If it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts without reaching the joints; and it is easy to restore; or as when accidents occur in the joints, and restoration is difficult; or as when the fracture is open.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is open, is to have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken furcula, and the other extends the leg with that part.
Then adjust the fracture with the pins called entry points so that the shape of the bone is restored according to its natural form, and do not leave it in a depression or concavity.
And if more extension is needed, then take a pin or wick made of cloth or wool, of the size according to your need; extend and elevate the furcula and hold the pin between your fingers while adjusting the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the end of the furcula to the outer parts because it is caught in the preon, then you should turn the foot over its ankle, and place a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that of the furcula bone be elevated as in the presacral region, and then you align the fracture and set it at the sites said.
And if you feel the branches of the furcula and they are tender, then cut there and remove those branches with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you make an incision in it with one of the scalpel blades which you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to hold the cautery; and that cautery is made of wood or iron, of which this is the shape:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it have two ends thus as you see, and one end should be broad and the other narrow.
And if the wound rupture which you have incised when you have extracted the suture from the bone is large, and you are certain of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with suturing.
And if the wound rupture is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the size of the incision in the wound.
And if you encounter an abscess, then stuff a cloth with vinegar and rose oil, and place it over it.
And altogether, provided that the splint is not too tight over the broken bone; so that you can examine the wound daily, when the dressing becomes soft or see the splint has loosened, then adjust it and strengthen the ligament.
And place the patient to sleep with the head elevated on a pillow, and place another cushion under the neck so that when he sleeps at night it is slightly raised. This raises the support for the injured area, and thus elevates the fracture of the furcula along with the elevation of the muscle; or the arm hangs down by the side of the patient.
And do not remove the dressing unless there is an abscess or suppuration in the same place within twelve days.
And renew the poultice if you see that it is changing, and adjust the support and restore it, allowing the fracture of the furcula to be fully restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and comforted according to the case in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some cases it is done in less time.
Capitol. VI.
For the restoration of shoulder fractures.
Shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the location and not broken of it but the edges.
And so when the location is broken — and it is broken in the middle of its location — and is not known otherwise than by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare it and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner that is possible for you.
And then place over the area powder of ground honey and stop parsley; and then place over the wound a thin slice of table salt according to the size of the spoonful, or somewhat more.
More if you leave the slice concave in some part of the spoon, then equalize that concavity with stop parsley, and then place the slice according to equality.
And then strengthen over the area with a well-made ligature and ensure that the slice is firmly in place without being displaced from its location.
And consider the string in each day; and every time that it is softened, tie it again tightly and equally if it has been displaced from its place.
And fix the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the string, and know for sure that it belongs to the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone to the ligament, then cut over it, and clamp it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostema caut if this happens here.
Capitol vii.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends move and tend to become cicatrized and comminuted.
And concerning the accidents when his thigh is broken it declines to the inner parts and happens great pain, difficulty in walking, cough, fever and much vomiting; and it is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration of the patient is that he be laid supine on the surgeon's lap, and a cushion is placed between the patient's shoulders; then press on the muscles of the patient, adjust the patient's back against the major bones of the spine, and handle with subtlety in the operation and equate according to every manner that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place over the plaster and padding, and place above the thin table of willow or caligine and like them in lightness, since you wrap that in cloth; then handle with subtlety that over the broken bone so it is not rough; and wind it around the back several times, and strengthen it with a decent tension; and consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes soft, strengthen it.
And if necessity provokes the death of that part due to corruption or puncture, or pain, or abscess that occurred in the place, then you cut and separate that part and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurred by this method of healing; then return the plaster, if you find it fit for that face; and adjust the structure between which it is healed.
Capitol VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs affects only large areas that connect them in pairs; and at the extremities of their front part, no contact occurs except by those parts which are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from the feeling of the inquiry into it by words.
And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your hands according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is declining towards the interior parts, then it happens that severe pain and puncture occur in the patient, just as pain occurs in one who has pleurisy, and for this reason let him have a veil placed; and it causes him difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in such matters.
And according to them: place the patient on a soft bed that causes inflammation and swelling, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is pushed towards the exterior parts.
But we advise this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle inadvertently; and if it does happen, then help the patient.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it is strong; and this seems reasonable, but it is feared that the abdomen might draw the superfluities to that place due to its weakness.
And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, making sure the dressing is equal when you wrap it according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a pleursy diet and medical treatment.
And if the pain is intense and the patient cannot tolerate it, and you puncture the skin with a lancet, be careful about the patient, then cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place your hand over that instrument which will conserve the chip, the memory of which precedes, and carefully incise the bone, and extract it.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And may he be laid on his back on the one on which he sleeps, until he is healed.
Capitol. ix.
For the restoration of fracture of the vertebra of the back and the neck.
In some cases, when there is a fracture of the bones of the neck, and then apply friction, similar to that of the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider whether their veins are already softened, numbed, and dead, unable to increase or extend or strengthen those areas. When you compress them with your hands or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you know that they are not healing, and under such conditions, it is fatal.
And if you feel pain in these areas when you compress them with your hands and prick them, then you know that the vertebra of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck closely and want to know if they are healthy or not, then examine his feet.
And when you see that they are already softened, attend to what happens in the bowels, and when it is close to their anus, show windiness and desire for urination, and sometimes they are supine on their back and want to urinate but cannot, then know that it is mortal, and then do not trouble with the cure of them.
But if no such causes occur, the cause is better and milder.
And the cure for them is that you should cauterize to induce sedation of the abscess. Place the cautery on the lumbar vertebra or slightly rubbed spine; place it over that area for some days each day until the abscess is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and apply it over that area. Order the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
If you find that the joint is dislocated or due to some cause that has separated from it, then you should treat the joint and hold that bone in place; then adjust the two edges of the wound, and suture if it is large; afterwards, apply a reddening ointment until it heals.
If the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the end of the femur, then you should insert your left hand's little finger into the buttock, and align the broken thigh bone with your other hand as much as possible for second-order reduction; then place a compress and bandage over it if needed, and firmly hold it in place.
If you feel dislocated joints in it, then treat that joint, set it in place, and cure the wound with the treatment that follows until it heals.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and they split lengthwise and decline inward; pain occurs in the area and there is puncture, and the leg becomes numbed when it fractures.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over that area which is at the fracture where its shape is.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you equalize it according to what appears to you by equilibrium, placing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the middle or already declining towards the parts, then you lay the limb on its side with its abdomen prepared for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have equalized it, apply a plaster over it, and place a wick or stick astelia over that area, and bind it tightly so that you fear neither the puncture of the fracture nor the removal of the stick.
And equalize the cavity with what fills it so that it takes the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess forms, then you cease the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is sedated, and apply something to soothe it as previously instructed; and then return to its restoration, and bind it accordingly.
And if accidents occur in the bones or are fractured, then you treat them.
Capitol. xi.
For the restoration of the fracture of theadjuctor.
Adjutori is that which is between the codex and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one you should use a rod of rough wood according to this form:
And attach two strings at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated location.
And place the patient on a cushion; and then hang out his broken arm on the rod until it reaches the nodal point of which the curvature of the rod is attached.
And place it suspended above something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor hold the fracture with his hands at the same time, until the fracture returns according to its natural course.
And another way is that the patient be supine on his neck and suspend the neck with a liament; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each of them extend to their part.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the area above the fracture with one liament and another liament at the other place, and each of the two ministers extend to their parts.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle of the liament over the tendon and let the other end be at the fracture to hold it.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the joint, then place the liament at that location and over the joint.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly.
But if an abscess occurs on the fifth day, then leave the string in place, place a pad of wool soaked in wine and olive oil under it, and when the abscess relaxes, then remove that.
The manner of removing it is to place a poultice over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth around the poultice; then adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth and firmly hold the arm on this support so that the arm is in a stable position, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents you from doing so.
And then use stays (or splints).
And you place that stay over the fracture which is both wider and stronger than the other stays; and between each stay, you leave the width of a digit, and the length of the stays according to the breakage plus the width of three digits in total.
And then firmly hold the stays with the string which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your pressure on the place of the fracture should be more straight. And when the fracture is longer, make the pressure less.
And so, if you place the position of the bones and apply pressure as we have said when restoring the member to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, wait, then leave the pressure and bones in place as we have said.
And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that no infection or inflammation occurs; or is forbidden food to reach the member due to the excess of pressure; and so correct all this as we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the bandage for at least three days or more.
And let the patient lie on their back, and their hands be over their stomach.
And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a woolen blanket, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be altered nor the ligament softened, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And place the food for the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then cover to thicken the food with it.
Four days after, it is customary for the assistant and the belt to be strengthened for 10 days; then cover to make them loose, and apply baths and ointments which correct that.
And if the fracture has been irritated, then do not make them loose of the ligament and the stitches for 10 days or up to two months.
Capitol.xii.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small, and is that which extends from the thumb side, while the latter is large and is placed next to the small one.
And if the large or small fire stick is broken forcefully, and you must break them together forcefully.
And when the small fire stick is broken above, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing of it is even lighter.
And when the fire stick is broken, I leave the fracture to be bad, and the healing of it to be difficult.
And worse than that is when two common bones are broken.
And so, if the bone that is broken is the small fire stick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration of it, allowing a small extension with facilitation until that which is broken is equalized.
But if the large fire stick is what is broken, then you must allow greater extension more vigorously.
And if both fire sticks are broken together, then you must allow greater extension more forcefully.
And you must place the figure of your hand for the restoration and extension of it on a cushion, with the wrist of the hand above, more so than all others, and the auricular finger below the other fingers, and the thigh be placed over a sloping bench.
And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a cushion, and another minister extends it over similarly.
And then the doctor aligns the bone within the joint according to the best shape it can be placed in.
And if there are fragments in the fracture of the bone, then you must force to reduce all pieces to their place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separated fragment that cannot be reduced to your satisfaction in the restoration of the bone, then you set it as best you can according to the manner we have said above.
More if the fracture is comminuted, I have dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of that.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your reduction, then you line a cloth with rosin oil and white wax, making it medium in thickness. Place the cloth firmly over the area with a subtle constriction to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the wax and apply an ointment prepared from powder of molybdenum and honey, and cover it with a bandage; let the bandage be placed on that fracture, slightly aside and more strongly.
And know that the number of the bones in the arm I saw in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
And then place your compression firmly on the location of the fracture more strongly and more vigorously, and the stronger the compression on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place the compression a little more gentle according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moist but not hard or rough, and the fat of the liver which is strengthened should be of refined meat between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as you anticipate what may happen to the limb, then immerse the limb in water until that anticipation ceases.
And leave the limb not compressed until it rests, and then remove the compression.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is healed and resembles those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive stricture, so that you soften it a little and leave it for some days until nutrition flows to it, and then strengthen it.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it is not necessary for it to be let loose within about ten days or around those.
And place the hand of the patient with its virtue of movement-agitating substances, and make it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or more thoroughly in twenty-eight days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexions and the dispositions of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the hand and fingers.
Know that at the tip of the hand and the joints of the fingers there must be tenderness on palpation, and do not damage them but rub with visible motas.
And when there is damage to the hand or tearing, then make sure the patient stays lying down and in front of the limb for one hundred seconds according to equality, and place your hand over the extended area.
And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor adjust those between which there should be good alignment.
And then place plaster and bandage, if no abscess forms use a cautery instead; and then place salt over according to the size of the area, and you have now wrapped that in cloth.
More so if the tear is within the parts of the palm, then make a semblance of a hollow in the cloth, and command the patient to hold that with his torn palm; and then hold it tightly with long cloth.
And let the salt be placed on cloth that is soft, so that the salt is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another piece of the bone above the stele and another piece from the part in the palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as you turn your hand like a wheel between the fingers with lint.
If a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the finger, then if it is the base of the digit, equalize it according to where it is and then strengthen it with the palm. If you wish, place a small splint on the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring, then equalize and bind it to the finger where that bone is; or bind all of them according to continuity, which is better; or place a small stele over it, as we said for the base of the digit.
And consider, in your restoration, and nearby, the placement of cauterization and opposition—during your operation—according to where it is when any cause from those occurs, as per the repeated narration of it.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the iliac bone.
The iliac bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it is displaced anteriorly and posteriorly.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on their belly and facing downward.
And then the physician extends the ligament along its proper side according to the quality of the fracture, when it is in the middle part of the bone.
But if it is close to the base of the iliac bone, then the ligament should be extended along the outer side of the pubic bone, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the pubic bone, then the ligament should be extended along the pubic bone, and the extension to the sides below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural shape, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to affect the limb with an abscess. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for a few days until the abscess can be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: make sure to wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the sole and the heel of the foot.
And insert a long piece of linen between the thigh and the leg near the knee, so that the ends of the linen extend above both parts, and then wrap this around the leg and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
And place something over the thigh at the site of the fracture, and place a splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the void between the waist and the thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction is constricted.
And then begin with a strong bandage around the middle over the location of the fracture using three or four wraps. The farther you are from the site of the fracture, the less tight your bandage should be, and it should be lighter and softer.
And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tightly secure both ends of the crosspieces of the other part so that the plaster does not shift from its place.
And then place the bandage over it so that it is secure and does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation. If any of these conditions occur, you should treat them accordingly and correct whatever has happened as soon as possible, as we have previously described.
More specifically, if the bone is severely damaged, you should try to set it as accurately as possible; if not, apply a splint and secure it, and treat the area from which the memory of the injury was recalled until it is healed.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is reinforced with strapping or that they fit well to the ilium, as we said in the assistant and in the arm.
But more so in the restoration of the leg in such a manner, no limp occurs to the patient; and if it is restored alone, or that the other leg is applied, then it is necessary for the other to limp.
And know that the hip is reinforced in about ten days or a few months, and all this is according to the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Capitol.xv.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs more frequently, but it often takes many weeks to heal.
But if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or there is damage to its parts, and this is either one crack or several cracks, and above all, it is essential to feel the extent.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized that which is broken from the parts of it by the fingers into which it is added and joined according to what is possible by equilibrium, facilitation, and fabrication.
And place the plaster and hold over that round patch, if you need it; strengthen above at the structure to that which is suitable.
And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for abscesses, cauterization, and appearance to those that arise when one opposes them to any accident at what is suitable until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the waist.
Know that in the waist there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the waist; and the other is thin and is named flexible.
And accidents of the species of fracture that occur in the two bones of the arm occur here, and for this, the restoration of it is made just as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones at once, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint becomes dislocated in front directions.
And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons according to this equal manner.
But more importantly, if the joint fracture is slight with visible marks, let the extension be less and更为轻柔，以你的力量加以缓解。
And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, when you equalize the stars and complete all of your operation, then take pieces of pine wood which are placed under the causes that are fixed in soles, and make them thusly from palm branches; leave some of those with little coarseness, but not of the thicker ones, and let their length be according to the length of the joint, and the thickness between them.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the middle of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be close to the base of the foot.
And place the two legs in three positions of both extremities and in the middle position, for in this structure the leg is forbidden to lean towards the right or left side, and must be well positioned.
And then apply a brace of wood according to the length of the leg; and place the brace there so that it maintains its movement.
And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, for when there is a fracture, it is properly called.
And then consider the leg every day and study it carefully, and keep it free from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, then immediately treat it according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot occur rarely, and when they do, they are not treated by fracturing them but are rubbed in the appropriate manner.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as shown.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into place.
Then apply a plaster and cover it with a cloth. Place the patient's foot on a small table with two pillows under it.
Then firmly hold the foot in a proper position, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes mentioned.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find that the bones are broken or shattered or displaced, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some bones are said to be broken, then restore those, and set them as I and have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And place the fractured finger steadily according to its length, and slightly bend it; then lay the hand on this table which you have already prepared, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each fractured finger individually, wrapping a quantity of it in lion skin, and strengthen the table at the base of the foot, and standing on one of the table's ends, pierce the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
And it is advisable for you not to forget that you should consider all the causes we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and pause at every occurrence as appropriate.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the pelvis and the groin of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, make that correction in a curved position, and then slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and this should be done in the thigh as desired; and then the woman is stimulated, and gradually raises her leg a little by little, for all of this must be done before the upper part of the thigh as desired and the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; and then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to its original powder.
And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and stretch it over the wound in the thigh; and insert all the bladder into the wound, and then blow through the cannula with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, because the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have advised, until it heals.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or a woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have advised for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that occur rarely, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via recta in the restoration and in the constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of a man's thigh when broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place a bandage around it, wrap it up, and leave it for three days or about that time, until it heals.
Capitol XIX.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
It is convenient to apply this to that upon which you are acting with a fracture that is dislocated, and especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar to it. You should warm and bloodlet that frequently if the conditions for bloodletting are present as we have said above.
And if the dislocation exudes pus, then you should apply your warm compress with the intention of retaining it and sprinkle it with dried myrrh powder, if another cause is not present.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that first day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
More so if an abscess does occur, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is healed, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth days, for then you will cause worse accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes over the knee joint, then you must perforate to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as little movement and extension as possible.
But if the extension and reduction with your hands are not readily possible, then you must reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; for this reason, the doctor must take three or four of them according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small gauge so that it does not bend, holding it over the area during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and let the bottom be relatively thick, and the middle parts thinner.
And this is the form of it:
And named in Greek "labre volontz atelarem", so is palette pاوکا.
To ensure that the extremity of the patient is raised above the end of the thigh bone.
And gently push it in one movement so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And strive to align the ends of the fracture between them, and if the broken extremity is thin, and does not fit the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the end of that bone into where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise that part with the knife which suits it best from those we have mentioned; or let it be one of the blades in some manner that is possible for you.
And quickly remove what remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
And when the os is reduced, and shortly after the reduction the patient finds great pain, then you know that the os has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have agreed with the patient for great relief.
When your restoration of the os is completed, and then you immerse a cloth in vinegar stained black, and precisely in summer, and do not pause over the sore or any other cause which is oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption occurs.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the os, and leave the sore uncovered to see if it improves, using forceps and applying dressings according to the quantity of the sore.
And be careful always that you do not aggravate the sore with the fracture, for many times doctors have made this mistake and caused death or severe illness by their improper treatment. Thus it is wise. And if the moon's influence is slight, moist, different from the influence of other fractures.
And if the swelling is great or it is a bad swelling, and you fear certain bad accidents which we have recounted, and you find pain in that place, then do not place your hand there, but make instead a wrapping of hard cloth around that area and strengthen it with stakes.
And when the swelling begins to appear after one or two days, where it has generated a boil, then lift that from under the cloth which you had placed over it, and apply cold, with which according to our custom we treat swellings, thus with tetrafarmaceutical ointment and similar to that.
And you should remove the bandage and consider the swelling at noon and evening each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the parts you leave facilitated.
If the swelling persists for many days and is neither consolidated nor abscessed by the boil, then you should suspect that this is a case of small swellings, and you should examine the swelling with a probe. And of those stages that are separated remain and are extracted, those that from them do not separate and put the member and cause pain, forcefully you have to extract those according to what is possible.
And if it happens to the thigh or calf, they are stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place each one of them in what is convenient for the cure of which there is a previous narration in its chapter.
And of that in which it is necessary for you to stay the main speech and make your presence felt: when the bone is fractured, you must examine the member as if it were the thigh and the helper's, resembling those of large members, and do not presume any penetration or extraction due to this leading to death; having left it there where it can remain, for strong bones will fall in by themselves within about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and otherwise leave it there.
Chapter .xx.
For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the place of some fracture.
Blistering occurs in this swelling in the place of the fracture healing, especially near the joints, and changes the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have a styptic effect, such as aloes, resin, myrrh, saffron, and similar; try which of them you take from these or all of them, and confirm whether they are virgins (i.e., pure) styptics, or white of egg, or virgins in oil, and place those on the swelling in a cloth, and bind them over it with good binding.
And let the extraction not be removed for many days; and then remove it and apply another, until the swelling is reduced. Or strengthen over that lead strip, as lead has the property of reducing whatever is swollen in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned to a hard lump and is firm, and necessity demands to remove it completely, then cut through it at its most convenient part, and incise the excess and prominence, or let some of it drain by lancing within until it is reduced. Cure that area once it is healed.
Capitol xxI.
For the restoration of a fracture when the member is restored and then placed under the appropriate ligament or tendon according to its nature.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the delicate member or tendon is placed under the appropriate ligament, this is done for certain causes: of which one is the excess of solution of the ligament and the joining made not according to its nature; or due to an excessive constriction of the ligaments within which the nutrition cannot freely flow to the member; or due to excessive ointment application; or due to unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or due to insufficient healing in the body of the patient and weakness of it.
And the treatment of this is to weaken the patient and make his heart tender while the healing multiplies within him; administer baths; and insert courage and joy into him.
And place a bandage over the member, so that the bandage draws nourishment to it, or continue ointment application with water of Thebes, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously, and prohibit the operation of them that comes from within.
When the limb has been reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and knuckle, and is due to the deformity of the limb itself, more importantly, the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so do not let it come to you that someone believes that limb is newly broken.
More importantly, there are many foolish physicians and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reprehensible for leading to great fear of the sign of which is fatal.
More importantly, if claudication and knuckle are recent, then it should be immersed in water of mule urine in which herbs mollifying are placed, such as wormwood, rue, melilot, and similar; and let them be covered with a poultice of well-prepared dyllaquilon; or they may be coated with a mucilage of rue and mixed with gualina gray or camphor oil, and then applied with that; or they may be coated with fat figs treated with goose feather poultices, and similar to those in the medicines named for consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent gentle friction, especially with the more moist ones, and by administering movement to the limb at all times in all hours.
If tortuosity has already gone on for some time and is strong, converted into a stone, and provoked, it is necessary to treat it. Therefore, incise above the cecum and let the continuation of the bone be dissolved and incised, administering incisions with sharp instruments where superfluous nodulation of that membrane around the bone with sharp incisors, and let facilitation be administered in that area which has been incised and studied.
Chapter XXIII.
On Speech Regarding Dislocation.
Dislocation is an abnormal position of one of the joints in the body, rendering it motionless and altering the figure of the limb, causing severe pain and significant injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to act promptly to reduce it. Do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the joint will become septic and more difficult to reduce.
And for this reason, it should not be cut nor stretched during the hour of the aposteme, because moments after it causes spasms and severe pains.
When this happens, you should perform a femoral incision on the thigh, and allow the aposteme to rest inside; then apply cold water and oil to the affected area, and reduce it with ease.
And each affected member should be treated with water, the memory of which will return to its place.
And you have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from the upper part of the body down to the lower part.
Capitol .xxiv.
On the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without damage; the dislocation of both can occur in one of two ways: either they are slightly moved from their places and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated and fully displaced, at which point they should be softened at the joint where saliva from the throat flows, so that neither can have that nor can close its mouth, and the tongue should be wrapped in a cloth.
When the dislocation is slight, it usually returns by itself in major positions.
But if the dislocation is complete and thorough, then it must be administered a slight reduction, and should not be delayed entirely.
And the minister should hold the patient's head, while the doctor inserts one of his fingers from the side of the mouth into the gap of the dislocated jaw, if the dislocation is on one side; or he should insert both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and keep the other fingers outside to support them. The doctor then commands the patient to stop moving his jaw and allows it to return to its place; the doctor then aligns the jaw and closes it gently until it returns to its position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then apply evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a slight reduction of both, and do not delay the complete reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And therefore when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the hernia is closed and not mollified, then place over those powder of cloth mixed with cerot, made of wax and rubbed oil; and further let it be tied with many ligaments.
And let the patient with the hernia lie on his back, and his head be placed between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force him to vomit for any cause; having his food consisting of bread, when the pains are relieved and the jaws are moistened, then let him vomit what he wants.
And this should be administered freely, and you should not interfere with the intake of food and drink until the jaw is moistened and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then movements or manipulations will cause fevers and frequent swelling. And the abdomen of the patient is greatly swollen and suffers from pure bile vomiting.
And when you see this, customarily consider it a fatal condition; many die for whom this occurs in a few days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated inside the sternum due to its connection at the feet; sometimes it is dislocated at the front part, and this is declared by sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient grasps his own shoulders and extends his arms. And place your palm on the area firmly to compress it, for it will return.
And place your hand on the area, apply ointment and powder to it, and strengthen it.
More often, the extremity that is attached to it remains connected and is not dislocated in any day; therefore, you must reduce and align it according to what we have said and according to what is within your means.
And then place yourself over the plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And this method of cure is to reduce the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called "tart"; and it is not dislocated at the back parts through the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts through the nerves.
And it is most commonly dislocated and pushed outward at the back parts of the tendon where the flesh is scanty. It is slightly dislocated in those parts where there are more muscles, but with difficulty.
And often it happens to some men through percussion or impact, and the muscle of him is abscessed from a carbuncle, and is cut by this that already be dislocated.
Then touch where you were especially concerned with it, and then proceed in the cure of it.
And the dislocation is known when at the joints you must tremble; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, which you find in manifest diversity; and you find in the head of the muscle a concavity, and by trembling you must touch the head of the muscle as if with a hammer, and to the patient it cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor raise it through all movements.
If it is dislocated, you must touch the foot or ankle, and then you find a clear tremor, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still painful.
And the reduction is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; then places the tied feet, letting them dangle, and raises the joint with strength in its place, and the minister raises his hand and extends it there; then places it so that it returns lightly.
If, however, it does not return for what we have said, and the dislocation occurs from the beginning, over many days, then it should be bathed in cold water and treated with a moistening and liniment as if it were roots of acanthus, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and should be applied.
And place the foot on its sole and let it dangle until the cold equalizes between levitation and stiffness. Then the doctor places his hand on the lever, elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the foot of the patient so that it is not twisted at the parts below. Another minister holds the head of the patient to prevent it from being twisted at the parts below, for it will return to its place quickly.
And if you wish, return the other in this manner: and it is that you make present a man who be longer than the patient, and stand on the side of that limb, and interpose his muscle between the vibration of the patient and elevate the vibration of him into the parts above while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pull the hand of the patient from the sides beyond his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then consider that another cause may be suspended, so as not to overlook this, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And if it is returned by another method: and it is that a long pole be placed on the ground with its head in a round shape, like the handle of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed near the patient; then you cover its head with lion skins, and the patient stands according to the length of the pole. And extend his hand towards the parts beyond. Extend the body from the other side with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: you should take a rod of which the length be two cubits, and the breadth of it be four fingers, and the thickness thereof be enlarged in the middle according to this form:
And above the round head place lion's skin cloth so that the rod does not scratch the patient.
And then place the patient's head on the cloth, and extend your hand or arm under the rod between the parts left, and cover the rod with the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its breadth, and the hand extended under the parts left, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon come together.
And when the instrument for it is completed in any manner that is possible to you, then place under the head a pillow of wool of equal quantity; and then apply an ointment prepared from powder of wormwood and honey over all the muscle, so as to be well mixed on top, and then tightly bind the head with suitable bandages; the ointment should be applied over the ointment, and the hand thereof should be attached to its neck, and let it be, without moving the hand thereof for seven days.
And ensure that the patient is comfortable with food withheld until the limb is comforted, for it is easier for the recovery of the limb.
And soon after, give the patient more food seven or five times and exercise some movement; and therefore, if it is closed and not mollified, then it is already healed.
If the joint is dislocated due to small changes caused by humidity or another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery in three passes as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament is released but the joint is not closed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it several times but still not closed, and cataplasms are applied but cannot raise that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either cut or extended or mollified, and you should know that the joint will never be set in its proper place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should move the foot and the calf or the parts behind, reducing it by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And it should be applied to the other structure, and care should be taken that it is cured.
And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling subsides and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation of the shoulder is not easily masked; whether you see it quickly or feel it by touch depending on the shape that is dislocated. When you set the dislocated shoulder into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or allow the hand to reach its own muscle.
And observe the shoulder blade, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it comes to a carbuncle, for if it does come to a carbuncle, reduction is difficult, and even with strong force, it may not be completely healed. Especially when it is in the rear part, for it is more harmful than all other types of dislocation, causing greater pain, and often leads to death through warm baths.
And the restoration of the patient, when that is possible to reduce, is that the hand of the patient be extended between two others, and the arm of the patient be spread out, and the hands of the doctor be on the shoulders and let go of the patient, and push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, return it thus by bending the hand towards its own palm, between striking the shoulder with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer violent extension and strong force.
And let two ministers extend the arm, and have these two ministers hold it in place so that it is not forced too much during the extension.
And then rotate the arm completely, as it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint by facilitating its movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity, place it over the stuffed material in which there is a constriction and evacuation of white bile, and let it be kept in a hanging position, and leave it for some days.
And then release it; and if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then reapply the plaster and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is hanging; and then release it.
Moreover, if accidents happen to it shortly after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in motion, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction, and compression, until it is healed; or pause over the joint for a while, so as to be a matter of fatty movement; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then dry it, and put that in the bath; when it is soaked, then friction the joint with gentle friction, and then apply it over that for a while, so as to be a matter of fatty movement, once, and the second, and the third time. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit. I am preparing for a bath, waiting until it is warm.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and cracked crack in the wall and strongly rub it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are returning it to its proper state.
Capitol. xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, it is more important that there be speed in the reduction of it at the hour when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and instruct them to extend their arm. The doctor then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint, and gently push it back into its proper position.
But importantly, it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the patient's abdomen, then the patient's hands should be laid out and reduced; and if dislocation is present, place both hands, ensuring the position of the hand precisely on the table so that the doctor's hand falls over that vicinity of the joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, strengthen that and drain the abscess, leaving that; and do not repeat this, for if you do, you will neither be able nor permitted to proceed with the reduction thereafter.
But importantly, the joint should be manipulated according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause to the patient, but rather have your hand softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are compressed or stretched, and then there is no need in it but to cauterize near the site of injury and fortify it with some cause.
And since the abscess has returned, place it over the drained area, which we have previously treated, and let it be strengthened for five days; then, return it to its position, leave it there, and exercise the limb.
But if the motion in it has been obstructed and occurs with some gravity, then apply that which is cold and with friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
In some cases, dislocate the fingers completely.
And when one finger is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs, until it returns to place.
Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until it is straightened in that day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straight.
And make it seem as if you do this, even if dislocated in the hand, bind that to that part and do with this your first operation until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you do this when dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the cure of dislocation of the cervical spine.
When an entire vertebra of the back or neck is dislocated and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their original positions, then there is no cure, for death ensues to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forced out against his will, and he cannot retain it; several times muscles of the body or legs or arms or one of those are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times the removal of those is done in four parts.
Then that is relieved at the rear parts and is named yellowness.
May the cure of it be that when you consider if the yellowness is due to puerperium, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal completely.
May it be that in those cases which come from conception or percussion or resemblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the ways of cure in much discourse, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I will now abbreviate what is of little excess of the tropes, by my proximity to your understanding exposition, to which I have here expanded and formed from various instruments, with which I shall show and expound that.
And of those, only the one that occurs properly at the foot is cured as I recommend.
And the patient should be extended on his back close to the wall, and laid out so that his feet are well moistened to prevent them from drying.
And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the back near its head, and another stick across the feet at the other end of the beam.
The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap around the head of the patient and tie the lion's hide tightly. Extend the end of the hide to the stick which is fixed at the head of the patient, and attach it there; and tighten the other hide over the hips of the patient with the nails, and fix the legs of the patient; and adjust all the hides tightly and attach them to the other stick which is fixed at the feet of the patient.
And the minister should extend the hide to the part of the stick, and do not remove both sticks and the hides in which they are inserted, but rather keep them fixed as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table as it returns.
And if it does not return in this manner, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia, and dig into the wall where we said was near the patient a place between the ends of the table. And place the majority of the table's length on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses firmly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a vein which is pulsating in the hand; and when you are on the ground, place the patient's head at the heel of one stick, whose length is that of a braccio, and place his head at the heel of another stick; and let the distance be such that the space between each stick is a palm. Then draw blood from both sticks, and secure each stick firmly to the ground so they do not move.
And there should be a round stick for the thigh, and it should be rotated in the two cuts of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a stick on which the round stick is formed, the length of which is one palm in relation to what is rotated; and in the two other sticks, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched on the foot with the stick on which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched on the thighs with the thigh where you place its feet.
And then you should place each thigh and have a minister twist the thigh with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a piece of cloth over the paste, the width of which should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length enough to cover the part of the spine.
And then apply the substance we have mentioned, and use the patient for subtle nourishment until it is healed.
And if there is any danger at the site at the end of the healing, then it is advisable to administer medicines that mitigate and relieve through continuous use as recommended on the table; and a lead plate has already been administered in that location.
Sometimes accidents occur at the end of the vertebrae, and it is seized by that dislocation; and it is that bone where you already anticipate that no suspicion should be caused to it with this medicine, for it will greatly happen to cause your death.
Capitulum XXXI.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and not what occurs in other joints due to slight movement and depression.
The joint of the hip is dislocated according to four manners, which is dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
It is primarily dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
The sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the leg of the healthy side against the affected side, the former appears longer and the latter more prominent. The affected side cannot bend its foot; it must be lengthened. This is the location where a cautery should be applied to cauterize the apostema, so that the head of the swelling is effectively treated here.
The sign of those affected with dislocation to the external parts is that their symptoms are contrary to this condition.
The sign of dislocation to the anterior parts is that you expand the leg in proper proportion, but it cannot bend at the ankle. If forced to bend further, it causes pain. The urine from this side is retained, and the swelling is an apostema. You should treat its mobility over the tibia.
And the sign of those who suffer dislocation in the rear parts is that they do not expand the buttocks, nor can that which should bend forward bend it backward, and the waist is shorter than the other, and the buttock is soft at that place.
The main reduction in the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old and already degenerated, that it has been there for some time. Then, according to its disposition, you perform a reduction on it as needed; but then there should be no presumption made in that treatment.
For the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four species of dislocation, you should manipulate it so that you reduce the joint and extend it to both internal and external parts, and move it to the right and left sides, for it will strongly return on its own without requiring further treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong medicine and extend the waist on the side more affected, or on their hands, or apply liniment which is rubbed on the waist above the buttocks; another medicine should extend the hand from above so that it touches the inner sides of their legs; then strongly apply liniment on the back of the thigh, and have another person hold the end of the liniment.
And it is the extension from the loins or from inside the iliac part to the axillary part, or from behind to the lumbar part.
And it is the extension of all those in one go, lifting the patient's body from the ground and letting them hang pendulously.
And this type of extension is special for all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is in the internal parts, ensure that the patient's body is supine on their left side; then place the bandages around the hip in that location where between the head of the hip and the location where the iliac part is placed. Additionally, extend the bandage from above the area of the axilla to the next part of the ilium.
And then another minister firmly grasp the thighs of the patient, and compress the large area of the affected hip, extending it outward forcefully; for this will cause the dislocation to return to its proper place.
And this species is of a milder cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
And if it is excused upon you and you do not comply with the training for this species of cure, then cover that patient's two feet together with firm but gentle bandaging, over both the ankles and both the insteps.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient's leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient's leg should be悬挂于杆子的顶部，且应置于手中；其长度应为两臂长。
And then command a strong youth to hold down the thigh, and have another strong youth suspend the patient's leg, with the other youth holding down the thigh firmly, so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the reduction proper, when dislocation is at the outward part, cover the patient's leg with a cloth according to what we have advised when he was brought in; and strengthen the bandaging over the patient's leg and its ankle.
And nearby two rods be placed, one on the foot and the other on the head; and nearby those rods adjust them firmly over the middle of the patient's thigh, upon which wet cloths be wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed because the rod is between their thighs, for you should allow the extension to the parts left undone.
And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then let the leg be extended slightly, and this is according to this narrative method for the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the patella of the diseased knee, and nearby tightens the other hand, and with that tightening place the extension at the part left to the kneecap.
And if the dislocation is at the back parts, then do not allow the patient to be stretched out on his back and elevated above the ground; instead, he should be placed on a hard surface, as we said when the wider part was dislocated towards the outer side, according to what we have said about the lying down of the patient on two widths; and his face and limbs should be extended, as we said.
And a compress should be applied on the place where the joint is dislocated.
Therefore, once the reduction is completed as it should — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is when you extend both legs of the patient, and when you see them equal and the leg returns to its normal position by expanding that part, then you know that the limb has been returned according to what is required — then you place both pillows and apply bandages so that the width does not change in any part; and you keep the leg at rest for three or four days.
And then separate the legs and compare one thigh to the other.
And if you see equal marks in the wound, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any sign of softening, then return and apply a poultice to that area, and reposition it according to your original structure, and leave it for three days.
And then move that area to gradually improve mobility in each part over some days until it is comfortable.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outward parts, to the inward parts, and to the front parts more than to the back parts; and it is not dislocated to the rear parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their thigh to their chest; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of the patient is that you make sure the thigh is straight, try to extend its leg as much as possible over this; attach your two hands to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then make sure the sole adheres to your palms, retain those between your toes on the sole of it with strength, and another attendant stretch his leg so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of relief for the patient is that his leg adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
And then apply it and make the leg adhere to the thigh, and place those continuously with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the splint for ambulation for some days until it is healed and conforted.
If the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip, a previous narration was given.
Capitol. xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the foot.
The foot is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated by force, and the dislocation of the foot is done either internally or externally.
And the sign of the dislocation of the foot is that you see the foot swollen proceeding from the part to which it is dislocated.
More the cure of the reduction of the foot is by gentle restoration, and it is that it be extended with ease and equalized so that it returns.
More in the cure of the foot when it is dislocated by force, make sure you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the injured part in the middle of that area.
And then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and your left hand on the lower part of the foot, placing your hand in the location of the heel.
And then pull the foot to your right hand, and then to your left hand twice, and then extend your left hand; and push the foot to the right with the leg bent on the left.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the foot to the leg for the third time, and you are at the heel.
So if it returns in one or two pushes using this method, and if you grasp the foot evenly, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, as it may not return.
But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have advised, then place the foot in a basin on the ground, and insert a wooden stick into the ground firmly, and let it sit between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped it with a cloth to prevent it from moving.
And then the minister hold their thighs, and another minister extend the foot with their hands or with a stick placed on the back of the foot; and then each minister extends against the length of their part, and the wooden stick remains between the patient's thighs holding it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the sides you release its extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the parts left, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then as the dislocation returns and its reduction is declared to you, then pause and apply a strong paste externally there, and bind the foot with linen to the leg.
And be sure to avoid or guard against the nerves behind the talus, lest the linen over that area be too strong and severely affect those nerves.
And then leave that alone for two or three days; and if the linen becomes moist, apply it externally.
And then remove the linen on the third day or fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to go before that time, be sure that the dislocation is not completely dissolved and destroyed, and that it does not receive treatment.
And if an abscess occurs in him, then cover the place where you administer as we described in our narrative in another location for healing and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Capitol.xxxiv.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes of the feet.
Cover that which is dislocated so that it is gently extended a little; what is not difficult, beforehand is easier.
More if the dislocation is in some joints of the big toe, then cover that you place the foot on a level part of the ground or on a table, and let it be thus as if walking.
Then stand on your foot, and place your foot over the area near the joints, and press that part with your foot to apply pressure until it returns, and observe that which is gently extended and does not appear as a prominence in the area.
Then place the abdomen of his foot on a table that can hold his entire foot, which has two supports, and firmly strengthen it with a stable structure for three days; then loosen it and allow him to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Capitol.xxxv.
Of the types of dislocation that occur from a blow or from a fracture or any other combination.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, mistakes can lead to death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is skilled in the art, long practiced, merciful, and pious; who delays, is not rash, nor presumptuous; and who uses at the beginning of medicines that can reduce abscesses by cautery alone, leaving the disease to divine judgment, rather than to him to which you hope for recovery from illness, in alleviation of the disease, and in which any hope appears. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, administer a regimen that reduces the abscess by cautery and treats the blow with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
And if dislocation or fracture occurs in the separated bones of the thigh, then you must reduce their displacement, and do so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these in the places mentioned above.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true soul those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless. Amen.
