Oh, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have labored to its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is clear to me that I have composed this treatise for you, which pertains to my surgical operations.
For our operation of the hand is practiced in our region and in our times as almost entirely private, although it is a science greatly needed, and its practice has been obscured; and only some minor descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which they modified to correct errors and hesitations that have closed off understanding of it and weakened its force and art.
And it is evident to me that I should revitalize that part of this treatise in accordance with the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; and for the sake of adding the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work, which serves as an addition to the declaration and preparation thereof, a necessary cause for this.
More the cause why a good craftsman does not apply his hand well in our time is that the art of medicine is long and that its practitioner must be trained in the science of anatomy which Galen knew well enough to understand the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, their number and their diseases; and of the pulsating and quiet veins, and of their places.
And for this Hippocrates says that in name is little, but more in the work and especially in the art of the hand.
More we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for who does not know what we have said about anatomy will not be free from error due to which many men will die, as I have seen too many of them. For some are formed in this science and proceed from that same science and its experience.
For I saw a physician who, being foolish and ignorant, incurred an apostematia scropholosa in the neck of a woman, and injured some arteries so that great blood flowed out, causing the woman to die among convulsions.
And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and brought it to him and dried that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the extraction of that, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient upon him, he will die.
And there was another doctor who took payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and he arrived at a blacksmith who had suffered a fracture in his thigh; and because of the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the rejoining, and then the letting it rest for several days, commanding us to loosen the bandage; and we stayed like this until the thigh and foot recovered, and proceeded to our detriment.
And I was called to him, and prepared to dislodge the stone, and peace and attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
But however, corruption was confirmed in the member, because I could not restrain that, and did not cease to walk the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
And I saw another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it became ulcerated over several days, during which the evil increased in it with the lord of it.
The cause is that the disease is purely of melancholic humor, and does not reach everywhere, but affects only the member that suffers from everything being hostile to it.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two divisions: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is perilous in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed here in all parts of this book where the operation is filled with error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and deceive you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and laudable success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and let your weapons be of what fears you, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not deceived: for more remains to your glory, and rather in this world and after in your sanctity.
Galia already has been dissected in some surgical texts: Do not treat illness falsely, so that bad doctors will not be named.
And you should now have dedicated this treatise according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the treatise, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered of the foot, concerning the forms of the instruments and the tools of the cautery, and what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cups, and on blisters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all categorized and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter ordered by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
Know what I will say about the quality of the coals of that cautery and its effects, and in which conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery coals and its effects is long and prolix, subtle by science, and hidden in secret; much has already been said about it by wise men, and they are divided in their opinions. It suffices me to touch on a little of their sermons, fearing length.
And therefore say that a cautery is applied to all compositions universally which are of flesh or sinew, except two compositions, which are compositions of sinew.
In the sinewy and dry composition, the flesh will desiccate; for some said that a cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in malaise which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that such malaise, being sinewy and dry, be healed by that which is cautery and dry.
And say that those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all sinewy and dry malaise that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body and its humors to the composition of fire, you find man's body humid.
And I say according to the saying of that, which I have already experienced many times myself.
But I do not consider that it comes to those who have been extensively trained in the Capitol of Cauterization by long practice, and who know the diversity of human composition and the disposition of maladies in their varieties, and the causes of those, and the accidents related to them, as well as the duration of those.
In other complications, it is not about fear, and especially in wet diseases, for all doctors agree on those, and are not divided in using cautery in them.
Understand, sons, that the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness lies in the burning medicine, for fire is simple, its action reaching only the member being cauterezed and not affecting other members much except with slight harm.
But the action of the burning medicine reaches that member from which it is distant, and strongly causes in the affected member a disease difficult to heal and quickly makes it worse.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything other than to superfluously consume. And we are already familiar with this through experience and long service in studying the art concerning the truth of causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this is not written at liberty in this pause, and that you secretly hide your knowledge about fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which you expel diseases, then this discourse would be a philosophical demonstration, which would benefit your minds.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when the best season is spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage from the accidental season is submerged in the youth of what is burnt by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulas, which do not suffer delay because it is feared of those that come evil intentions, which are greater than minor damage entering through the season.
And thus they do not place a cautery on your feet, or, sons, they only consider the common people and the unskilled physicians, for they believe that the ailment that is cured by a cautery is not effective at all times, and they avoid such a consequence.
And the reason is not that they care for this, for a cautery is nothing more in medicine than a means to alter the composition and dry the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
But nonetheless, a cautery can be superfluous in medicine for the sake of the speed of its efficacy and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
It is possible that their illness returns at some point in time, according to the complexity of the disease and the location of their illness, as well as their virtue, and what is prepared in their body through the aggregation of superfluities within them, and what is acquired by them in food and semblance of those causes; but the illness in which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a limb with few superfluities and humidities, just as a tooth cautery for pain and similar to that, it is possible that such pain does not return, more so when this is done in small amounts.
It is more common to say that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a surgeon's saying, not what I understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either medicine or any other cause except the cautery.
And the cause is contrary to this; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one administers the methods of cure in some illnesses, and those medicines do not work, and near the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which then benefits that condition. And at this point, the last remedy of medicine is the cautery, not according to the understanding which I understand the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a cautery made of gold is better than one made of iron, and they did not say this only because of the equality of gold and the subtlety of its substance.
And they said that the place for a cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely heated, for I have already tested this and found that it does not heat all bodies equally, and a gold cautery is good and better than one made of iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire on gold, it is indeed so, for the gold ignites according to the quantity you want due to the corrosion of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust over this ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and settles in the fire with some sheets so that the craftsman can cut through its occupation.
And for this, when making a cautery of iron, you should use it more lightly and more properly according to the correctness of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter concerning the cautery according to other chapters, and I have ordered those of the foot within, so that I delay the one requesting what they want from me.
The first chapter.
This cautery treats cold and humidity over the servant accident of which there are two causes, causing soda and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the hollows and the ears flowing, and much drowsiness, and tooth pain, and the gullet, and universally all illness that comes through coldness, thus as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similarities in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, I command the patient to be evacuated with a laxative medicine on an empty stomach for three or four nights, according to the power of the illness and the age of the patient and their habits.
And then command him to shave his head with a razor, and place that razor between your hands on a leaning bench so that he places his hands on his own foot.
And then pause the razor from your palm near his mouth between his palms. More over, since the correct location has been determined, mark that location with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place that cautery over the marked location with a probe, in such a way that it descends gradually, and your hand is gradually constrained, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location. If you see any part of the bone being revealed through the flesh, as much as an err (a small amount), then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron or another, if it is cooled, so that what I have said about it can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that [solution], and leave it there for three days.
And then place it on the wound in the groin and leave it there until the scar of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with an ointment of tetrafarmakon until it is healed.
And they also say that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the knee should be cauterized inside the bone, and that the cautery should remain until part of the bone tissue is burnt.
And then scrape what is attached to the bone, and then treat it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing firmly on the bone until the bone cools, and this is the method of Alphécat: And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound be kept open for a long time, and then cure it before it becomes consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, except in some men according to a way of fear; and leave that one, my advice is, it is better to be healed when possible; because the head is developed by solution of continuity of the skull as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of foul nature.
And the first type of cautery is more safe and better, my advice; use that one and do that work for healing.
Capitulum secundum.
On the cautery for the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs in the head, and this has been prolonged in the patient, and they use various treatments such as powders, seeds, cap purge, plasters, poultices, cats, bandages, and similar remedies, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve the condition for any of these causes, consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and there is no foul or great cold, then this cautery should be reconsidered. Leave that one for another cautery and use it only slightly. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the vein is divided. Incise the vein and the quantity of the opening as we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the back of the head in the place where it is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And lift your hand here, and do not uncover the head, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cauterizations.
And I will say this cauterization in its place, for know that the cauterization with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cauterization than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Head complete.
Of the cauterization for new migraine.
When there is a sharp pain in the back of the head, or a prolonged pain in the temples, medicinals should be applied to the head to relieve it, and another treatment, which I have described for diseases, should be administered. If this does not help, then cauterization can be performed in two ways: with a burning acute medicinal substance, or with iron.
May a cautery that burns in medicine be that you take a piece of aloes, and soak it there and bind the extremities of it from both ends. And then apply the spot of pain on the temple with a lancet laid gently there and make the cut where it is to be hidden.
And then strengthen the place where it is stopped by descent compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove and cut the aloes, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then cover over the spot submerge in balsam until the area heals.
And then treat that wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, use those wounds which some medicines burn, the ones I have written about in the second treatise on burning medicines.
May the cautery be performed in this manner: heat it with fire, of which this is the form:
and it is called a key lock, because the head of it has the form of a clove and in the middle location there is a small projection.
Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and hold it back—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
And if the amount that is burned due to the strength of the cauterization is as much as its size, lift your hand so that the artery which is left is not burned, so that there be no flow of blood.
Then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it near a warm place, and apply ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize at the tip of the knife edge according to the cautery, and guard against cutting the artery in this new migraine.
Capitulum quartum.
Of the cautery treatment for old headache.
When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous treatment and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective for the disease that does not respond to what we have said about the first cautery or the cautery by fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it becomes white-hot. Place your line over the site of the pain along its length, or where it may be. Then hold your hand for a moment and strongly apply the heated cautery to penetrate into the artery and reach the bone.
However, you must be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is affected by chewing, and ensure that the tendon is not adhered and the nerve which supplies it is intact, to prevent spasms.
And if it concerns the care and precaution of the flow of blood in the artery that is amputated, for in its amputation there is fear, especially for one who does not know what to do and is not studious and hesitates; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I will recall the treatment for the flow of blood事故，根据其方式，在此自由之地的相应位置。
And if you see this illness in someone who does not tolerate this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, apply the cautery in the middle of the foot as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter on the strengthening of the artery with two knives, and this is a better and more effective cauterization.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of ear pains.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with hot applications, and another treatment as I have said in the division does not relieve the pain, then apply the cautery, which is called puncta. This is its form:
And then puncture near the beginning, and extend it to the vicinity of the whole ear as if a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part. Lengthen the cautery from the rim of the ear gradually placing it where you have tested the location.
And if the cautery with ten points around the entire ear, and cool it, then quickly cure the places between as they heal.
Capitol. vi.
Of the cautery for the tortura.
Tortura which is cured and treated with cautery is none other than due to the species that the vein carries, as we have said in the divisions of ailments.
Avoid cautery for the species that flows due to dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that species of tortura with jerras, capipurgi, and guarismes, and your cure does not agree, then when you cauterize the maladie, you should make three cauteries: the first on the rim of the ear, the second a small one in its temple, and the third on the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the affected area, for softening effect occurs only in the part that is healthy.
The method of cautery is to apply the cautery on the outer side of the ear near the tip of the ear, placing a small piece of cloth over the top of the head. On the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the affected part, and then place your hand with the cautery within until the quantity of the material of the codena is burned.
This is the method of the cautery, and it is specific to the barber-surgeon, whose form is given below. However, more subtle is that you should add just a little as you see fit; and cut away a small amount to avoid unnecessary crudity.
Then cover the area with what is given and proceed to treat it until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery treatment for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have cured it as we said before, and there is no fever in the patient, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with a cautery on the middle part of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the neck. The method of cauterization is done as described above.
And it has already been cauterized on the opening of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then it is cured as you proceed.
Capitol. viii.
Of cauterization for oblivion through flame.
Cover what is given to the patient at the beginning with large stones and pills of the service purgative.
And then wrap the head of the patient entirely with plaster and place it on the neck as described in the treatise on plasters.
And pause that for some beats, as that is a way of cautery. And do this according to the method and order which I have already said.
And therefore, if these good methods help; and if not, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head to the lower part of the neck. And pause the duration of a finger's breadth between each cautery, and proceed with the cautery as previously instructed.
But if you add more oil and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you add a greater amount, then cautery that area above the two horns.
And proceed with the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be in the shape as shown previously.
Capitulum ix.
On the cautery of piles and the soothing of the whole body.
Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then raise the head of the patient, and place a cautery there on the middle part of the head, and a cautery on all horns of the head, and a cautery on the back part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for more and the gout is stubborn and the illness is strong, then place a cautery there with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and behind that with a cautery where it is combined from the main spine of it, and lift your hand. And then cure that where it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitulum.
On the cautery treatment for epilepsy.
No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore modify the patient's pulse at the beginning of his artery and the other cure which we have mentioned in the division when the illness is great and resists the exception of medicines.
And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, the assistant modifies their diet and administers guar gums and masticators.
And then over the head of the patient, and then cauterize that spot on the middle part of the head according to the preceding method, and another cauterization on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes. And if the illness is strong and resists, then cauterize those spots as I have said, while maintaining paralysis and softening of the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And use olive oil cauterization as previously described.
But if the patient is a child, then use a subtle cauterization according to this method.
Capitol xi.
Of the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and large flames, then use the cautery as we have said in the chapter on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess moisture declining into melancholy, and the patient's body is humid, then have him drink what purifies his brain according to what was mentioned in the division.
Then place your hand on the patient's head, and properly make a torcortura (a circular incision) on it above the middle of the head.
And the patient should be bathed and kept from all sides.
Then apply a liniment; it is most worthy of being used as a remedy for sheep. And heat it over the fire for a moderate warming, which the patient can bear when it is more intense. And then place something in the middle of his head in the circle, and let it be fumigated.
And do this to the patient every week once, and follow the other regimen until it is healed; or if you wish, make a cautery there by making small points according to its size. Otherwise, keep your hand on an ordered cautery: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain in equal measure.
And then place that cauterized area on the edge or in the folds of cloth.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
When the beginning of water in the heel has been declared by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the humor, and keep that free from all moisture.
And let that sugar be immersed in wine for several days.
And then command him to raise his head, and cautery that point in the middle of the head with a pointed cautery; and cautery that point with two cauteries on the temples if it is the beginning of scalding water in both hands, or of one burn if it is the beginning of water in one hand.
Apply the cautery to all veins and arteries which are left without a seal; and let the cauteries be in that length along the temples.
And guard against fluxes of blood when it is cauteryed; and if you see fluxes of blood, apply some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will bring with me wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in their ligation, and caution against fluxes of blood.
And sometimes the neck is cauteryed leaving two bones with cauteries deeply produced.
Chapter XIII.
On the cautery of ancient tears.
When tears from the eyes are ancient and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest place of the head above, it is verified that this is excess phlegmatic fluid, then cauteryize that with a cautery as we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of flowing water in the feet, and cauteryize in the middle of the head and two cauteries on the neck leave two temples, and two cauteries on the neck leave two bones. And if you suffer from addition, then cauteryize that on the entire length of the vein in the eye at the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cautery for the foulness of the nose.
When your treatment for what we have said in the division is not effective, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient three times the decoction of wormwood; and place a cautery on his head, and cauteryize with a medium-sized cautery over an olive branch. And then sear that spot with a pointed cautery on both supraorbital areas, leaving the hair a little.
And guard that the artery not be burned there.
And of the pointed cautery, this is its form.
Capitol. XV.
Of the cautery for the softening of the eyelids of the foot.
When the eyelid of the foot is softened due to gout or humidity, then sear that eyelid with a cautery like this lunar one; and this is its form:
And if you, sear that spot on both supraorbital areas a little with two cautery points entirely, and let them be long from the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the supraorbital area.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the free edge of the eyelid is adhered.
Chapter XVI.
When the skin is converted to the inner parts and hand of the eyelid, use a cautery.
When the skin of the eyelid is converted to the inner parts, I must probe the eyelid. The cautery in such cases should be used according to two methods: either by applying a hot cautery or by using a burning medicine.
If the cautery is hot, command the patient to look away from where the skin is burned as if they were gazing at those who clean their skin, keeping it prolonged and equal. And when probing, you should grasp its root; then strengthen the eyelids with a bandage so that it does not stick until the skin has grown back.
Then, when they have grown and equalized, place the head of the patient's probe in their temple, and then press over the eyelid of the affected side, marking it with a mark shaped like the leaf of a laurel, which will be the beginning of the mark relative to the skin.
And then place something hot in a bag or on a poultice over the affected area.
And then heat the cautery, of which this is the form.
And then cauterize over the figure which is marked, little by little, in stages, while the surface of the wound, which is like a bay leaf, is being burned entirely appropriately.
And a sign of recovery from your work is that you see the eyelid of the affected area already contracted and the skin around it elevated due to the puncture of the wound.
And then lift your hand and leave it there for three days, and then place it over the wound between the burns to allow the scar to heal. And then apply ointment until it is healed.
But if for some cause the skin returns to the area near its origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another pass with the cautery over that area as you did at first.
But if the skin is on the eyelid, then cauterize it there where it is elevated to its natural place and make it equal so that the skin does not remain uneven.
But the cautery for medical burning commands the patient to extend the skin where it is to be made equal, and then make the shape of a mulberry leaf from linen cloth.
And then take a known soap and fresh fat, one pound or as much as is needed, and mix these fats well, preparing it without rubbing; then spread this mixture over the linen cloth which is made thus in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that on the skin or both; place the remaining part cut into small pieces in honey, and position the patient's head at the center.
And place that on the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is like that of fire.
And thus, when you observe that the inflammation is biting, then remove the medicine and press it at the center; as soon as the biting ceases, replace the medicine and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid has already been lifted, and if so, apply heat or incision, for then it is good; if not, return to applying the medicine in the place where it did not bite, ensuring that your operation remains equal and contracts the area.
And then place your hand over the groin area between which the root of the adhesion is to be removed, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it is healed.
And you must, with due diligence, ensure that no error in the medicine occurs during your operation. If the eyelid becomes softened or some cause of skin swelling appears on it within a few days, then repeat your medication on that place where the eyelid has become softened, and proceed in this manner as you did at the beginning, and soon let it heal completely.
This is the way to treat a cataract.
And know that the eyelids of humans are diverse in size and shape, and therefore your incision should be made according to this.
And the way of making the incision should not be hidden from him who studies this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal duct of the eyelid.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of the ailments and do not apply your treatment, then when you cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and let another minister hold the head of the patient between your knees in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
And then place the hot iron on the flesh in the thigh or over the swelling of the boil above the hip.
And then heat the cautery, and this is its form:
which should be cylindrical, as is the form of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, let it penetrate into the other end. And if you want, let it be drawn out like a needle.
Yet, however, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little below the root of the nose to prevent your hand or the patient from moving, and then place the cautery on the cheeks and destroy that area.
And so, if at the beginning of your cautery it goes into the mouth, that is good; otherwise, then reapply the cautery one or two more times if necessary; and leave it like this for three days, and then place a border around the area and apply an ointment that is dry until it heals.
But if it does not heal after ten days, then apply the sharp corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed and is scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
And another method of cautery for a fistula, which some first doctors will say: locate the place of the fistula and do it there and immediately pause at that fissure like a thin form of it. Then put in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and hold your hand like well retained, so that the bad humor does not enter the hole where the melted lead does not penetrate; and continue to pause over the hole of the bad humor as in album of hoot or water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals it by a marvelous cure.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a draft from the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cautery for the fissure of the foot.
Warts often cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Then when you cure those fractures as we have said in the divisions and your cure does not improve, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
Let the cavity of the wound be according to the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that hot instrument in the fractures until the cautery reaches the depth of the fractures.
Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment of fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or in the roots of the teeth an abscess forms, and then breaks, becomes old, and forms a fistula, and your cure does not improve, then heat the cautery according to the quantity received in the fistula, place that heated cautery into the tract of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its depth, and do this one or two times; then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And if the abscess is incised and healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to uncover the area and set the corrupted bone as will be described in its chapter.
capitol.xx.
Of the cautery treatment of teeth and the softening of arteries.
When the arteries are softened by humidity and the teeth are decaying, and you have treated those with medicines without success, then place the patient's head in warm water, and shortly thereafter heat the cautery to the form of which will be described below. Try to hold the cautery over the tooth while inserting it into the area, ensuring that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth so that the warmth reaches the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
Then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and keep it there for an hour, then spit it out, as the decayed tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a boil or abscess, and medical treatment does not bring relief, the cautery in that area can be performed in two ways: either with a bull's gallbladder cautery or with fire.
The bull's gallbladder cautery is when you take the gallbladder of a bull and fill it with hot oil, then wrap this around the end of the lancet, and immerse the filled gallbladder in hot oil, placing it over the painful tooth rapidly before the oil cools.
And then repeatedly apply it several times before the heat of the fire permeates the pulp of the teeth.
And if you do, soak some wool or cloth in the bull's gallbladder mentioned above, and place this over the painful tooth. Then hold the ignited iron over it until the heat reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire is such that you attend to the small opening of skin or iron, and in its core there must be some coarse material so that the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then shape the cautery as it will appear, and place that part over the tooth and put your hand inside to ensure the cautery is well lubricated; and do this a few times to prevent the pain from worsening on that day or the next.
And ensure that through the impression of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth wide and maintains it for about an hour; and this is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize where you wish to stop according to what is possible.
And this is the shape of the catheter:
Chapter 22.
On the cauterization of exostoses.
When hernias are caused by phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion through medicines, and you see the digestion of those lightly, then you apply the cautery to cover the form of which this follows, having two ends open so that you let the smoke issue from one end and the other, and place that ignited over that abscess for one minute, and another if you feel it necessary before it reaches the root of the abscess.
And if the abscess is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the abscess, and let it be for three days, and keep it over the hot spot between the time that the fire has burned out.
And then cure that with ointments and dressings until it is healed.
Capitulum XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness and constriction of the throat.
When the humidity of the wind affects the canal of the lung, especially when it is due to complex coldness, then it is advisable that the patient be treated with laxative medicines at the beginning, and afterwards cauterize the vein in the compressed area.
And be careful not to apply the cautery too strongly on the vein nor burn the ligament of the leg, but only slightly.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the lower part of the spine. The cautery for the leg should be applied according to the previous method.
And afterwards, treat it with what was prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by cold humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis, and it is an old lung ailment, then cauterize the leg with two cauteries on the depressed areas of the furcula (wishbone); and with another cautery in the middle area of the foot between the two mammary bones; and apply the leg cautery according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery point be made with the cautery that is called a puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And make points inside the wound to those areas; and then cure that which you have placed inside as it heals.
And let the cautery have three spikes; for this cautery, you can make three points in one go according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and does not return within the hour, you must return its dislocation before it naturally returns. Then, by a slight movement, it dislocates again as it attempts to return, just as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, then place the patient's foot on their back or on their side; then lift the heel which is in the inner part of the ankle with your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the vein where the humor penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two cautery heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for why the cauterizations are VIII.
And then place your hand on the cautery for a while with salt, and then attach the patient to a bed, so that the limb is not swollen for some time until it is comfortable.
And if the dislocation is above and the treatment is done here, then cauterize over the muscle with a clavilh cautery or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is relieved and the patient heals.
Chapter 26.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by moist humors that extract themselves from its composition and multiply within it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment and they do not relieve it, then you will find that gout has settled on his back, extending its hands and other things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: in one cauterization place the foot with the width of a finger using a nail cautery, and in two cauteries place them on both sides of the cauterization, so as to form a triangular figure; and keep the ones not aligned separate, which will cause suppuration.
And if the depth of the cautery is the width of two-thirds of the thickness of the cord.
And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this should be a circular cautery as shown in this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized with puncture where someone is scared by this cautery: and you hold over the stomach with a puncture according to the quantity you want to try, then immediately cauterize that with the cautery in the punctures; then cure that with the cure that comes before it until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cauterization of the inflamed hip.
When there is pain in the hip due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness such that it has deviated from its normal structure through superfluous discharge, and the patient is treated as we have said without success, then you should cause the patient to lie on their back, and hold three cauterizations according to this form and this quantity over the hip below the ribs, with one along the spine.
And let the space between each cauterization be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauterizations be according to the length of the body straightened.
And do not hold the cautery too long.
And if the amount of what is applied equals the size of the swelling of the affected joint, and it is not adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if not standing, when lying down, which already has extended its parts, elevating its knees.
And you may apply these cauteries with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are sufficient.
And be careful not to overheat the cautery, ensuring that the application reaches only the affected joint and does not spread to the entire body, as the joint here is delicate; know this.
Capitol.xxviii.
On the puncture of an abscess on the sole with a cautery.
When there is an inflammation or abscess in the groin and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the groin or in its covering, then if it is in the flesh of the groin, the patient will experience a greater gravity and intensity of pain.
And if it is in the covering of the groin, then the pain will be intense and often causes great fatigue to the doctors treating it.
Then make sure the patient is lying on their side; and place the location of the abscess correctly; then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the shape of which was shown in the previous page. And cauterize it in such a way that the entire chain of wounds is charred, until it reaches the center, until it becomes healthy.
And then treat that by the method of curing other abscesses until it is healed.
And ensure that only those who have studied this method in the art of medicine use it. In most cases, they will know the defects of other cauteries; however, from my experience, some times this cautery works well for this operation, so I recommend using this one instead.
Chapter XXIX.
Of cautery for the thigh.
They said that the ancient cautery for the thigh should be made according to this method: take from the leaves of Aristology a long, dry twig, which is found to have a thickness similar to that of a finger.
And then immerse that in oil and heat it on the fire. Then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; use two small cauteries to guide, one slightly inclined towards the part below the beard, and two more cauteries that are inclined between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclining slightly towards the rear parts. And another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries behind. And one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries on both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery between the two shoulders.
And make sure that your hand is on the cautery, not off at the handle.
And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, placing it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and the healthy tissue is free of disease, as we have said regarding the abscess of the thigh.
In this puncture, there is no fear with the cautery, for if it happens so, you will quickly encounter the location of the fistula which does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery of the abscess.
When you treat the illness of the abscess, as we have said regarding the treatment in division and do not change your treatment, then applying the cautery to it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four lines according to the length of the abscess, following the figure of the cautery for the thigh, the figure of which has been shown previously.
And the distance between each cautery should be the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have said for the thigh cautery.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient lie on their back.
And another way to cauterize is that you ignite the cautery with two wicks, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the middle of the seam letting the juice of the left patient flow through.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cauterizations are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two wicks, ignite them, placing one in the middle where they penetrate the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus it makes four cauterizations.
And if you use, cauterize with the cautery having three wicks.
And then you should cure the cautery more thoroughly since it has been left to burn for too many days; this is more effective than the other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol XXXI.
Of the cautery for dropsy.
Cautery is not used for dropsy but for the ankle properly.
When you treat the dropsy, use the methods of treatment we have said in the division and do not deviate from your treatment. Instead, apply the cautery at four points in the circuit of the swelling, and one on the stomach, another on the flank, another on the navel, two between the vertebrae of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be approximately that of the thickness of the skin.
And leave the cautery open so that it heals for a long time.
And do not evacuate the bad matter of the treatment near the cautery where it should be added to two intentions, and it will be sped up with auxiliary healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should follow the form of that described above, and it is with this cautery that the two olive-shaped areas are seared according to what was previously mentioned regarding their shape.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellowish water, you should sear the feet over the inner part of the foot between the base of the toes and the heel, and raise your hand with the cautery without twisting that area; then raise your hand further, and do not return it completely, for the yellow water will drain.
The cautery should be done in this manner: And over each thigh, place two cauteries, and on each thigh make the cautery at the end of the surgical instrument. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh and the other end in the middle of the thigh; over each thigh, use two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water seeps into it.
And then treat the ailments which we have said.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity that penetrate into its weakness, it has the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines. This condition is treated according to the methods of treatment and you do not apply any other remedies; sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of virtuous exhibition, so cauterize that area with a large cautery over their stomach as previously described in the cauterization of the stomach, using the ring cautery and four cauteries around the circuit of the subtle fibers, using a fine stylus cautery; or use one cautery on aloes wood, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that area over the pentelich and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for youth from which you will not err.
Capitol XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we have said in the division and do not confer your own cure, then cauterize three times on the tip of the two small ones, forming a triangular shape, and with one cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food they ate was not digested, and their face appears feverish, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the side, and another on the armpit with a pointed cautery, and let the cautery remain open for some time, and soon cure them once they are healed.
Capitol XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment near the site of removal for hemorrhoids.
When you incise the thigh, then ignite the cautery that resembles a rod. Then insert that ignited cautery into the incised thigh, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this one or two times; if there are more, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments between the skin and wound as it heals.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is better for the patient's recovery.
Capitol. xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the natural passages of the body.
When nature does not yield to the operation we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat it with a cautery.
When there is an old fistula in the nature behind and it is corrupted by bad health, then what is most worthy to probe is with a fine needle, and you know the quantity of its depth with the front mentioned needle.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, according to the quantity in which you insert the needle.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted tissues are burned up completely in one or two or three passes, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the part of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy part and you can see it is not penetrating.
And cure that area once it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are cut away from it, and remain thus for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not from the site, you can see that they are penetrating or in the pores of the bone and corrupting it, or this comes from those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol. xxxvii.
On the cautery of warts.
When warts hurt due to friction or excessive dryness, and for this reason the patient's cry is diminished, then you should cautery those warts with a cautery on each wart using the claw cautery, the details of which will be recalled.
And we cautery with a second touch lightly, for three linear cauteries will follow, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol.xxxviii.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When there is a debility and softening of the bladder due to inflammation and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize that area on the side of the bladder where the skin begins to peel, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; cauterize that area with one cautery on the lower side of the foot, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And use a lancet according to the condition.
Chapter XXXIX.
Of the cautery of the urethra.
When there is cold and humidity in the urethra, and for this reason conception is forbidden, and the menses are corrupted, and the induction of labor is delayed, and joint pain occurs as a result, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and place one cautery on the lower part of the foot, or two cauteries, using a lancet for the cautery.
Capitol.xl.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the area of the ankle, and are causes of displacement in its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other foot when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is around the outer ankle.
Then, make a circular cautery mark on the foot around the ankle with the cautery. Ensure that you have marked it in the circuit of the ankle as if it were rotated, so that the area falls in the middle of the circle.
And let the form of the cautery as described above be used in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not at hand, then use three large olive cauterization marks instead.
And make the cautery according to the intensity of the pain throughout the leg; and then cure that which remains until it is healed.
Chapter XL.
Of the cautery for the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the region of the kidney, and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said about it, and you do not confer, and then you let the patient suffer from large humors through fetid pills or artificial ones; and then cauterize that area.
The method of the cautery in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with fire.
According to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area on the side of the flank with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the width of one digit, and let the cautery be either olive-sized or large.
More often, apply the cautery in the middle of the location, on the head of the kidney, as there are four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circle where the form precedes the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the sensitivity of the entire tendon.
And this is the way to cauterize for gout when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended into the thigh.
But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize there with two cauteries on the thigh over the area through which you will pass the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little you should raise the lateral part.
And for the surgical cautery, the depth of the cauterization should be according to the amount of sensitivity of the tendon.
And if the ankle passes through the pain extended near the base of the feet, then cauterize there where you will pass the cautery with three or four points or more if needed.
And if the ankle passes through and the pain is felt in the thigh, then cauterize there with a surgical cautery.
Guard in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that it burns nerves or great artery, and that by this you are over the patient badly injured or contraction.
And I have seen others who cauterized on the cartilage and ended in the cautery, and the bed was inflamed between where the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And then follows a severe solution for the belly, and then there is death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each separately according to this method.
And they will say that wise alchs in the cautery of an aqua cauteri do this: make it seem like a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its orifices be according to the size of an os of a finger or at most a little less.
And inside that circle, place another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of a toe; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those cuts be one toe or two toes, and make on those iron edges decently fitted to the circles; this is the form of it:
It is heated in the fire until it turns red and sparks, then placed on the part of the water, the patient lying on the ladle. And then cauterize it with three round cautery marks in one go.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by rubbing it with ointment until it is healed.
As Al-Zahrawi says: Oh, son, of this kind of cautery we have used it little because of the fear of looking at it, and because of what few of us have found to be true about it.
More than those who suffer from the good cautery, he finds it to be in that place.
More than medicines that adhere, make two circles having a perforated ring in which the smoke from the iron door passes through; let the length of the walls where they are be about two fingers or thumbs wide.
And if the space which is between each of the quantities of the swelling of the finger; and they be opened both above and below, and should contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand on the side of the foot where the patient feels pain, and hold your hand on the side of the water; and take some warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be like fire little by little, and let that remain for the quantity of one hour, and allow the gout the bite and adjustment — for that atrophy bite similarly to fire — until the bite ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and remove the warm water from all the foot with cold water.
And then let that remain for three days and place your hand on that border until the blackness of the adjusted area subsides, and let this remain for some days, after which it will turn to redness; this is called erysipelas.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended into the thigh or hip, apply a statue to it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way of applying water, and I have already written that in the treatise on the preparation of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for the extinct part of both halves, one third of it is mixed with a new vessel in which the part left has been pierced by a small tube according to the quantity that enters it.
And place the bottom of the vessel in another warm vessel, and let it sit over the live alkali and water for a day, and when you understand that they have absorbed enough with your hand through good compression, leave the excess water from the alkaline solution to drain into the prepared vessel.
Then adjust all that water, and place it over fresh alkali and new alkali, for then it will be of much strength, which is administered in most operations of medicine and in the cautery of other members, for it acts like fire.
And some of the medicines, which are burnt wide, such as terebinth and mel acratic and cause anassise to be mixed, that they may be more effective.
And Gualia recounts an operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatica. The method was magnificent, as described by her, and she said no other treatment was necessary. He was cured in one session just as she recommended, for he immersed himself in warm baths and exercises, as she had instructed.
And it should be placed near the vert remedy, and if no vert is at hand, a fresh fig; it should be tied with a few grey threads and placed on the water in which the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be moistened.
And it should be left for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time the patient can endure the application.
And then place it in warm water; when the patient's body is relaxed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that none of these medicines should be used with a cautery near the body's evacuation.
When making a cut in the sinew vein, it will heal better if cauterized; and the cautery should be used as follows: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes of the foot and over the bone.
And then take a dry cut of wood and ignite it inside to make charcoal; place it over the wool and let it burn until it is extended. And then repeat this, and continue doing so until the heat from the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called the bull's cautery.
Capitol. xliv.
On the cautery for pain in the toes.
Sometimes pain in the two [joints] is caused by multiple reasons, such as by impact or puncture or by excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery is not used for cutting, but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
So digress, and after the evacuation of the groin, use pills similar to them, which are applied over the two areas where the pain is three lines according to the width of the area. Then test with cautery or more on any line if necessary, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the area.
And perform the cautery with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, perform the cautery with three or four cautery strokes using a medialawl according to this form:
Capitol.xliii.
On the cautery from the beginning of gilbositat.
Motions observed when this illness affects small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience discomfort in their limbs during play, elevation, and movement.
You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and the ribs that are beginning to overgrow over the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then cauterize that area with a cautery shaped as a circle according to this form: place the cautery over every part of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
Then cover the area thoroughly until it is healed with what we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in cases of swelling caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
Of the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when venous pains occur in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by infiltration is cured using a treatment method that does not alleviate the pains temporarily but cures them with a cautery.
And you cauterize the area near the foot joint with a cautery to facilitate the evacuation in the circuit of the joint.
And the olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and this method does not alleviate them, then cauterize each toe with three or four cauteries of this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need to use cautery irons for these cauteries, then apply the cautery and do not press your hand too much against the cautery before, just around the size of a thumb.
And if the pains penetrate into the groin and thigh, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called podagra, then puncture along the circumference of the toe joints as they twist, puncturing in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then puncture along the circumference of the joints over each finger and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the elbow.
And if you do not evacuate the gout properly and with the right administration of medicines, then even if good regimen and flux are applied, this cautery will not be effective, God willing.
Capitol. XLV.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are protruding behind the cloth at the genital area, and this begins to prolapse, then when you order the patient to leave their meal for that day and use mild applications so that the descending wound of their abdomen does not worsen.
And then place the patient between your hands over their abdomen, and command them to keep their hand inside until it is fully contracted or the cloth or intestines appear.
And then return those to your hands called ties and test the rupture over the bone of the thigh, marking the extremity of which should resemble the size of a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
until it be hot and begins to spark. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark on your hand where the cautery is straight, and there where you can find the bone of the big toe in the middle of the foot; and repeat with another pass if you have not succeeded in the first pass through the bone.
Observe wisely the position of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not burn that intestine so that it does not come into danger for the patient or cause other great harm.
Be careful that when you use the cautery, you do not touch the bone, as this would compromise your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is细而适度，根据他们的大小和体型。
And shortly after care for the place of the cautery for three days among that the wound from the fire is healed.
And shortly after treat that as well with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient lie on his back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you place the nourishment according to the length of time for the healing of the wound which closes his abdomen, and that the intestine does not come out with great effort to heal.
And shortly when it is time to lift after 10 days, then apply a decent liniment, and use it for another 10 days.
And let him rest from work and replenishment of food and drink, and use strong voices, for when he uses this regimen entirely he will be cured.
And I will say the healing of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not tear, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its quantity, and let that which is drawn from the cord be as the tender part of it; and shortly care for that which we have said, and it is not tight.
And some first ones have said that a rupture should be seared with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than sewn with a needle.
And a line is placed for the width in the slashes and passes above the rupture, another line on top; then place your hand with a cruciform cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the cautery treatment for a twist.
When pain in some members persists due to a compression or percussion and does not respond to medicine or treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be of the size and shape appropriate to the member, its strength and sharpness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Then if the member is healed by the first cautery, that is good; otherwise, repeat the cautery on it. For customarily, those pains are punctured in a nearby member of the same body, so that you may achieve healing through the cautery while the illness is cured.
Chapter XLVII.
Cauterization for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes cauterized with a very hot cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cauterize the affected area, consider whether the leprosy is common and active or cured as we have described in the division. If it is not, and you fear that corruption may encompass his entire body and all its complexity, then cauterize the area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and leave a space between them; place one at the forehead near the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or servitz.
And finish your hand with a cautery slightly inside where it leaves a small impression in the os, so that the expiration of thick vapors is alleviated; and cauterize on the melsa as needed.
And if leprosy is already spread over the thigh and appears manifestly, then you cauterize that area as well as those cauterizations which we have said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on the two eyebrows, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the hip bone, and one on the spine, and on two on the hips, and one on each hip, and on two on the buttocks and one on each buttock, and on two on the knees, and two on the muscles, and two on their tendons; cauterize that on all joints of the fingers of the thigh and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on his nerves.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, as they do with their seams, for so the body of the patient is already numbed.
And know that the cauteries should be large or small according to the limbs and joints as indicated by the use of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a paste of ground err cilantro and honey, and other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the cautery for stupefaction.
When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the depth of the wound a little. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And sometimes certain areas are cauterized to remove the swelling in the limbs and the vertebrae, and to relieve the congestion of the nerves which run through that member.
But do not assume this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the limbs and the course of the nerves throughout the body.
Capitol. XLIX.
On the cauterization of sores that become morphew (a type of skin ulcer).
When sores are old and you do not apply any of the medical ointments to them, then cauterize the sore with a cautery, using a small amount according to the quantity of the powder in the mixture until the whiteness and color of the sore are changed.
And then cure that which is made from wheat flour and lentils in olive oil and with leaves of rosemary, or with pigeon's dung or with goose's dung, take one part of each, mix them all together, and place a cloth on the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the groin.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cautery it with a circular cautery in the circuit of it as it is revolving.
And the wise will say that it should be cauteryed with the latest cautery in the middle spot; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times.
And it is better to cautery it in the circuit of it with a circle, as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for adenitis.
When some adenitis is delayed in maturation, this is either due to an excess causing it, or due to the patient's condition, which may be old age, weakness, or time, and if you want to hasten its maturation; then cautery it in the circuit of it with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave that which will mature on its own.
If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and place that in the middle of the affected area where the probe will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be so that the arm's flesh is relieved; and then cure that which will be healed.
Capitol. lii.
Of the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which eats away that part like fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where the cautery of fire is applied, then heat the cautery with many or few large sparks according to what is appropriate in that location where the corrosion is present.
And then cautery that completely, after you have eradicated all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And for three days let that be, and place over the cauteryized areas solely three times a day of oil mixed until all the scars are completely eradicated and all the corruption is gone.
And for that cure the flesh generating wounds.
More so, if for three days the flesh grows healthy in what is not corrupt, that is good; more so, if not, then re-cauterize the area that is rotted in the corrupt locations.
And if the flesh needs to be treated with some medicines several times with acute medicine, which is half in place of cautery. More importantly, cautery with fire is beneficial for slight wounds.
And I have already described the treatment with acute medicine in the division, and therefore use that when you need it.
Capitol. liii.
On the cautery of wounds and other similar conditions.
Small stones found in the foot of the sick that are called clau, and this is a large cause, entering, which affects the foot; for the cautery in these is according to two ways, so it is a cautery by fire and a cautery by hot water.
The cautery by fire is when you heat the concave cautery resembling a pen for turning, which is made of iron according to the quantity that can contain the stone from all parts, and it should have thin edges.
And then place that heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. And let it be there for three days until it begins to dry out. And then apply a plaster with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the plaster remain on it for one night, so that the stone will be removed from its place.
And then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If so-converted and spots appear on the surface of the body, mostly on the thighs and feet, then when you administer in those areas with water, take a cautery of iron or iron pin, place it over the nail; then put some water in the cautery container, withdraw your hand, and you rotate that with compression of your hand from all sides, and press the edge of the tube against the root of the nail, and you will find the water leaking through the gap of the nail; wait for the patient a little at the bite of the leaking water for an hour, then remove it, as the nail will be softened.
And thus apply to them and then to the other until you come over all of which they have in their body.
And then cure those pus that the roots of the nails have been softened by the ointments which the flesh becomes affected.
Capitol. liiii.
Of cautery for trembling.
When there is an occasional trembling due to friction in the nerves or fever of a cause, or another similar cause, then cover that area with four or five cauteries on the spine, between each vertebra one cautery; and one cautery on the foot, and over the stomach, one olive cautery.
When the trembling subsides and the healing of the illness progresses, continue as necessary.
Capitolium.
Of the cautery treatments for accidents in the body.
When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules have created openings which are made of gross, decayed materials; then at the beginning as they appear, they should be cauterized with a thin cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an estruthion stick; or with a flat cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is applied again at the beginning of its expulsion according to this method; and when they are not completely discharged, by breaking the excess, those are healed.
But however, it should be done close to evacuation by lancing.
Capitol the sixth.
Of cautery for flux of san (a vascular injury) due to an incision of the artery.
When veins are burned due to flux of the artery that is incised, you must burn the wound which lies beneath, or from the incision of apothemas or cautery of the member, and then seem it, and it is difficult to heal that.
So when some vein occurs to you, first cover the orifice of the artery with your hand, and then place yourself over that to strengthen those burned veins until the flux of the blood is stopped, let it be, and do not allow it to swell.
And then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few large and small applications, by number many times, and blow on them until they are dry.
And then take one of them small or large according to the place and wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein strongly place the cautery after you have dried your hand, and keep the cautery until it cuts and restricts the blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you rub your said part and apply pressure to the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries that are in the fire, and continue doing this one after another until the blood is restricted.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood flow with a cautery, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either using a cautery as described above, or performing an extraction when not extracted, or when it is extracted, the ends of the vessel are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or applying honey or gum resin for its strong structure, or placing them over the medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the blood flow; they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constriction.
More so, he who administers a proper constriction with gum resin and tight binding with cloths or by the position of burning and similar causes, will not succeed only slightly.
If, however, it happens that no one is present except for the patient and neither a doctor nor medicine, then carefully open the digit indicated over the holes of that vein as we have said, and understand the great compression within which the blood has remained from the upper part of the wound, and above the arch let the said not be touched; and above the arch let water mixed with strongly cold flegm be sprinkled before the blood is congealed and thickened; and more if necessary cauterize or apply medicine.
Of incision and perforation and fenestration and of bloodletting and of wounds and their appearances.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which a cautery with fire is convenient and medicine burning, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them in the forms of cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who seeks this may be relieved of what he has requested.
And before we begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter what is treated concerns the fear from that which is in the first chapter of cautery.
And therefore, hear that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, many cases of evacuation occur which involve the vein or incision on an abscess or puncture or extraction of pus or cleaning of the wound or removal of an arrow or incision of the boil, and similar cases. And in all of these, there is fear and trembling, and in the most severe cases, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in your situation, for in some cases, conditions can lead to methods of treatment going awry due to the patient's maladies. And from these, some will go to their illness and be more easily led to death, and this due to the intensity of what they find from their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and in illness is fear which means death.
And of those who give you their symptoms and say, you wait for that health, and their illness is dangerous.
And so you must consent to only those who come to you, of whom this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than greed and your rapacity; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and by which success is praiseworthy.
And use in the cure of all your patients by predicting and indicating to them where health is converted, for in that you have help in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God inspires his understanding in you and does not deprive you of direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly into chapters according to what was preceded in the chapter of cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, that you may be eased by what you ask and which you need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during birth and when the mother strengthens the child's head after birth.
And sometimes during birth for causes hidden, which are not known.
But I have not seen this illness except in children; and for all those whom I have seen, it leads to death, and thus I am left with the task of treating them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head was always thus enlarged until it could no longer bear the weight due to the size of his head, and more importantly, because the humidity increased leading to his death.
And this humidity is either added between the meninx and the bone, or it is added to the bone surface.
When the operation in that place where the moisture is between the ligament and the bone and the abscess is small, then cut in the middle of the location with a crack in the width, and let the length of the crack be about two finger-widths so that the moisture flows through, and this is the form of the spatium:
And therefore, if the moisture is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here are two cracks in this manner:
And if the moisture is located on the bone, the sign of this is that you will see the edges of the ligament wide open when you press it with your hand on the inside parts and it does not appear to be so under your fingers. Cut in the middle of the location with three cracks in this manner:
and then remove all the moisture by scraping; and strengthen the cracks with bandages and pillows; and on the fifth day, pour oil over it, and remove the dressing and cure the wound with lint and ointment, strengthening the ligament with equal parts; and let the patient eat dry food of little moisture until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And another way of making an incision, which consider as having regard to the size of the abscess and the collection of the water; for in some cases it is more at the occiput, or at the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess appears and the filling with water, and do so according to what seems best to you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let pus flow from the boil through that flow of blood, for this would cause the patient to suffer due to the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When an abscess or wound is found in the ears or on the foot, it is customary not to apply medical treatment to such cases. Instead, the proper procedure for this is to make an incision in those two arteries.
And therefore cover when you want to incise those that the malady root has its head, and then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and then strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and consider where to feel the vein; and the places of each over the places which are near the ears pressed, and they are hidden in almost all men.
And then touch over the artery with your hand, and then incise each with a sharp blade into the mouth, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the blade leaving the artery and transect it at the incisions on the parts above.
And let the length of the incision be about two digits wide, for when a vein is incised, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which spurts frequently through frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the ear the quantity of space three digits wide, and then touch with your hand, and do this into the mouth.
And what flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one pint, and more or less it flows out of the same, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and from the filling of the artery of his.
And then consider the wound, and thus if any cause of infection remains on the bone, then incise this to prevent an abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and place those inside as well until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute headache occurs due to excessive humidity in the air and the quality of the air near the temples, or if it is a strong old headache similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and since this does not relieve us, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that the surgeon raises the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your pulse, and is hidden in only a few men due to the strength of the cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then hold the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you apply the cord to that with ease until you reach the artery; and then grease it and extract that into the upper parts while extracting that from the cord and uncovering that of the tunics, which you leave there, from all parts.
More if the artery is fine, then wrap it at its extremity with a part of the intestine, and then incise a portion according to the quantity for which the extremities of the intestine are long and contracted, and there will not be a flux of blood, for if they are not incised, the blood will not rise up.
And then evacuate from the vein one. in three.
And if the artery is large, then you divide it into two points using a needle double strong for each or with long cords, and do not touch it before the consolidation of the wound and ensure a flow of blood.
And then incise the superfluity which is between two sutures; and do so at that time or shortly after another time.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery inside the bone and with a surgical cautery where the sutures are made, and it will take the place of that metal work.
And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of chills and fever; for a cautery is of those causes that help to resolve humidity, and therefore it is better in youth.
And then you should ligate the arteries that you place at the proper site, and they should be packed with dust decently made, and it will be cured by applying dry medicines which cause flesh to grow and with waters until it is healed.
And if while working another time you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you must constrict that blood, or with a cautery, or what you fill the place with cotton, and strengthen your hand so that the blood is restricted. And if any cause of this is not at your presence, then place your hand as you have said on the area until the blood congeals, and immerse the area in water of strong coldness until the acuity rests, and be strengthened according to what is suitable.
And that which is easier in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two areas with your fingers, and place warm coals over them until they reach the bone and incise the vein in two places, so that what is between the extremities of the vein, which are not consolidated by this cautery, may be elongated.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two knives be sufficient. But moreover, if it is a sharp acute pain that is like two knives, then it is better, for if such sharp pains approach each part quickly, and you do not cut the flesh with speed.
Therefore, when there is any swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this method is better in all works and more gentle.
And let the space be which is between two knives the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitulum quartum.
On the treatment of bodies affected by sharp and acidic tears from the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and the body is affected by those veins which are on the temple of the head, and you find no cause for the treatment in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were being crawled over by ants, and the eyes become weak, moistened, and their skin seems to be known, with the eyelids becoming scalded due to the sharpness of the tears, the ancients mixed remedies for these in this operation, and we number that treatment among them.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin which is on his forehead, and then incise the forehead with three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a small movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal glands, and the third from the other part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloth, place them over which to absorb the blood.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, the form of which is the incision for this. that is from the opening between the temples into the second incision. Excise all the tissue that is between two incisions along the suture line which is over the bone, and then do this for the midline incision into the second incision. And then incise this space and insert it into the first incision. Alternatively, use another instrument called a cutter, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
And place the blade of the sharp side to the adjacent flesh, cut the flesh, and the blade inside the bone. Then push it into the midline fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
More than that, continue the incision to where the tissue appears, and then do this in the midline fissure between the other fissure.
And when the bleeding has stopped in equal quantity, express the areas of the veins congested.
And then place your hand over any old gouty crack, and place it on those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
And on the seventh day after the ligature, administer a large infusion of horse chestnut water, and place on it an ointment of basilicum in olive oil and others until the sores are healed.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and phlegm descending from inside the head.
When there is an abundance of acute and continuous phlegm, and the gouty tears are diminished in quantity, and their appearance is weakened, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from this condition the skin is affected, and in the forehead there is severe pain and subsequent swelling, then you can deduce that these materials and phlegm do not come from the veins within the head.
And the best cure for these conditions is this: you command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small slit right in the middle of the forehead (starting from between the left temple and the right temple; and within the bone, extend your hand over the wrinkles of the temples which are prominently visible, ensuring thorough incision), while the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the wound with a small piece of lint or a cloth. Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you open it and see that the abscess has diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to dry, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a poultice and apply it to these lesions of new flesh.
Capitol. vi.
For the cure of what catches in the ears.
All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron and lead, or it is from plants such as cedar or fennel, or it is a fluxible cause such as water and oil and their similarities, or some beast.
And when the ear is pierced or another cause resembling those causes that do not settle or insert into the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the piercings, then it will distill in that certain cause of viola or sesame oil, and then administer the extraction of it, and make the sneezing according to condition, and plug the nostrils to prevent the onset of sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are frequently found due to these causes.
And if it is not pierced, then administer the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios, of which this is the form:
And if it is pierced by the gesti, that is good; otherwise, then administer the extraction of it with a fine, doubled hook.
And if it is not pierced by this, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and with oil softened so that it is not open except for the cannula. And then extract the thigh muscle with strong traction, for too many times as we have recounted.
But if it is not performed in this manner, then take some lampblack or previously prepared ink in which the fowls' wings are immersed a quantity, and place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap around that area decently. And then insert that into the ear tract with ease, and then dry the ear of moisture.
And so if it is not performed with all the causes which we have recounted, then you incise to excise that which is about to become an abscess or spasm.
And the way to incise it is that at the beginning you mark the spot of the evil from the phasic vein and extract the sanc according to the manner of its virtue, and then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear towards the parts above, and make a small fissure in the edge of the ear and press its grays into the well-prepared place. And let the fissure of lunar figure permeate to the heel, and, if the heel is blackened, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then apply velocity to the fissure in that hour, and cure it while it is healed.
And if the cause affects the ear, it is one of the greases that collect and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not respond to your therapy, then take thin subtle spasm according to this form: And administer the extraction of that grease which is caused in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and then extract it in those areas near the canals or with subtle touch, or by incision as we have said, for this alleviates the extraction.
But in the water which has entered into the ear cavity where the illness causes sneezing at the beginning, and fills the ear with some old wax, place a hot rag over that ear in which is the water. If by this it is expelled, well; but if not, then take small pieces of lead or iron according to the length of the finger, heat them in the fire for a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the tube of his ear and shake out a piece of that part over the ear with which the ear is filled and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out.
Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out. And when the water has been drawn out sufficiently, take either paper or wool, and place one end in the ear and extend the other end into the fire until the wool is burned.
And place another wool and do this several times until all the water has been drawn out, and squeeze it with a cannula as previously mentioned about the leech extractor.
In the extraction of blood in that ear, if it is a small wound, apply more and to its likeness, treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large wound which causes significant pain, then administer the bloodletting with speed and precision, and the cause of it is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
In the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations, and if your treatment does not show results, then examine the ear in the sunlight.
And if any cause of worms appears here, then extract that with tweezers or fine forceps. But if no cause appears, then take a cannula and stretch it open from above, as this is its form: I insert the subtle end of the cannula into the ear according to the amount that the patient can bear; and then I suction it with strong suction, performing this several times until all the worms are extracted.
But if it does not respond to your attempt, then you plug and seal the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, as this is its form: And make that of silver or copper, stretched out, in which there is a small tube, and a flat surface above.
And so that it may be forced into the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you want from these—those are in the auricle—and insert the wick carefully above, pressing it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the illness feels the oil inside.
And what is infused in the ear should be slightly heated over fire. And make sure that the medicine you distill in the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot withstand that.
Book VII.
On the treatment of ear abscesses.
Sometimes children are born with abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their parents' unperforated ears, and this happens occasionally in some people, with an abscess forming in the ear肉 here due to infection or no apparent cause; sometimes these abscesses occur in the cartilage of the ear before it fully develops, and sometimes they appear on the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the anterior part of it, which does not affect the surface, is in the major dispositions of difficult recovery.
And in that where you can see the surface, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and examine it. And if you see an apparent swelling, open that thin membrane under which this swelling is located:
If the extremity of which is narrow in width, and one part is sharp while the other is not; and the membrane is two fingerbreadths wide so as not to irritate the ear.
And if the opacity is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the肉中, then you should use thin scissors and cut through it with great delicacy so that all the flesh is completely removed.
And if the opacity is in the anterior part of the ear, then take a thin needle and heat that fire a little, and then place it in the flesh of the ear.
And so if you sense an accumulation of that which the patient experiences with ease due to the weight of excretion, relieve the oppression with ease; and be careful not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth in the ear according to the size of the wound which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you soak some and insert it into water, powder it thoroughly, and use it; and if you see the ear already swollen, then change the liquid and substitute another that you wrap in lint made from rubbed oil, until the swelling is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
But if a flow of blood occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which you tighten to restrict the flow of blood, which is called in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol. viii.
For the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Eyelids that sometimes become moist, and at other times dry.
Then take those flax or wool cloths, soak them in the foam of their juice, and place them over the areas after they have cooled.
But if there is pain with a hot flux of blood, then cauterize those areas with a thin cautery.
And the best cauterization is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their juice; and when they are cauterized with fire, those juices are burned and do not return.
Capitol. ix.
Care for inflammation that has affected the eyelids.
Spots appear in the eyelids of the eye, caused by some reason which is similar to inflammation in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called inflammation.
And this is an addition of thick humidity in the eyelid above and below.
And in their operation, you must consider whether the swelling is present in them at what appears from the eyelid and affects all parts; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a slit there for the width, and then examine that of all parts with ease as you evacuate it, and suspend that by an ocular and cut it off.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment of it restores and heals it.
And if the swelling is diminishing inside the eyelid, you should evacuate the inside surface, then evacuate the eyelid and suspend the swelling by an ocular, or one that you choose for incision, and press it from all parts. If the eyelid is elongated by incision, this is noted in no cause.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salty water; and cover the area with water that will remain until it is healed.
Capitol.
Of the cure for excision in the upper eyelid.
Excision is when foreign bodies are generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, especially in children, worsen their conditions and cause death through their catarrh; and they cannot look at the clarity of the sun because this leads to tears gathering around those areas.
And for this, you often see them weep on their faces all the time, and they sleep with tears on their faces; only over their cheeks do their eyebrows remain wet, which are already covered by inflammation, and the imminent need for excision is apparent in the wound; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you feel the excision within those areas.
And one method of operation is when the patient rests their head on your hand, then places a cloth around them and ties it securely, forming a circle according to the quantity containing parts of the excised tissue, placing it over that and pressing with your thumbs so that the excision is aggregated in the middle of the circle. Then, in the center of that moisture, let spasm-inducing substances enter through a crack, ensuring the crack is not larger than the incision made in a superficial puncture.
More in the preceding cavity where you make the cut completely until you reach the artery, for in the later stages the artery passes through a fissure according to the form of white grease.
Then extract those from the sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and divide them by holding in your right and left hand until they are thoroughly mixed.
And beware that you do not press at the fissure so that you do not block the pus and lift away that part.
More if it does not appear at your artery in the beginning of the fissure, more that you press a small piece of flax at the fissure until it processes; then extract those as we have said; then submerge sheets in water and wine and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
And then allow those that sprinkle salt and place them in the cavity of the fissure so that what remains from that moisture is removed.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess forms in that area, then cure it by applying flax poultices until it is healed.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When in the eyelids of the eye so narrowed due to tightened natural skin and become lax, then those signs are ways of diseases such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue before this is a cause of destruction of the eye, which is called tactinir of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as previously said in the Capitol on cautery; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or by canthiostomy according to what I will say.
And thus cover that you place the head of the eye in your left hand; then convert the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it converts, good is it; and if not, insert a needle into that part where the thread from the eyelid tightening lies, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises — near the skin, and pull the thread to the parts above the eyelid, then convert it.
And then place the skins tightly against the surface of the inner eyelid, positioned between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland; next extract the humors and place a powder of fine cotto or cloth dust on the eyelid, and then cover the eyelid with a flap, as illustrated by the figure of a mirt leaf.
But more importantly, ensure that the figure corresponds to the degree of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in women, and in those cases where a significant amount of fluid is causing the eyelid to become softened, you should incise the large eyelid accordingly.
And then make the incision on the surface along the lines you have marked, starting between the major lacrimal gland and the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as wide as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the angles of the wound, and completely excoriate it, and next suture the two edges with a thread or fine woolen string, and clean the wound, and adhere what surplus from the threads onto two small pieces of cloth for some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, you do not treat it.
And after that, leave the suture of the stitches between three and four days, and then heal this.
And if you wish, leave the wound open without suturing, and heal it by what dries and constricts, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the sealing of the wound and its addition; but suture is better. Therefore, so say the ancients of taxonomy.
But if it is stimulated on the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of taxonomy is to hold the eyelid in a shape like a leaf of myrtle, and then lift the eyelid by three inches, separating and gathering it according to this form:
But if this is not possible, hold the inches, and thus not unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties called threads to equality, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it was held as we have advised.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with stitches, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
If you make an incision or cut, tie the abscess with a thread and dress it to match, and apply ointment.
And sometimes under the eyelid, its own skin must be converted. Then use the incision method as described earlier; but stitch in a few places that are more artificial.
Use canes according to this form: And you must convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two canes or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width be half the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add some thin material over what superflues from the eyelid of each part, and tighten the canes of each part with strong tension, and leave it for a few days; as the knot due to the tension will die and become rejected, and it will come off when it falls by itself.
And if it is delayed, then cut the threads, and soon after treat the wound until it is healed.
And when it is reduced, the eyelid is raised and the skin is not punctured.
And this is the way to make two canes according to this form: and has the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol. xii.
For the elevation of painful skin pricked with an awl when the skin is tough.
When they are unnatural, hard, rough, and painful skins, the operation on them is that you take a thinawl and place it in the fine fiber of the skin, and soon after adjust the ends of the awl with nuts in a very subtle manner. And let the length of the fibers be about the width of a palm.
And then you compose another fine cloth briefly, place it there, and use its ends if you wish.
And then place the patient's head in a towel, and near the sun to ensure that your work is effective, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the opening in the tightly adjusted skin flap, which has been prepared with skill, and make it penetrate forcefully into the eyelid. As you do this, remove the natural skin from above.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, using one or two or three pieces of skin but not more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is moved outwards on the incision in the eyelid with the natural skin.
But if the incision is made with the cautery and the skin is not moved, pull the cautery to the edges leaving it on the fine cloth you have prepared there, so that when the skin is moved, the cautery will remain over the wound.
And with that, you will place the flask on the heel, for then you will apply heat and rub it all over the heel, and leave the closure for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a longer piece of natural hair, and elevate it at that spot, or you let it grow until it lengthens somewhat in that space, and then you elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
Of the cure for inflammation that occurs in the upper eyelid.
When there is inflammation in the heel, and it is a contraction of the eyelid that tightens at the upper or lower part, due to poor healing of a wound or a cut or a cautery, it is called leporine. This inflammation can be natural or accidental, caused by the consolidation of a wound or cuts or cauteries, or by conditions similar to them.
May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of him, and place in him at what is between those one thread of cloth, and bind those together until they are healed.
And ensure that you use the cure for those causes which dry up, constrain; for if you do this, it will return to worsen more than not having done it at all.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as with fenugreek, and soak the cloth in water in which it is steeped and its seed, or unguent of yarrow, which is liquidified by some oil, and submerge the thread in that, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with whatever does not become consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a correction of gout that does not return the form of the place according to what it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the treatment of hawksbill in the eyelid, do this.
This hawksbill that is caused in the eyelid is called an hawksbill by name; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More commonly, it is caused by a wound or a cut or a cautery or other similar injuries.
The procedure for the operation is that you take a needle on which you make double thread, and place that in the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts above the needle and stitch that with the needle, and incise with a wide blade. And so, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the thread and place it in the incised figure, and with that, convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures in the edge of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the corners of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and let a corner be made between them such that when they converge a figure is formed.
And this figure is Greek: the lambda.
And place the flesh there for the quantity that is the length of the sharp point left from it, what remains on the scab.
And adjust the separated parts and close them with threads of wool; and cure those with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until they are healed.
And if you incise further for a crack or suture or cautery, then make the incision a flat one on the skin of the eyelid as previously described. And separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the end of the discourse on the cure of incising when above or left behind, let it flow in the operation, as prepared in the form of the incision, and that is in the form of various spots.
And the wise craftsmen at all times prepare an engine in any manner which is possible for him to make return of the figure to the natural form, or near to that, and that malady according to what is convenient to him from the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Chapter XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in adult men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid from above on the tarsus, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the edge of a needle, let the eyelid in there, and elevate or extend it over the eyeball.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle probe, which should not be done with the sharpness of the incisions, having a small obtuse edge so that the malady is not disturbed by the operation. You should remove the probe without damaging the eyeball's acuity.
And let your incision be such that it facilitates the separation of the adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then place in it enough salted water to wash with; or distill it with zinc dissolved in the water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in albumen of goose, and for several days use consolidative remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the orbital fatty tissue.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, and it is similar to a hard thin cord; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided, and the piece does not remain in it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland which gradually covers the eye and prohibits light and movement thereof.
The manner of acting in the incision is that the patient places his head on the pillow, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then picks up the edge of the skin and extends it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a hair of horse or bull or ox, or one resembling such, or strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle and fix that in the middle of the skin, and penetrate that with the needle, and glue the skin with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape off the skin the fat of the skin which seeps from the eye, the pupil being affected. And then follow that under the skin to the back of it.
And then you make the incision in the duct of the lacrimal gland with a fine spatum or small forceps, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is placed in the sole of the foot stretched out or in pitch, as we have said, and then extracted with lion's tooth from which this is its form:
And take care that with the tooth you do not touch the corny tunic and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine to the wound, and leave it there for another day; and take care that what goes in is healed.
And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle in it, then use this kind of nail treated with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space of the patient and take a sharp lion's tooth according to this form: of great subtlety. And if you find that it has hardened and is embedded in the sore, then spit on it with a wound made from needle or hot coal or salted water, and apply the wetness to the other side.
And then repeat the operation on it until everything from it is removed, otherwise, if a carbuncle appears in the wound, then you leave that and cure the beginning of the carbuncle until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on it until it is healed.
The lacrimal gland, if noticed in the wound causing great discomfort, should be suspended with a pin; and incise part of it, but do not complete the incision so that the flow of tears is not obstructed.
And then apply wetness with hot coal or made from needle to it until it is healed.
Capitol XVII.
On the incision of the azhdarinicus and what arises from flesh pressed into the wound.
Sometimes in the corners of some eyes, a tender flesh grows, and is pressed over when covering the pupil, or approaches or strengthens on the eyelids and lightly clamps the eyelids at the edge near the window frame.
The operation for this is that the patient lies on his side on a table; and then open the corners of the eye and collect all that tender flesh with forceps or tongs; and then incise the flesh where it begins, as everything is finished with the scissors, and guard the corner so that you do not lose the one you should retain for your operation.
And your incision should be where you incise those, either with a spatula as we have described in the incision of the cataract, or with small pincettes with which you collect the flesh according to the form that will appear near this chapter.
Then, when your incision is completed and all that flesh is thoroughly removed, fill the wound with salt water, or sprinkle it with tender powder similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place a compress over the wound as you would with a honey pad until an abscess is assured.
And if there arises any cause for guardance and is infected with a sore caut, and fears an apostema caut, then let the whole and cure that apostema with what yields that apostema, and then repeatedly operate on that above which until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the healing of this kind.
Moreover, however, you must ensure that any healing from a female sore occurs naturally or accidentally, and use iron for it, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb is suffering from that operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge about female sores.
Knowledge is that veins are rough on the sore and you prohibit their operation, and these increase the sore over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the sore in which knowledge is sought is strong and contains only a single sore, then you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your prudence; and let that inch be of subtle double thickness according to this form:
or two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then gather those veins with fine threads, in subtlety, and wipe the wound hour by hour, while urging those veins to rise up and be rotated.
And beware that you do not let blood at the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the middle of the day before the sun, then remain firm in your operation so as to enter only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the wound green vitriol or rhubarb so that with its acidity it destroys what is raised from the surface.
But if this is not possible in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and let it be for a few days until the pain subsides and an abscess is assured.
And then repeatedly over it according to how the patient responds as it heals.
This is the form of the splints:
Capitol XIX.
For the reduction of dislocations to the nose.
When you treat dislocations of the nose with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of the case indicates it and it does not heal, then do not hesitate in it. Instead, cut over the abscess and wait for its maturity. Then remove all the moisture which is within it, and let the bone be uncovered.
And so, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackness in it, then treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named "hard head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, like holding the one which is made punctured by sawing or filed with fine points (as in the following form).
And place him over the corrupted part of the bone, then return that between the toes, and press your hand little by little making sure that you feel that corruption is superficial.
And do this several times, then restore the area caused by drying and constrictive factors.
So if the area is consolidated and there is good hidden flesh and the wound separates from the healthy tissue after 40 days, and does not become gangrenous and does not suffer an accident, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the deformity to the shape of the nose, and do it in this manner: first, uncover the bone with forceps or sharp medical instruments, once the bone is exposed, then proceed as follows:
Let the tip of the forceps be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed towards the tip like you can see.
And place it over the bone, which should be near the lacrimal bone; then extend your hand a little and return your hand with the forceps, ensuring that it penetrates the entire bone. The patient will feel the pain where there is a hole or air escaping due to the presence of the hand.
Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they should.
Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which it infused into the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel swells completely and there is no damage or diminution of the clothing, then you should loosen the foot, subsequently apply warm scarification and suck out the blood with good suction; then place liniment on the heel made of acacia, aloe, sesamum, and storax, and finally strengthen the plaster on the heel with motz (a mixture of powders).
And the method of the powders is that you take pieces of lion's fat, each piece folded into four parts; and use those pieces.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of what has the need. And then strengthen those with a hard bandage in firm wrapping; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and then leave the cups on for the day and night.
But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it quite straight.
And then keep the ligament for the day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the wrapping and the cups until it is healed.
Capitol.xxI.
Of the incision of the prominence of the uveal tunic.
When there is disruption in the uveal tunic, and then it protrudes outside the eyelids as much as a degree of wrinkle, and this forms the shape of a human figure. If you wish to incise this, then the operation on it is as we have recommended: you insert the needle into the wrinkle of the uveal tunic from one side to the other side above, and then place another needle, which is twice the size of the lacrimal duct, in the opposite part. Make the latter penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the area where the double thread passes and lift the part of the uveal tunic in a circle around the needle, and strengthen that area.
And then extract the needle and place yourself over the hole filled with wool infused in cow's milk, leaving the thread inside until it dries.
And then cure the hole with what comforts that which is within as the wound heals.
And in some cases, gather all parts of the torn tissue into a circular piece of cloth around the hole, then place an eminentia gran in it, and then perforate it with a fine needle that goes to the edge of the hole, allowing moisture to flow out, reducing swelling and healing the hole quickly.
And then strengthen it so that it may be healed.
Capitol.xxii.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called alconati is nothing but a sore that settles in the hole resembling water dripping down and is not the other.
The method of treating it is to place the patient on a prepared and straight bench, then take the patient's head in your hands at two parts and move that which you see the sore approaching the parts left, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and let the patient remain in this position until the sore shows signs of healing as you would observe.
And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent to the eye is not prepared as we have said, then make a切口在眼睑和眼球之间，然后取出积液，在此过程中尽量避免损伤角膜。
And since it is removed, then you drop water infused with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey into the eye.
And then treat other causes once it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the treatment of descending eye water.
We have already mentioned the species of eye water in the division and which ones require piercing by declaring so according to the patient's condition.
Then you must make a cut in the eye between your fingers on a cushion and hold its part well with a tight grip.
And then place your left hand near the corner of his eye, if the affected area is the left side, or with your right hand if the affected area is the right side.
And then with your right hand take the sponge, if the affected area is the left side; or with your left hand, if the affected area is the right side.
And then place the tip of the sponge near the corner of the eye for the width of the eyelid from the inner canthus, and then press the sponge with virtue and rotate your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the eyelid and feel that the sponge has already been moistened due to the moisture.
And ensure that the size of the sponge is appropriate when pressing, matching the width of the space between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, which is the corner of the eye; for you will see the pupil through this with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
And then place your hand in the spot where the water is, and then you draw it down one time or another, and so when the water descends quickly, then see the patient there below where his vision can reach quickly, and water remains in its fullness.
And then rest for a moment; so when the water has descended, then you draw it down another time before your hand is gotten back.
And when it is taken out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and move your hand little by little, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and with that wash the area inside; then place outside the area a small piece of wool soaked in olive oil and egg white and cover it with this the area.
More often, however, and those of our times cover it with olive oil.
And if your hand does not fit into the area due to its hardness — which is often the case with some people whose skin is very hard —, then take the spuma (foam) which is called albared, and this is its form:
And therefore puncture at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small way to a soft location beneath.
And then introduce the amgada as we have said.
And you should provide the patient with a comfortable bed, placed in a dark room where he can lie on his back, and all movements should be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the wound to let its nature heal, and do not pour too much water onto its right or left side.
And apply the bandage according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove the patient from that dark room and expose him to bright light, and make some incisions, and return the bandage on the seventh day.
And do not perform this during the hour of cure or shortly after infusion. Having a cavity that you allow this to pass through due to its great and strong urgency.
But if it happens that you make a boil incision, then having a cavity that you open before the seventh day, and correct that with which the boil yields.
When you finish the incision and place your hand over the face of the wound orally for which the bleeding is controlled, let the wound heal for a few days, remaining in the most shady place.
And gradually it is healed, and its causes are converted into their sources.
And know that in surgery it is not excused for the apprentice to have a few visions, and then you should be attentive to the operation.
And we have already been informed of some of those which are in Artach, and some say to make fire in Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is drawn.
But I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of madigaa because it be about those that ignore those:
And they are made of leather or iron properly, and their ends have this subtlety in the form of a triangle, the尖端同样也是这种形式。
Capitol. xxiv.
For the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose hidden flesh masses are concealed from which arises some cause that is associated with a scorpion of heavy weight or with a polyp of a place; this illness is called polypus, which is in resemblance to that place represented. And the flesh is cancerous, dark in color; and from it comes the flesh of a lion not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion flesh or non-cancerous flesh, make the wound severe between your fingers and place it in the sun, and blow into the nostrils, and prick the tumor in those flesh areas. And then extract it from the incised parts externally, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you perceive that all the flesh is cut; if any remains due to some cause for which the division is possible, then quickly use one of the fine instruments to facilitate its division for any reason. If the lord is inflamed or an abscess has formed, then place a probe where it fits; if it is a malignant abscess, then extract and cauterize it thoroughly so that the cavities are all exposed.
And then insert something in the nose near the incision either to breathe or to drain. If the nose is opened and you perceive moisture in the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
If the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is flesh rather than pus, and it will be bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
When you find that there is a lump in the place where there should be none, use your fingers to probe gently, and place the quantity of your finger or less between each probe, and explore carefully and insert an extremity of the cord into the nostril with a needle or for another reason which is possible for you.
And when this has been done, let it emit its odor into the nasal passages until it reaches them, and sit over his head, for often children at schools laugh at such actions, and it is a light cause for someone who wants to do it.
Then return the two extremities of the cord, one that touches above the nose and the other that reaches into the nostril. Next, apply a flesh clamp to the fingers that are in the cord, and do this before you can feel that the flesh is against the fingers of the cord.
Then extract the cord, and place a pledget of wool in the nostril near the edge of the wound, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corroded all that was damaged by the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
And if you desire a cure that is effective, use this one.
And this is the form of the instrument for making nasal distillation, where oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make it of silver or gold, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small cup, and the spout should be similar.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the spout of the instrument for making nasal distillation should be flat and open; to this, attach a handle at the rear end, with which you can hold it when you heat oil or water from the oils or causes that are extractable.
Capitol xxv.
From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Pimple-like spots appear on the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and they become larger and are covered in a few days as the pimple is examined.
And because of this, you should go to that in the beginning of the appearance of the pimple, and extract all of it. And place yourself over the area or apply a cautery or burning medicine where it was located.
But if the extraction is delayed until after it has become larger, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and has little sensation. In that case, do not touch it with iron, as it is an abscess; for pimple-like spots should be extracted from this abscess because of its great malignity towards the area where it was located.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and extraction is possible throughout it, then empty the poison and extract it without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
For the suturing of the nose and lips and the auricle when continuity is dissolved by wound or by resemblance.
Know that when there is dissolution of continuity in any of these cartilages, you should consult with a few experts rather than relying solely on your own operation.
Therefore, when it comes to any such cause of these, consider whether it is a fresh wound with its own secretion, and then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and proceed to treat it until it heals.
And if the edges of dissolution of continuity are already separated, and any one is made healthy, then you should excise each part of its hidden wound until it exudes secretion. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder and threefold incense over them, and place a piece of diaphonic plaster or some other consolidated plaster on top of the powder, and leave this mixture for two to three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the roots are absorbed, and proceed to treat with ointment until it heals.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the extraction of those causes that the vein enters in the two lips in the internal parts.
Spots turned into boils are found in the internal parts of their lips, where abscesses hard and resembling fat of pork appear, some being smaller and some larger.
Then carefully remove all parts of the hardnesses from the lips and corners, and after the extraction, fill the place with three layers of sponge so that the wound is constricted, and then wash it with vinegar and treat the area with water that is astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of the incision of the flesh fixed in the gums.
Great care should be taken over the gum tightly fitting the tooth, which the ancients called albulus. Then you must hold that thread with one hand or have another hold it while you incise with the other and let the healthy blood flow out or the disease.
Then place something warm on the area for three days or another cooling or excitatory powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth being firm.
When on the surface of the teeth both inside and outside parts, as well as between the gums, show sharp, hard edges, some are black and are caused by yellow or green substances that corrupt the gums. This causes the teeth to become loose.
And therefore you must cut open the patient between your thighs and place the head in a basin of water, rub the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear so that nothing from them breaks due to any cause, and do this with the blackness and the yellowness as well as other substances that have been altered.
So if what remains from the beginning of the reasoning is good, that is well; and otherwise, then you repeat the reasoning on those the next day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have required roots to be removed in various ways and of diverse figures according to how you prepare your operation. And so, some razors for removing the tooth from the inside are different from those razors used to remove between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you must prepare, which you will often see:
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the entire extraction, for no cause can substitute the need to extract it completely when it must be extracted, for a substance is sublimated during the process of its extraction.
When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must certainly be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and indicates a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon after the pain ceases as the sick and painful tooth is extracted, for we have seen this in the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth in which some virtue lies, until it dissolves from the tooth of the gum completely, then probe there with tweezers or fine forceps gradually so that those concussions cease.
And then fill it well with strong water for good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your fingers so that you hold it well without hurting them, and then extract the tooth straight according to the right manner so as not to break it, nor give the patient unnecessary pain.
And if it is not forced out, then take one of those instruments, and place it under the tooth from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal as is done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or corroded, then you should wrap that part with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a fine thread so that it does not get injured during your procedure on that area.
And you should incise precisely in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so that you do not break that torn part of it, and return to the illness due to its malignity which is greater than the first pain of it.
And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity regarding the eradication of such things; for they do not administer what we have advised. Which spots seen bring great illnesses to men, which are harder to injure than broken bones, and the causes of their remedies all, or some of those, or that you extract from certain bones of the mandible as spotted by us.
And after the extraction, wash the mouth with vinegar or sour wine mixed with salt.
And if bleeding occurs for this reason, just as with wounds that bleed, then take some wool and sprinkle it over the wound, and if this does not stop the blood, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and thin tongs used to extract a tooth should be long, short, and thick, so that they do not bend when those you need to work on.
And they should be as thick and short as you can make them without bending when tightened on those.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and long. At the ends of these, there are teeth that interlock and tighten by descending construction with great force. Sometimes the ends of these have the shape of a heron's bill, which is called a ciconia, and they are strongly constructed.
Capitol.xxxvi.
On the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken jawbones.
When you must remove a tooth that is cracked for some reason, then you must place a cloth over the area for one or two days until the place becomes softened; then insert gauze or bandages at the edges of which are attached the tips of a bird's beak called ciconia or forceps.
The edges of the tips should be made like a file orawl.
And if the edges of the tips do not obey your attempt with these forceps or bandages, then you must scrape the root and strip all the flesh, and insert the instrument which is called an atrial, a small lever of which the shape is like this:
And briefly, the extremity should be slightly large, and not cracked so that it does not break.
So if the root is slightly perforated, that is good; otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the shape of the first instrument is triangular-edged, in which there is some thickness:
The shape of the second instrument should be triangular and of fine extremity.
And already assist in this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form approximately as follows: and there are other instruments which will follow for the scraping of teeth; for this youth is made with this instrument, which resembles a large hook, and this is the form:
of the triangular twisted or curved extremity, which should be somewhat thick, and not too thin so that it does not break.
And another spoon for the tooth instruments is similar to other instruments.
But the skilled craftsmen find for themselves suitable instruments according to what the operation and various ailments signify; for there are ailments to which the ancients did not refer or provide specific instruments due to the diverse forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are broken, or if extracted, then apply a compress to that area in its place with what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which this is the form:
And let it be in him some small lump little by little, and let it be pressed or held at the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is thoroughly treated; then restore the place with suitable medicines for this.
And if there is a small abscess in the bone, rush that abscess and its blackness, and cure it while it is still healthy.
Capitol. xxxii.
Of the treatment of the prominent teeth above others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural form, especially when they protrude in women, and particularly in venerable old ladies; therefore consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to extract or line it, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise that one using this instrument, which resembles the head of a pig, and made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be where you cut that in too many days due to the hardness of the tooth, and may not be another of the teeth.
And if the tooth is prominently protruded and needs filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron, the form of which is as follows:
And let it be entirely of Indian iron; and let the margin be filed; and let it have small pointed teeth as on the file with which the tooth is gradually filed over many days for ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or loosened. And then line that at the end, and sharpen that with some razors.
And if the tooth is such that one part is broken and causes irritation to the tongue, then cut that part off where the sharp edge of that fragment is stopped and equalized, and let it be fully smoothed so that the tongue does not become irritated nor the speech impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
For the restoration of decayed teeth using gold or silver paste.
When accidents occur to the front teeth due to concussion or removal by striking or during hunting, and the patient cannot strengthen what is left, and after treating it with styptic medicines your treatment has not been effective, then for those that are strong use gold paste and not silver, because silver turns green and may spoil in a few days, but gold remains unchanged for any length of time.
And the paste should be in such fine particles and granules according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the method of application is as follows: take the paste and place twice its amount between two healthy teeth, then carefully shape it so that there are two tortuosities of the paste between two decayed teeth, or if one or several, until the fabric reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then insert the fabric into the part from which you started, and strengthen your hand with skill and wisdom so that it does not decay.
And let your tie be such that it holds firmly the roots of the teeth so that they do not escape.
And then divide the roots of the superfluous tooth with forceps or scissors, and add them to any place with your hand, and hide both in the healthy tooth and the decayed one, so as not to injure the tongue. And let it be thus tied like a Roman.
And if it is slipped or broken, hold it with another tooth in such a manner throughout its entirety.
And this is the way of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two decayed ones, as you see these tied:
And when you return one or two teeth to their socket in their proper locations, and they are grown back as we have described, and they are decayed.
And it is not done by mere artisans but by wise and skilled practitioners.
And sometimes it is fit for some cause of the bones of cattle, and is made of them thus like a tooth, and is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and is strenghtened as we have said, and remains and serves you for long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the incision of the ligament which we call and prohibit speech.
This ligament, which causes the tongue to hang down sometimes, is either natural, something one is born with, or accidental, occurring due to a wound that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, whose chief symptom is hoarseness; then elevate the patient's tongue, and subsequently incise that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be separated from its resting position.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you gently cut and incise that ligament along the width where you have already separated the tongue from its resting position.
And make sure that no fissure is made in the skin and that you split here the arch and let a flow of blood occur.
And then wash the incision margins with a mixture or with warm water; and place the tongue depressor over them; if it is necessary to keep the patient under, leave the tongue depressor in one of the nostrils to prevent the wound from becoming consolidated again.
But if a flow of blood occurs, place a glass tourniquet over the area; but if the blood stops, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery that is suitable for water. And then apply these treatments to other causes until the patient is healed.
Capitol.xxxv.
For the extraction of a ranula, leave the tongue depressor in place.
In some cases, complications may arise where the tongue becomes swollen like a small abscess, prohibiting the tongue from its natural operation; and greatly enlarges as it fills the mouth.
And the operation on them is to split open the space between the patient's thighs sixty degrees in front of the thighs and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of a brown color or black, hard, to which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that part which is diseased.
And if it is turned to white, in which there is moisture, then you apply the needle to it, and incise that area with a subtle blade, and incise all parts; and if you find blood during the time of your operation, then place above it three grains of vitriol, so that the blood is constricted.
And then return to your work until you have completed it, until it is washed with vinegar and salt; and care for that with the other cure once it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are located in the cheek, as well as other abscesses.
When the boil is godet (full or ripe), so are its glands which are gathered like cotton, which occur on the surface and are named two ears, which when you cure them as we said in the division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dusky color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is large, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will puncture it, or it will break by itself.
And if it is of white color, tender, and its root is fine, then that should be incised.
And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has fully matured and rested after cauterization, or if it has decreased with some reduction; then make an incision in the morning before the sun, place its head in your sight, and open its mouth. The servant holding between their hands the patient's tongue should take hold of the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, and as fine as a blade.
So when you press at that spot and the abscess is shown to you, and you quickly see over it, then take a pin and stick it there, and pull it outward as far as you can. Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull from the cause of the tunics, and then apply that to the area using an instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, but the ends of these are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the opposite direction, sharp points, which should be made of iron and embedded.
But if this instrument is not present, then incise there with a spatula of which this is the form: and it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And after you have incised one cut, incise the other according to this method of incision, and then wash the patient with water so that the illness heals.
If there is a flow of blood, guard with water from decoction of scorched mint or of holly leaf and similar to those causes stopping the flow of blood, and then cure that once it is healed.
Sometimes this occurs in the groin, or other boils, or those of both ears, and incise those according to what the surgeon dictates in the incision of both ears equally.
And I have already treated a woman with a boil that was located in her groin, which had turned a dark brown color, with little sensation, and had already closed the groin area. The woman was breathing directly, and had been forbidden to eat and drink any water, and she was nearing death if more water remained for one or two days.
And the boil had matured so much that it took more than two weeks to rupture through two incisions.
Then I cut it carefully and incised one of its edges, then pulled that part out, and removed the larger portion. Next, I incised the other side, and sutured its mouth shut, compressed its tongue, and placed the edge in the boil.
And then you cut a large part from it, and there was flowing from it only a little blood. Therefore, the gout of that woman had begun, and she soon started to drink water and eat preserved food. Therefore, I could not stop incising that abscess for a long time, and an abscess would form in its place, which continued to grow as long as that condition persisted.
Therefore, I treated the gout of her and applied a cautery to it, following the method; and then I walked around, not knowing what God had done to that nearby.
Capitol.xxxvii.
Of incising the abscess when it is swollen.
When the catarrh affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure effective, and you realize that the abscess has already been cauterized and is subtle, then you should incise the one that is added and round; if it is long, and is bloody, of a dark or black color, and is not more than a centimeter, then you must be careful with the incision, for there is fear of gout in that area.
And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, you make an incision in the malade and press its tongue with the tip of the instrument by which its shape is formed, then place the onion in the new opening, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are called in the cutting of two halves.
And know that you should not incise there but where it is attached to the natural term of addition, for if you incise beyond it, you will ruin its speech.
And near the incision, use what we have recommended in the cutting of two halves, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the malade was frightened by the incision, know that you should use an anesthetic in the cautery to relieve his fear, and the way of the cautery is merely with sharp water. For you should place the head of the malade in your hand, and then press its tongue with the instrument we have mentioned. And then take the water which we said in the chapter on cautery, and apply it live to that cause, and pause the application not thick nor subtle, but use it to fill the cavity of the instrument whose form this is.
Let the lower part of the cavity where the medicine is placed be as wide as the width of a ray fish, and place the instrument with the medicine on the vulva, and the patient's hand on his own leg to prevent saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person entering the internal medicine, so that it does not deteriorate due to any such cause in the wound and heals that.
Place your hand with the medicine, and express it over the uvula for about half an hour until you see that it has darkened and been saturated by the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then submerge the cloth in the medicine. Insert the ray with the cloth into a tube from above, so that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this several times until you achieve what you want for the cautery treatment of the uvula. Then let it dry and fall off in about three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, apply it, and after the cautery, clean around the uvula with a cloth soaked in vinegar, and modify what is in the circuit of the uvula due to the medicine, and wash it with water, and treat externally with ointment, and internally with powders until it heals.
And this method of treatment is safer than incision and shorter in duration.
Some cases of uvula are cured by what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origanum, rue, scordium arabicum, camomile, powder the roots of these herbs, and adjust all those causes or some of them into one vessel, and let them be submerged in water enriched; and the liquid be well stirred, and in the middle of the liquid place a tube, over which an applicator made of wool according to this manner; it should be made of silver or wool.
And insert the extremity in the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the quula, until the uvula is well moistened.
And then repeatedly over those dry spots until they are well moistened, and guard that you do not perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of apoplexy, for it would overly constrict the apoplexy. You should not do this, but instead declare the condition as an apoplexy with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place a hazel nutcracker at the end of it, so that the opening of the patient's anus is dilated, because the nutcracker prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhering in the wound or from a foreign object or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious and visible from the wound or thorn. Place your hand on the tongue with an instrument in the sunlight, so that you can determine what is in the throat.
And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled by vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or razit leaf or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of sponge well saturated with honey, tie it firmly and make the patient swallow it, so that it reaches the location where the thorns are and are extracted, thereby being expelled. And take an eel and bind it with honey, placing it inside the body and secretly extract it; or take a pepper and secretly place it inside and remove it secretly.
And if none of these causes apply to the cases we have mentioned, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a small grain, and at the end of it, have a cavity that you insert into his throat with ease.
And let him raise his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body, or that it scrape the bone or the spine, or that the doctor places his hand there.
And instead, if the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and scrapes downwards, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, all this according to the quantity which is prepared for him before it is forgotten.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
When treated with gouty blood as we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not find relief, consider at the gout of the patient in the sun, for you may have misunderstood the language of the patient using the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or with fine threads properly.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a heated iron in the concavity of the cannula, performing this as many times as necessary (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and make the patient abstain from all liquids for the entire day.
And then take a cloth full of water, open its mouth over that area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any of it for any reason, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, as soon as the gouty blood senses the water it will begin to come out.
If not previously fumigated with the wormwood or with asafetida over the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula, then do so.
Do this, so that it may fall.
And another way of operating in fumigation is that you take a bowl in which are burning coals and the bowl is covered with a cloth in the middle of which is a hole, and you place the end of the instrument at the hole; and then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and seal its opening so that the subfumigation does not get extinguished until you see that the fumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if not cured, then repeat the subfumigation several times, and refrain the patient from drinking, eating salty foods and such, and do not let them have water. Thus it is necessary that this regimen be followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which gouty hemorrhoids are treated when visible; and it resembles forceps as you see, but there is some curvature in it. And it is placed over the gouty area, and the extremity of it resembles the beak of a stork, which is curved, and is filed with a file, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on boils and their treatment is presented.
Boils are special lumps, of various types, according to the memory of them, of each one in this treatise.
And they vary in their perforation and treatment through two methods. Of these, one is specific to the type of boils themselves; and it concerns what is grasped from the humors.
And the second method is specific to the locations where bodily accidents occur, for a boil that occurs on the head is different from one that occurs in the anus; and a boil that arises in a fleshly location is different from one that arises at a joint; and for each of them, their judgment is made through an operation.
And more of abscesses some of which cover that they not be perforated but near maturation of the health in those or complement of their.
So other abscesses some of which cover that they be lanced when crossed, and are not matured according to their complement, thus as abscesses that are near joints, for an abscess when near a joint, the nature of it is prolonged into where·s poyreys you that is in the circuit of it, and strongly let the veins or nerves of that joint be corrupted, for it may cause contraction of that member; or it is near the main limb, and if you delay the perforation of it until its maturity affects the main limb; or it is near the anus, therefore lance that which is not matured; and should not lance it crude, from lack of digestion, but one that is near the anus, so that it does not procure a prolapse of it and be elongated to the inner parts of the anus, and a fistula may be made, or that it be done in the term of it that is not healed. And you should know the time for lancing the abscess, and this is when it is matured.
And know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and the decrease of swelling and pulse, and the subsidence of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And know that when you can feel the perforation cage in the place just below the abscess and of pus coming from the cure of the prominence.
And the perforation should be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the thigh or feet, and at the location of the lacertae, of the nerve cords, of the arteries; and, accordingly, in all similar places where there is no reflection. For in those that are reflective, use perforation according to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshly location, it is better to delay the perforation until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous saying; for if you perforate before that, it will prolong the course of the putrefaction and harden the walls of the abscess and increase its depth.
More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as the need demands, or according to that from which the limb suffers.
And ensure that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a large and broad or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the cord is returned to its cavity and tied, when this is done, do so while it is still warm, just as you would do with cords from piles and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which an incision is made as the figure of a mulberry leaf, as with abscesses of boils.
And of these, there are those in which a circular section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
More so for those where nothing is done in this manner, as with superficial abscesses, you should puncture them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should puncture it so that all the foul matter is not extracted at once; having extracted part of it, then on another day fill the abscess with more, and continue extracting larger parts in successive days until it is thoroughly drained.
And especially if the patient is of virile virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit resolved with the exit of the healthy pus weakens the malady, and you must open it.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture the abscess in which you are going to make your incision, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or a flat section, in which case you should apply some locally effective remedies; if the abscess is large, and the openings from the puncture are large, then you must place your hand between each one until they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have divided part of the strand or concaved it in the circuit, then you must complete it with fine linen or a thread made of linen cloth, just as when you have drawn out bandages or roots, to maintain their moisture; strengthen it on the seventh day; and proceed with it and cure it as what is appropriate from the ointments until it is healed.
But if you happen to experience bleeding during the time of your operation, then administer water infused with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the bleeding several times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure with powders which I have recommended in several places of this our livre and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near many nerves, then you must infuse powders with wine and oil, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders infused with water or oil or with wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you must drain the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to its cure what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary regarding the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction, I have already said everything about the abscess in how the cure of it should be done by chapters singly.
Chapter XL.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and these contain nodes which are formed within them; the nodes have spots.
And these nodes are hard, and those that contain humidity resembling lime. And those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and those that are hard, like stones.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, as you should not have any aversion to the extraction of these.
And the operation for the section of these is that you express them using an instrument in the form of which see below, which is called an entremes until you know it contains pus.
If what is contained is humidity, then section it along its length by superficial section in this manner:
And commence in the section of the line of B between the line of G. As the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause of it all, for too many times it returns if there remains any cause of it.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment if present, otherwise in water and salt; then fill that with the mixture and leave it for another day, for with this you will dissolve all that is left of that skin.
And then repeatedly apply to that area with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodules, then you incise it according to this form: In the section having the form of a cross, and make an incision between two sides of the section, and drain it completely, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do what I recounted to you first.
And similarly treat the abscess lanced and for its section and cure as we have said; the section of an abscess lanced is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes some of these abscesses located on the head in some people who have little humidity overall; the cause is that I cannot describe for an abscess on a woman's head and make the abscess like a deaf, rough, white pear, which could not be cut, and if any were struck by it, it would heal.
But in other head abscesses, this is not covered in this chapter; as with abscesses that occur on the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions, but the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
And place the lancing of those in the lower part for the sake that it benefits the body by allowing the disease to reach the lower parts.
And then attend to those matters that pertain to the cure.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Black spots often cause these abscesses in the neck, in the armpits, and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated among them, and all scrofula of these is within its own membrane. Just as with nodes and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are mottled, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to cure.
Then in that one where you find good disposition in the Touchement, where the color that is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not painful, cut that part with a superficial dry incision from above the body line of G. to the body line of B., and scrape it completely away, and extend the edges of the skin flap outward by one finger or several small fingers if you need them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is greater caution that the vein or nerve not be cut.
And let the incision not be too deep, so that you do not cut into your own hand during the operation, or to ease the patient's pain, and make cuts only where necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop the operation, then apply a glass of treacle or other powders which are fluxes of salt, strengthen the wound, and leave that in which is relieved the acute state of the abscess and makes the wound softer and begins to suppurate. When the blood is cut off.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then inquire if there is any other cause for the small scrofulous swellings, and if so, cut those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein in the vicinity of the scrofulous swelling, avoid cutting that part of the scrofulous swelling. Before you fold that cloth strongly in half and let it fall so that it covers by itself.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then cover it.
And if you insert the scrofula completely, then you must adjust the two lips of the wound and press so that there is no remaining superfluous fluid.
But if you see that there is remaining excess fluid due to the size of the scrofula, then you must understand to insert the sharp blade, extract it, and administer sutures as said.
And for those scrofulas containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation of that scrofula. Then stop the perforation with a dry application below the surface of the body, as we have said.
And then make the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it腐蚀了剩余的坏死物质。 And when you see that the wound is already clean, then apply the cream of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the abscess in cases where there is a complication in the groin.
The ancients described this section in the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with hernias, a cavity should be avoided during the extraction of the epilhot, for if not done properly, all the veins and major ones in the groin will suffer.
More in those who have abscesses cauterized in the mouth or groin or ears, when the illness is not in the throat, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the damage caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, cut the epilhistium and leave three or four small circles in the space between two circles in terms of quantity, so that the section is circumferential, not in the cartilage, and this place is suitable for sectioning, as it is devoid of flesh and its vessels are lacking.
And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the hook's chain to open it wide, and then cut the chain before it reaches the channel, but more avoid the vessels of blood if you see any cause.
And then incise the cicatrix as we have directed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that heat and by the disruption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is delayed in which the perforation is feared, add two flaps of the wound's chain, and suture that alone to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is lacking.
And Alcucis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you can see some of those abscesses have already ruptured the patient's throat, and the patient has come into death, and its life force has been cut off. Some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the place of the wound through some breath, and thus be saved from death.
And for this, I command to keep the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity of the disease lasts for three days; and then, when it is so, I command thus the wound, and cure that where it is healed.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in her throat, incising one part of the lobe of the lung, and I was called to treat this case. I gathered the mistletoe as it grows from the dead, uncovered the wound, and let the blood which was oozing from the wound out.
Then I have to confess that there was no rupture of vein or artery, and the wind from the wound, and cured her where it was injured.
And she did not suffer any accident or even hoarseness, and soon recovered from her discomfort.
And now I say that in the case of the inguinal region, there is no fear.
Capitol XLIV.
On the section about an abscess that occurs on the thigh outside, and is called a thigh hernia.
This abscess, named thigh hernia, is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it often occurs in women.
And it can occur in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural case, it is not easy to cure.
And the accidental case occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an abscess formed by the obstruction of an artery, and in this case, there is fear. And do not assume that this applies to him as much as to the small one. And thou probe that one and investigate that one as he is told, and if thou findest a semblance to nodules of fat, and it is not suspended in any of the veins, then thou incisest that thus like the nodules, and extract that from within the skin and bursicle; and if not, then thoroughly examine his whole being, and place care on the area as what is suitable for healing until it be healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the sections of the species of nodules.
Of the nodules, there are various species, and I have already described all the species of these in the division.
And note that I recount thus the difference between a nodule and an ulcer so as to avoid doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an ulcer there is quality, fever, and violent pains until the boiling of the excess subsides; and when complete putrefaction occurs, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat or fever or pain, and concerning that lion's skin which is on the back pack.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a blotch and is made thus, either larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of nodes, express that and inquire about that from the beginning by examining the swelling which is called intromes, according to its form which will be in the capital which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this swelling and insert it into the place most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little with it until you know that the swelling has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand according to the measure of the size of the abscess, and extract the intromis and consider what is situated in the residue.
And if the running moisture of any color is neglected, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in other carbuncles.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form: As I have taught you, suspend it with threads, and carefully remove the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack above it, if possible, and extract the healthy part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and many clots will remain. Then you should remove them in pieces so that none of them gets infected for any reason.
But if it gets infected for any reason, either partially or completely, the node should return as best as possible.
And if you see that any part of it is infected, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, strengthen the powder, place it over the area where the carbuncle resides, and cure the rest with the other treatment until it is healed.
And if it is not great, then you close its two lips and cure that which is enclosed.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then you incise and fill the area with a cloth soaked in vinegar and let it dry for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cut what is ruptured from the node.
Chapter 46.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, these are the forms of the instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large instrument is this:
The form of the small instrument is this:
They should be made of iron, of copper, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument speeds in the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albed, and one of them is called berid.
And these are made from three spices, of which one is major, the other two are minor.
The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
The form of the experienced one, half, is as follows:
The form of the experienced one, little, is as follows:
It is advisable that they be used for those abscesses, ulcers, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are located near the bones or due to other causes.
And they should be round, large, like big needles to which the threads are attached, and they are made of iron, or steel, or silver. The best are those made of steel citron.
And they make experiences with black feather, which are said to be effective when the fistulas in their cavity are opened and the reflections are reflected back due to their lightness.
And so of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the width of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the experience with great lead:
Form of the medium-sized lead experience:
Form of the small lead experience:
The forms of the feathers are of three species. Some of them are simple long ones, which have only a curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium-sized.
And they have feather bodies, which are of three species.
And those feathers having two curves, are of three species.
And from them they have three curves, and are of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Shape of a single small one, its shape:
Form of a large single one having two curves: Form of a medium-sized single one having two curves: Form of a small single one having two curves:
Form of a large single one having three curves:
Form of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the knives which are sharp and clean of knots and abscesses, and there are three species, one of which is large, woman-like, and small.
Form of the large knife:
Form of the woman-like knife:
Form of the small knife:
The ends of those which are cut sharp are acute, and the other ends are not acute, and they are not used in this manner, but so that it may be done judiciously in the cutting out of knots, to avoid injury to vein or nerve, and for these purposes it is healed and a small degree of comfort is found from the heating which causes the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of the lancets, and there are three species: large, woman-like, and small, as you will see.
If they are formed of heat and have the appearance of a red spot on which alcohol is applied.
And if in the outer side it is pierced with a probe hidden and there flows to the inner parts both inside and outside, when you want, as you see.
The forms of pustules, which are hidden between the fingers and do not cause pain, are of three species: great, female, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of hemorrhoids, in which the flow of blood is stopped, are of three species: great, female, and small; the forms of it:
If they are formed of citrus heat, round of some length, and very fine.
And these should be these suction cups either large, medium, or few, so that through those divided flux of blood is accelerated in necessity, and when you first applied it, it is not medicine.
But do not use those to reduce blood in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the tendons of the knees and thighs, and on the tendons of the arms, and on the breasts, and the abdomen, and the armpits, and similar fleshly tendons.
And sometimes small ones are made with those instruments, resembling curved sickles according to this form; through which blood is reduced when performed by venesection, or by incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are gathered from women.
Some times the breasts of certain men swell as they begin to become flabby, and at these times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, like Roman apstles.
And for those who have this, cut out the affected lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, and then excise all the growth, and fill the wound with red medicine, and sew the two edges of the wound together, and cure him until he is healed.
Moreover, if the breast droops to the sides and is softened by its size, like in women, then divide it into two layers so that each part is contained within the other. According to this form, let the major line contain the minor line from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the cord which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the fatty tissue, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders as necessary during the cure until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the patient's restlessness and flow of blood, then you must fill the wound with cloth submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it eats away at the roots of the grease, and then cure what is left there until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the incision of boils where pus leaves it.
These boils where pus leaves them are of the kinds of scrofula, tumors, which contain a core that is removed.
And of those that contain moisture, they must be incised on the lunar phase according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is within the boil is evacuated, then complete it with dry material and leave the inside for another day.
And then let the dry material remain and be treated with appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon in this way as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the ulcer is extended in such a way that it causes putrefaction, then apply to it a cautery as we have already said.
Capitol. xliv.
Section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or a vein.
When an arrow breaks a vein and the chain (likely referring to a tendon or ligament) is consolidated over it, spots with dark shadows often occur as abscesses. The signs by which one can recognize that inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or vein: when an abscess occurs from an arrow, it is long and extends along the surface of the body; and when you press the abscess with your finger, you feel a stridor (a grating or friction) within it.
And that which is from the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
And the exudation over this abscess is error, and especially in those that are left under the armpits, in the inguinal regions, in the neck, and in other random parts of the body; and if it is large, then consider that its cure must be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or at the head should be avoided.
More about that which is due to them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, cut the longitudinal section in the chain; then narrow the section with clips and approach the artery, and剥离动脉周围的组织直至显露。
Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other side, and strengthen the artery with double stitches in two places — which you should show me in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temple area.
Then burn the area between two sutures with a cauterizing tool as it bleeds out, and dissolve the abscess.
Then administer treatment in which powder is applied before the sutures are placed; and cure it with suitable ointments as it heals.
And if it is an abscess due to the drying of a vein, then you should grasp with your hand that which you can reach of the abscess at its root, and then introduce the needle where you have held the abscess with your hand, and make it penetrate; and take out from there on one side what is on the other side, and tie the abscess tightly with good lint as I said in the grapevine fiber chapter about tying at both ends of the thread.
And if you fear that you will take out the thread, then introduce the wax into the needle and remove all the abscess by making the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your ties in four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location such that when it is sitting on this, you make the incision of the root, and leave what is wet.
And then place the powder which you have soaked in vinegar and oil on it, and proceed to apply the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Capitalize the area where the abscess occurs due to nerve compression.
Similarly, an abscess can occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess can occur in nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
And it is most often found in the areas of the ribs or the spine, or in any place where the joints are loose.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body. It is located in the largest parts of his body system, and when stretched by inflammation, pain is felt in it resembling a state of stupor.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the anterior part of the body, and therefore you loosen the bandage, and he is loose in all parts and does not go to the front or back parts.
Therefore, that which is in the joints does not need to be filled with iron, for strong ligaments can withstand contraction.
May those in the head or on the forehead be made with spatula. May it be that if the apтемema is small, you incise it with forceps and cut out the pus.
And if it is large, you suspend it with forceps, and scrape out that part, and stitch it up; and cure that until it heals.
Capitulum.
Of the section on apтемema that occurs in the cheek which affects the abdomen.
Some men have had warts appear in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These are called funguals due to their similarity to fungi; the pus from them is thin, and the head of the wart is large; and the lips around them are soft, coming from those that are small, and from those that are a magnified lump.
And I have seen one case where in the abdomen there were two lumps that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, with thin pus.
And already those lips were turned inward and split, and moisture flowed from there continuously.
Then I incised those and punctured in the one foot at eighteen inches. The other at six inches.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the gout is humid, and the color of the flesh is white, humid, of fine particles; then you incise with a spatum lat, and let it be in your presence cauterized in the fire, so that the section of it should be expelled without infection; and if you meet the infection, cauterize that.
And if you find the gout painful and fearful, avoid incision with a knife; rather, when you take lead powder recently made, strengthen that flesh, the method of which is as we have said; leave it for two days.
Then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, continue to strengthen the lead greatly throughout the flesh, between which it should be incised and fall by itself due to its work.
If the swelling is from a large tumor, in its incision there is some cause for fear and alarm, especially in that which is in the belly.
Perhaps you can incise the tumor, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then cure what is within to heal the wound.
And beware that you do not attempt to incise tissue which is of a dark color, with little sensation, and appears suspicious, for such tissue is likely cancerous.
And I will now recall the treatment for this disease further on.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of an umbilical hernia.
An umbilical hernia is caused by various factors; it can be due to cracks in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and protrudes through the abdominal wall according to where other ruptures occur; or due to a tumor that flows from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to constricted fatty tissue.
If it is due to a tear in the sac and leakage of the membrane, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is like that of a lion, and often appears in various positions. If it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with more varied severity. And when you press on that area with your thumb, the swelling diminishes and quickly returns; it is light in that area, and a strong motive for treatment should involve bathing and vigorous work.
If it is due to humidity, then the pain is like that of a lion and does not diminish when you press on it with your hand; it is neither constricted nor relieved.
And if it is due to a wound, then in this case the abscess appears blackish in color.
If it is due to no flesh at all, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and is located according to a certain quantity.
If it is due to excessiveness, then the touch of it is like that of a lion.
And the operation in such cases is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to an artery, or a vein, or from phlegm; then you must refrain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to lie on their side; and then gently feel around the entire circumference of the navel, and command them to lie facing between your legs on their back; and then surround the area you felt with a strong paste or a cord in the same manner of binding decently; and finally apply a firm ligature or a soft one in the circuit.
And then extend the majority of the abscess over the bandage and insert your finger in that indentation to feel for the intestine; if you have already grasped it and kept it with the bandage, then you extract it quickly and push the intestine into the inner parts of the abdomen.
And if you have found the membrane, then take it with forceps; and incise its superfluous parts.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and soon return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads and insert two needles into the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and soon strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and let the area where the extended flesh can ooze and fall by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be allowed to drain, and soon cure that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is filled with flesh or due to humidity, then drain the abscess from your cavity as we have said and remove the pus or humidity you find in it, and soon cure that with ointments until it consolidates.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of cough.
We have already said, in the division, of types of cough and in what manner treatment is approached with medicines, and that the cure should be conducted so as not to become ulcerated; and we have said about a cough generated by the method and care of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some types of cough can be cured in the location where its eradication is possible, such as with the one in the chest or in the groin and their equivalents in other body parts, by extracting all of it, especially when it begins small.
More often than not, when it is old and hard, one cannot determine its properties, for I have neither been able to cure such cases nor have I seen any other, nor can it be cured by this method.
And the operation for it is as follows: when it has spread, as we have said, you should first isolate the patient and purge them of black bile for several days, then extract it, if it is found to be clearly filled with blood.
And then prepare the patient for the operation, placing it in a position suitable for the procedure; and raise the curtains to which they are attached; and carefully depress all parts with the forceps so that none of the reasons for the operation are damaged. Let the blood flow, and do not stop it too soon, and squeeze the areas, and wipe away the thick blood with your hand or an instrument at your disposal.
But if you encounter thick blood in the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it once the flow of blood has stopped, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy from water, and the signs of each species, and the cure for it using medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the species of altithermal dropsy alone, and it is not approximated with iron to the species of tympanic dropsy or the species of hypoarchic dropsy, for this is fatal.
And when you have medicated this kind of diphtheritic ear disease with medicines and do not find your treatment effective, consider whether if the patient has already achieved sufficient debility, or another illness such as edema, similar to those in their lungs or abdominal organs, then guard yourself against further medication, for fear of harm.
And if you see the patient has excessive vital force, and in him there is no other illness but edema only, neither child nor old, then the way of the operation for him is that you lift the patient between your arms, and apply your hand to his abdomen, squeezing out the water from him with your hand, push the water to the lower part of the body, and then take a spinal tap according to this form.
It should consist of two sharp parts long, with sharp ends like a spinal needle; however, it should be somewhat short, so that in the operation you do not enter the intestine, and you stop there.
And consider in this case if the generation of edema is from the intestines, for then you must place the section away from the navel by the width of three fingers to the lower parts, along its side above the pelvis.
If the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver, when your section is on the left side of the navel for three fingers.
If the generation is due to the spleen, when your section is on the right side of the navel for three fingers.
And ensure that your section is not over the side where the illness wants to affect so that the superfluities do not flow to that area.
Then pierce the instrument completely through the wound, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand with the spout between the wound and the syphon, and you extract it; if the quantity is about an ounce or so.
Then pierce the syphon so that the spout reaches the desired location, which is where the water (liquid) is. Then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or copper or tin, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and along its sides are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised in the manner of a pen, as you can see:
And at the extremity of the limb an overcoat, for when the instrument reaches the water, then they quickly say upon the instrument, therefore evacuate from the water in the half hour a quantity, for if you evacuate from there more than can fit in the hour, great harm comes to the patient through resolution of his animal spirit, or accidents approach him that are close to death.
Evacuate from there according to the quantity of the virtue of the limb and according to your assessment of the patient's disposition due to the virtue of his pulse and the goodness of his condition.
And then withdraw the instrument, and retain the water which causes this, for it is quickly retained by the cord which you hold above the clavicle, and you are advised that you should perforate there according to this manner.
And then repeat the instrument on the other day if you see the patient tolerating this, and withdraw a small quantity of water, and do this for several days with caution, and be careful not to become wet from the water except slightly.
But if you fear for the patient, and let a great quantity of water remain, then cure that with burial in sandy ground, and washing in bathwater, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what came before.
Capitolium.
For the treatment of children whose urine outlets are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are born with the abdomen of their mother not perforated, or the opening is not in its proper place.
Then immediately after birth, make a small perforation and gently blow in a fine mist according to this method:
Then place a fine lead probe in the opening and sew it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when they wish to urinate they strain and do so; then return that.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not let this close.
May the one from which you remove it be straightened and treated with a lead clamp, as we have said, for many days until it is widened.
May those in which you remove it not be in their place, as said, the cause is due to those where the trauma is at the tip of the penis, for which it cannot urinate inside; while elevating the penis with its hand above the parts upward. This is not a generation issue, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to the correct path, and this is a long-lasting malady.
And the method of the operation on him is that the patient be placed on his side, and then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the tip of the tip of the penis at the circumcision site with a sharp blade, as if it were a feather cut, or any part you think appropriate, so that the wound heals resembling the head of the penis and the removal heals in the middle of the wound.
And guard yourself in your operation for the flow of sand; whenever you notice accidents occurring there; then pause at that which cuts the sand, and treat the wound before it becomes infected.
Capitol LXVI.
Of the white substance which occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, with corruption, blackness, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
White spots occur on the penis and form a raised flesh lesion.
And of these, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, first suspend it with a fine thread and cut that part while cleaning it thoroughly; then place it over that with Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with diafinicon until it is healed.
And if the white substance is malignant, of a changeable color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
If there is a wound on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the wound is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should treat the part that is inside at the beginning where it has consolidated; and then treat the part that is outside. When you treat the latter, it cannot be assured that the former will not become infected.
And we treat accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin, such as blackening and corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and that which is about to腐化或已经腐败；然后在那个区域敷上一层蜂蜜，该蜂蜜是由陈葛兰粉、细研的三种粉末和筛过的制成。
And then treat the other injury as it heals.
But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery in this manner:
but the lunar cautery is in two positions together, used for a flow of blood and on the wound when it has腐化。
And if the head of the tumor is corroded and destroyed entirely in an hour, then you should introduce a lead cannula into the meat of the prepuce so that the disease urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce, there is the head of the tumor (and this adhesion occurs only in that part from which the prepuce detaches, and no circumcision is required over it; and when adhesion occurs due to inflammation or abscess) you should excoriate with a blunt instrument until the adhesive is dissolved and the head of the tumor is delivered completely.
And if it is difficult to excoriate those thoroughly, then you should excoriate with a blunt instrument some cause of the head of the tumor and the prepuce, and this is why the prepuce, when thin and light, is perforated slightly by its subtlety.
Then separate between the prepuce and the head of the tumor with a sharp instrument, which has already been moistened in the abrasive liquid to prevent re-adhesion.
And then it should be treated with astringents after it has consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuitas in the same way as other plagues: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in the children, it is necessary that we assign to that the better operation and the more gentle way, losing nothing for health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not perform circumcision on any of the free men, for they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of craftsmen and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a blade and with torches; and they use linen with honey and incision with oil.
And I have already examined all these methods and found that the best purification is with forceps, with linen and honey rather than in purification with oil. For you will easily remove the string above, for the string of the prepuce has two tunics, and fastens at the top, so it is necessary to make another incision and suffer certain pain. And a circumcision which is performed by circumcisers, and is digital, of which they use the fingers, is not secured at the extremity of the male member, for it often enters into the wound.
In the operation, be cautious, firmly use iron and corrupt your operation. And the foreskin of the child is short by nature, and often in this manner does not require circumcision, and I have seen it.
More on the circumcision that is done with scissors and threads of bowel, its goodness, I have experienced personally, for the scissors are of proportional incision, for which their sharpness above is thus like the sharpness below; and therefore as you press your hand proportionally on two sharps, and cut according to a comparison in one time; and it is made compression of the bowel in a figure containing the foreskin from all sides, upon which no error can arise.
And the manner of the first operation is that you keep the child mostly if he is one who understands a little, and do not do anything but tie the bowel around his penis only, and leave it for another day.
And then do everything possible to comfort that part where their intelligence is received. And then place the infant in your arms preparedly, so that it is not too tightly wrapped; and hide the scissors in your hand or let the child's head rest there, so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
And then place your hand in the genital area and blow into the vagina, and pull that out so that it straightens the head of the penis, and then modify that which is attached to it for deafness.
The shape of the pincers after modification, this is the shape:
If the fingers are uncut and the others are cut, let the stem of the key sit in them, and let the length of the two claws be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, in modification, if you remove the intrinsic chain entirely or partly, you must incise.
Therefore, make sure that you incise there where your finger meets the surface of the wound and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot reach it with your finger, then extract it and incise it.
More importantly, if they have passed three days and the swelling remains due to the empyema, then you let it be until the abscess is ripe, and extract it with ease, and incise it according to your preparation.
And guard the head of the swelling, for that is not where it will be.
And therefore take care that the wound consolidated by the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it exceeds the measure from the ankle, and you follow the parts above, this will not hurt him.
And take more care that which we have said must be healed.
Capitol.lix.
On the cure for retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a burn, or pus or flesh, and resembles those we have said about the methods of cure in the division.
And if it is not dissolved as we have said, then strongly make the cause on the patient, and when you must administer extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It shall be of silver and shall be thin like a quill, thus like a goose feather in thinness of long thread in the likeness of half a palm, to which there shall be a thin cane at its head.
And the manner of ejecting urine through this is that you take the needle doubled and tie it at the end with good knot; and insert the ends of the needle into the part left by the syringe, and cut with scissors if there is any superfluous cause of the wool, more thoroughly insert it into the canula with force. Then quickly draw back the syringe with the thumb and index finger.
And cauterize the patient on the sole, and anoint the bladder and foreskin with mild oils, olive oil, and aqua vitae.
And then introduce the catheter easily between where it will reach the head of the penis; and then fold the head up above the point of the glans; and then push the catheter inside there; and then push that inside so that it reaches the bladder, and that is done as required, otherwise the meat in which it goes becomes tortuous.
And then slowly pass the string through the wool little by little, for the urine will wet the wool.
And then extract that and use it for urine cure, and use the catheter, do not cease doing this and use the catheter until the bladder and patient are fully relieved.
Capitulum 6.
On the quality of catheterization of the bladder, use clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a constricted hemorrhoid in that area, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then make use of an instrument called a clampcedra. This is the form of the clampcedra:
so that at the extremity of the limb it is numb, it is closed. And in that there are three incisions: two from one side, thuswise.
At the beginning is a concave location, in which that which is pushed resides. Its amount that fills it is addition, until when some cause is drawn by those humors, it is drawn, and when expelled, it is also drawn, and when expelled long, it makes clapping against which naphta is placed in naval battles.
So, in order to expel humors from the bladder, insert the end of the clamps into the humor, and draw out that which is pushed to the upper parts, for the humor is drawn into the cavity of the clamps.
And then insert the end of the clamps into the vagina as we have described for the ear; and then push the humor by that which you push, for that humor quickly reaches the bladder, and gout centers there.
The form of the subtle stone that the bladder crystallizes, and this is its form:
And let it be made of silver or copper, of which the head is either like a small feather or a tiny bead, and insert the cane inside it.
And then take a bladder of a pig, place the humidity you want to crystalize in the bladder inside it, and tie it tightly with a double thread of linen, and heat the humidity over the fire.
And then insert the end of the crystal into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand on the bladder with the humidity in a descending structure so that the patient centers on the bladder as the humidity has already reached it.
But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make a circular shape from it; and perforate it completely round; then insert strong thread through those holes, as they are turned; then attach the circle in such a way that it is attached, for you place the part you want of the humidities in it. Saturate and bind it well.
And then you place that one in the instrument and do so with it as you did with the bladder, keeping your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of gravel.
We have already discussed in the division the species of gravel and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of the latter.
And we have discussed the gravel for which surgical intervention is required, and the sectioning procedure.
And the gravel generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted into the bladder.
And I am now narrating it in a clear and concise exposition.
Therefore, I say that gravel generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and the signs of it are that the urine expelled from the bladder is similar in its subtlety to water, and appears with that sand; and the patient rubs his genitals, experiences pain, and is generally ill; and for this, the thigh is often inflamed instead.
And the cure for children who have reached four years is easy; and it is a difficult cure in old women. In the young, gout is often caused by that which is between them.
And of that in which the stone is larger and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
And so, to achieve the cure for that, we come to the beginning of it by cleansing the gout with a cress seed which exerts all the passage which is in their intestines; for that passage sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone and releases its inquiry.
And then place the gout on their feet and compress and rub it well so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or it may pass from there in a few days.
And then make that cushion under your hand prepared, and let the other servants prepare the things needed, so that the bladder is made to slope downward in all parts.
And then insist on that and all that area.
And if you feel the stone in the space, then quickly apply heat to it.
And if you do not feel the stone, let your hand touch it, then rub it with oil from your right index finger if the patient is a child, or with your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert that into the patient's anus. And insist on the stone by letting your hand touch it. And gradually push that small object into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on it with your finger, and expel that out through the parts outside, observing the location from which it comes.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals upwards with his right hand, and with his other hand tighten the band which holds the genitals, at the part where the section is being made.
And then insert a sponge between them, from which this is the form of it: And cut through it what is between the buttocks and the genitals, not in the middle location, in front of the left thigh; and let the section be on that bone and your right hand be on the buttocks, and make a transverse section, so that the outer section is wide and the inner narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone is possible, and not more, for your right hand which is on the buttocks you should make the section along the bone, and it becomes an opening-sutured defect.
And note that from the bone there is some with angles and margins, because the excision of it is made difficult by this.
And of that which resembles a lion's head, and is round, and a light excision is made of it.
And if that which has angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
And if not thus relieved, then you should gently press upon it or firmly press upon it with proper gesture, the end of which should be like a rasp over which you are pressing on the heel, and do not withdraw from it; or that you insert a slender instrument under its curved end.
And if you cannot do this, then you slightly enlarge the wound, and if you want a flow of blood, incise firmly there with vitriol trissat.
And if the heel is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise slightly over it; then press a little where you have incised; and similarly do if they are more.
And if the heel is very large, then ignorance dictates that you incise there with a broad section, for which an evil result occurs in the patient from one of two causes: either he dies or he suffers continuous urine distillation, due to which the area is not fully consolidated.
And administer an expulsion when it is not relieved, or manipulate in the fracture of the foot with the forceps until that which is inside comes out through the wound.
Then when you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place the soaked cloth on it in oil and wine, or in olive oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
And then raise the patient's leg above its own heart, and do not loosen the bandage on the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wet the area with water and apply oil, and then cure it with ointment containing diammonium and ointment containing myrrh until it is healed.
Mais if in the wound you encounter an abscess with heat and corrosion, and it appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and from this comes the prohibition of urine (and this is known as the egress of blood through urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it can cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with warm water, salt, and in opposition to all spices, using what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And keep the area of the entire treatment where you have placed the thighs and applied the medicines which are pressed onto the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urination is prohibited, then cure it by using what I have recommended before reaching the stage of desiccation; for too many days of this treatment are accused of causing desiccation. And now I will describe this: you should take a perforating iron implement, of which this is the form:
of triangular cross-section, sharp, inserted into a shaft.
And then take a needle, and sew the penis closed, leaving the stone in place so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the penis, perforating easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And you rotate the probe with your hand in that heel little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it before you make that of the other side penetrate; for the urine is soon released.
And then press your hand on what is fractured in the heel behind the penis, for that is cracked, and is pierced by the urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prohibits it, then you have a cord tie the heel, and another above the heel. And then bind over the heel in that groin between two ligatures. And then extract it. And then untie the ligature and modify the surgical wound, which is made in the wound area.
And you do not need a cord for the heel, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other cord above is necessary, for when the cord is untied near the injury of the heel, the wound returns to its place and heals the wound area.
And for this it is necessary when you have the bile above, that you lift the partition above or return your lower part, and take back your former position, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol.lix.
For the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Stone in women is not frequently generated.
But if there is a stone in any of those cases, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that if the woman is strong and a virgin.
And the second is that you cannot find a well-informed woman who can describe to the doctor whether she herself has had it or if it is one of the women who have a husband.
The third is that you cannot find a well-informed woman about this art, especially regarding the operation.
And the fourth is that the place of the section on the heel in women is far from the location of the heel, so you need a preceding incision, and there is fear.
And if necessity prompts you to do this, then seek out a skilled female surgeon, and it is seldom found.
And if you are lacking in that, then consult a skilled and subtle surgeon, or present a wise woman experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some part of this art.
Then have her present and command her to do all that you will tell her, from the examination of the heel to the beginning; for this reason, she should check if the woman is a virgin, and then insert her finger into the woman's buttocks to feel the heel.
Then if she finds it, cut it off and withdraw her finger, and then command her to incise the area.
And if she is not a virgin, then command the wise woman to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and examine the heel, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Then if you find it, gradually introduce that from the orifice of the bladder into the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the root of the thigh.
Then place the root of the thigh in any part where it is stopped and center the foot in that part, ensuring that the said part is not removed from the foot by cutting away from it.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the needle into that section, and if the foot is felt, adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the foot will be drawn from there.
And know that the symptoms of the foot are spots: some are few and large, lion-like and harsh, long and round, and have borders.
And know what symptoms it has so that you can signify about what you want.
And if you want to induce a flow of blood, adjust the location with trioxide of lead and apply that for one hour until the blood is drawn out, then return to your operation once the stone has been removed.
And make sure to prepare those instruments you use in the stone extraction from men, so that you can be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of urine, and you know that the expulsion of the urine is from the artery that is incised, then place powder over the area, strengthen it with powders, and apply downward pressure; and do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not remove it, for strongly pressing will kill the patient. And then treat the wound.
And when the acute pain of the urine has subsided after several days, then you can return to your operation once the stone is passed.
Capitol lxii.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Aguoyza hernia is nothing but the accumulation of humidity in the white chive, which is the conduit of the generative fluids containing the humors, and it is named chive.
And sometimes in the very same skin which nature prepared for that part of the foot, between where it is cut and another foot; and this is the seam of the stocking between the white garter which we have said, and it is not here anything but thread.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the inguinal regions, for into those regions this material infiltrates, and sometimes it occurs due to a blow struck on the inguinal regions.
And this humidity, having streaks of color, may be yellowish or reddish or brown, or black and powdery, or watery white, and it is what is most common.
And the signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are these: if it is in the white garter which we have mentioned, then the abscess is round, slightly elongated, like the shape of a foot, and the inguinal region becomes apparent, for the humidity contains that from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the very same skin, then the abscess is round starting from the foot and for this reason one thinks it is another foot.
And if the humidity is between the sciatic nerve and the white muscle, then cut and remove the tissue.
And in order to know the color of the humidity, you should probe the color of the humidity in the abscess by inserting a needle; and according to what is found in the trace of the insertion, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the treatment of it, you should command the patient to bleed if this is possible, and often raise his body.
And then lift him up on his back for a little while, and place his head on some pillows.
And then sit you on the left side of the patient, and command the minister to stand on the right side of the patient, who should stretch his cloth across one of the sides at the sciatic nerve and the part of the flank.
And then take a spatula and split the sciatic nerve longitudinally in the middle near the buttock.
And the section should be made according to right measurement, equally distant from the line where you shall cut the skin, between which it reaches the white fat comprehending.
And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this that you do not incise that; and your excision where you incise that should be suspended from the greater and more subtle you examine it according to the quantity possible.
And then perforate the fatty tissue full of water with a large hole, and extract all the water.
And then separate between the two labias of the section with needles, and extend the fatty tissue to the upper parts; and do not touch the root of the genitalia encompassing, and incise the fatty tissue in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that in its entirety or in pieces, especially its thin edge; for if you do not thoroughly examine the incision, it is not certain that the water will not return.
If the humor proceeds from within his groin during your operation, when you have completed the section of the thigh, return inside that area, and properly suture the two labia of the groin, and properly treat that as well until it is healed.
And if you find the humor corrupted by another illness, then tie the vessels which are above the suspensory ligament, extract the humor, and properly treat that as we have said.
And if the water is added in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part just as you did for the other; and if it is evident to you that it is a single operation, then do so.
And then cleanse the wound, insert strips of submerged wool in oil or rubbed oil; place another strip of wool submerged in wine and oil over it, and spread that over the thighs and the wonder of the belly; place over this clean cloths and powders, and cover those with lint which is according to this form:
And then place two cloths filled with well-combed wool according to this likeness; and let the ends which are pressed with cotton or wet wool be added to the structure in the breeches' belt, and one end take from behind into the two, and the second take to the part of the armpit, and two ends over two thighs leave and two other ends over two armrests, and all structure be tightened in the breeches' belt.
Sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the location instead of sectioning with a surgical instrument; and you should take a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genitalia, and ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white chyphac containing the water is discovered, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it is similar to the Greek letter.
And then puncture that chyphac, and ignite it until all the humidity is expelled.
And then extend the cut with scissors, and incise with scissors, and cauterize with a thin ignited cautery; and cut that according to what is possible for you to remove all of it; and beware of the smoke that the fire does not touch.
And know that this operation is safer and more distant from the flow of blood, better than an incision.
But if you find any contrariety, make a cautery at the time of incision or at the time of cautery, or during the flow of blood, then cure as you would for any contrariety, using the appropriate cure as described.
But if the patient is faint, and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I will instruct you; and when you are certified, by what we have said about the significations, that that hernia is acute.
Then you should place the patient on some elevated bench, and perforate the abscess in the lower part of it with a flatawl, and stop the perforation according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide enough through which all the water can flow.
And then place your hand over the hole carefully and hold it there, so that the water can continue to flow. And then cure that through which the wound is healed.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you perforate it: and this is not done so that the white linen cloth in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prohibits the passage of water. When you must put a sponge or an instrument into the wound from which water is extracted, the form of which is described; or place a small tube in the opening of the wound.
And you should know that the water returns, and it is agueguada (recovered) approximately six months or until then; and when it is recovered, then perforate it according to that method, so that the patient will pass its days.
Chapter LXIII.
Of section regarding a fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section regarding this hernia, one must beware of causing harm to the major organs; for I have seen its removal and been saved by the better outcome.
And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses arise in the tissues where the glands are located, and this occurs for various causes: either due to acute excessive flux, which is infused into the glands, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain is not present in it; it is a severe abscess.
And the abscess is firm and ripe, of which the color is dark, and there is no pain in it.
And sometimes abscesses form due to the obstruction of the arteries, and due to swelling of those vessels, as is remembered, or due to swelling of veins.
More than that, which is due to the inflammation of arteries, it is known as the dispersion of the aposteme when you press upon those ties said; and note that you should not touch it.
More than that, which is due to the inflammation of veins, it is not dispersed by any cause; you should apply compression with your fingers.
And it is possible that section be made on this species and on other tissues; for you incise the canal of the genitises, and then stretch the skin above, and extract that from the white cyst, and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and ligate them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the skin.
Then if the skin has already adhered to the other tissues and consolidated, you should extract the skin and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause of the cyst, or between what is between the vessels, then you should deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
But if the nature of the flesh in the place of adhesion behind it is such that you must incise all of it, and extract the humor as we have said.
So when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; then cover it with another dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
On the cure of hernias that are external.
It is an external hernia enveloped by some envelope resembling a swelling due to the thickening of the scrotum, making physical exercise and walking difficult.
And in the cure of this illness, one is apprehensive about what preceded it and causes reminiscence.
However, proceed with the operation as you would for the first one.
And I say that you should incise the hernia on an elevated cushion; then attach the suspensory ligament of the testicles to the parts left; and place the inguinal canal on the thighs that are tried by the virga; and have another minister hold those, extending them forcefully.
And then incise through the skin longitudinally along the vessels among which the vessels are exposed.
And then excise from all parts as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is a double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the location where the injury occurs, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle location through a longitudinal section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish to have healing occur so that the vessels which do not contribute from either genius are not affected, for this is not harmful.
But if the vessels are injured throughout, then consider that the testicles may be extruded or that the testicles perish due to the injury of the vessels, because it would be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and they should be established, or that it perishes for this reason.
Capitol lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a separation that extends over the diaphragm across the abdomen from the inguinal ring, because of the rupture of the intestines through some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the diaphragm or of its excision, and these two species occur due to various causes: from a blow, or by a jump, or by shouting, or by lifting some heavy cause, or by something similar.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension of the diaphragm, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is an abscess forming within the chest as the diaphragm compresses the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to diaphragmatic separation, for at the beginning it causes sudden and intense pain; there is an abscess that appears different from the apparent one near the diaphragm, and this is due to the displacement of the intestine, and the body shows symptoms in the parts outside the diaphragm.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this greatly disturbs the patient, and sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness, there is fear, because it is known that hunting should be avoided.
And the manner of performing the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand at the internal parts of their cavity if it obeys on its return, and then tie it over their collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's shoulders.
And then stitch the scrotal skin at the parts above, and incise the scrotal skin entirely lengthwise; then place two stitches in the incised section as needed to open the section.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there let the oil flow.
And then excise that cyst which they leave near the cord of the testicles, once the white hard cyst from each part is uncovered.
And when you insert your thumb into what is being excised from the testicle, in what is between the white cyst, which they leave near the oil cord, and between the second cyst, and release any adhesion that is behind the oil part.
And then hold the oil cord of the testicles at the front parts, and by this extend the white cyst on your left hand, and raise the oil towards the cyst to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the oil upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with the completed solution.
And near your thumbs, say that there is no cause for the intestine being enveloped in the white hard cyst. But if you find some cause, then you peel it off to the belly leaving.
And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows blood and health as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications, the white cloth is cauterized, as we have said near the incision of this fearing blood flow, for several applications occur there). And leave the plaster until it falls by itself.
But if the dressing is delayed, then pour cold water over it, and place it on the area until it falls as we have said.
And then cure the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
Capitol. lxvi.
Of ventral hernia.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burnt during the treatment of it.
And the first ones said that it should be done this way as we have recounted in the hernia case; which is that you tie the vessels near the section above that facilitation of it; and then dry out in the middle place around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you should treat the area.
And the genii do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the genii; and if they do, it is few; and return them to their place in all cases.
But if the time at that point is prolonged, there is an adjusted fissure in the chiasm where we insert the intestine in the chiasm; and this occurs due to the extension of the chiasm, which is in the ankles as we have said. The cause is that the chiasm is extended, and nearby it becomes softened, and the area becomes apostematous and you should treat it.
And the treatment of it is by cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
Sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on his side between your legs, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses is dried out by heat according to the width as much as three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under when it is uncovered.
And then take the rod and place it over the prominent area of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then fix the two prominent areas over the ends of the rod of the cloth, and adjust one to the other with the stitch.
And then withdraw the end of the rod, and do not extend it completely out of the cloth, nor lengthen the stitch, nor any other cause as I know in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that in the treatment of wounds, and after incising the flaps, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proximate to health.
Chapter LXXXVIII.
On the softening of the scrotum.
When spots appear on the scrotum in some men, it is softened because the flesh between those spots is softened, and attention should be paid to this.
Then it is necessary for the one who is consulted in the treatment of this to have the patient lie on their side, and completely expose the scrotum which is softened over the natural scrotum; and then draw the two lips together at the seam.
And if you wish, stitch in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotum with three or four stitches and a firm seam.
And then incise between the seams; and thereafter treat for the other wounds until it heals and the sutures fall out.
Capitol lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but by cause it is allowed to me to remember it in this free treatise; and the remembrance of it is necessary for two ways, of which one is so that when a doctor is asked about it, he knows the cure for whom it happens; and the other way is that we might see there is a necessity for castration of other beasts for our young ones, such as from bulls, and from boars, and from pigs, and similar to beasts.
And therefore say that castration is done in two ways: either by excision, or by incision.
But in that which is done by excision, the way of the operation is to tie the beast's tail in water until the testicles are softened and relaxed. And then take those with your hand until they are soft and do not appear to have lumps when touched.
In castration performed by fissure and section, make sure you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then lift the suspensory ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those pus that you have from each excoriation. And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but the thin skin which is over the veins.
And this method of castration is better which is performed by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Chapter 70.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in males occurs according to two methods: one where it appears that the space in the cord of testicles is opened, in which there is a mixture between two testes with some female characteristics in them.
And sometimes urine flows from that vein which is in the root of the testicles.
In women, it is special: and the vein in the woman's groin is like two testicles of a man, slightly larger, with some heaviness at the outer part, similar to the scrotum of a man and the two testicles.
And the cure is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And it is that you should incise those tight tissues where the excess of that humor escapes, and then proceed to cure those with the treatment for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the vein of the testicles, neither cure nor operation is needed.
Chapter 21.
On the enlargement and prominence of flesh in women due to certain causes.
Enlargement of the flesh is usually adjusted over natural causes where it is stretched and made firm by looking; sometimes in certain women it is magnified to such an extent that it extends like in men, and swells during intercourse.
Then you should have the excess mucus in your hand or cupped and drain it.
And do not finish in cupping, especially on the right side, lest there be a flow of blood.
And then care for the wound in its care and healing.
More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother before it fills that space, and a strong cord is fixed to the parts outside according to the likeness of a vein (and for this some first called this "caudata malady"); therefore, we should cut it thus as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Capitol. lxxii.
Of the care of alratica.
Alratica is when the canal of the female is not perforated, or is slightly injured. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental is due to a malady which has preceded, and that one is caused by meat not fitting well or by a pulse thin or thick.
It is caused in the liver, or in the flanks of the body, or in the upper parts thereof, or in the lower parts thereof, and you prohibit coitus and conception and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by looking at the midwife, if the obstruction is apparent, probe gently; but if it is not apparent, then you examine that among the thighs or on the abdomen.
But if the obstruction is due to a thin pulse, and is close to the two lips [vagina], then you insert and dilate that.
And you place powders on the two lips [vagina], and then place your fingers indicating both sides near the entrance.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that thin pulse is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place it over the area, and leave a man there to prevent the incised place from becoming consolidated.
And if the ulcer is large and deep, then incise it with a spatula or leaf of mint.
And if the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it there.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from bites, such as aconite, dragon's blood, and ensese, prepared with alum.
And then administer a broad lead cannula to prevent the ulcer from becoming slightly consolidated.
And keep it there for several days and administer cooled wine.
And then treat with the other consolidation remedy before it is healed.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you should incise according to this method. If this is due to a painful abscess, for an abscess that is in the greater part, do not perform any opposition by iron in any manner.
Chapter 73.
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and for tail and for red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated from the openings of the small veins between which blood flows continuously; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed into masses.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore, say that hemorrhoids and masses when they are in the pelvis and do not appear in sensation, then for those do not perform any iron to cure.
But those that are in the openings of the pelvis on which there is sensation, are those that can be cured.
And make sure that you put the woman in hot water and then extend the thighs with scissors or a rough cloth, and incise those areas with razors.
And then sprinkle on those areas the flux of the blood from one of the incisive powders seven bites, thus and with the same appearance as those.
And then wrap her feet for an hour, and then immerse that in cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make that poultice in decoction of sumac and of scours of millet grains and of walnuts and with the same appearance.
And then take flour of oregano and mix it with honey and wine, and make a poultice with this over his back.
And if the bleeding is stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply two vetches, and to the breasts perform six incisions.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of fennel or in the juice of agrimony or in the juice of greater celandine in fermented wine, and apply it to the area; then cover the area with ointment until it heals.
And cure that which is within and let it be healed.
Capitol.lix.
On the puncture wound accident in the thigh.
Various types of apostemata occur in the thigh, such as carbuncle, erysipelas, ulcers, abscesses, erythromela, fistulae hemorrhagy, and thrombosed veins, and other apostemata. And I have already said these illnesses and the types of those, and the signs of those, and their cures in the division.
And cover that I say in this treatise on apostemata to cauterize which comes in the thigh when it is one of the apostemata that produces health, and if you want to know how the operation of it is done.
Then consider whether the pain in the abscess at its beginning is acute upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if catz over that the sentiment, when no·t cuts of it, and cure that with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you should place the woman on a pillow that has two parts; recline her upper body and adjust her legs to the part behind her abdomen, and spread her thighs. Place her arms behind her hips, and tie quilts with linens as needed.
Then the midwife should follow the length correctly and administer the instrument to the opening of the vagina, the form of which will be described in the causes that will be given later.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the length of the cervix of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the vagina should not exceed the length of the cervix and help the patient. If the instrument is larger than the mouth of the uterus, then cover it with powder on the cervix to prevent the instrument from entering the cervical opening.
Cover it so that the fluid running in the tube of the syringe is above, and let the minister hold the tube and rotate the fluid until the cervical openings are open.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is like a lion and wet, then cover that part by sprinkling the head of it with cold water.
And when the foulness is evacuated, then cover it with a wet cloth submerged in sweetened olive oil or green olive oil with some astringency; and place the compress in the cervical area at the cervical opening.
And place it over the cervix and on the pelvis a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it is usually cured in about two days by applying ointment that you apply while it is healing.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed in an attempt to cauterize them with water and honey, then with water in which is boiled bark of willow or of arbor vitae, and then return to ointment.
And if the wound is deep within the liver, then covet that you desist from the treatment of it with iron, taking care that which we have said in the division.
Chapter 75.
To teach midwives how to treat miscarriages properly when they occur according to an unnatural figure.
Necessary is that the midwife know at the beginning the sign of a natural birth by its symptoms. For when you see the woman expelling from the passages and desiring to smell the air, and over this she is enlivened by what happens around her, and hastens the expulsion of the fetus, then you know that this passage is according to the natural figure, and it is the expulsion of the fetus above its head, and the second one is either suspended or pendant from the umbilicus.
Then when you see those signs, at once let the abdomen be compressed so that the fetus descends slightly; when it is on its head, let the second stage begin, and it is prepared for those excessive fluids through good management.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and unacceptable, for when the fetus is situated on its feet and the body of the mother is situated in front of the head of the fetus and its feet, or one hand, or at the side of the fetus, or the head of the fetus and one hand, or over the abdomen of the fetus, and heavily it is turned over its own back.
For necessary causes the midwife must be wise and subtle in all those causes, and she must guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of these, and which engine is in them so that it may be signified by this and be placed here.
When the fetus is situated on its head by natural causation, and it is vehement over the woman and made difficult for her, and sometimes the virtue of her is weakened, then make that cesarean section, or what the women have for it, and evaporate the concoction of fenugreek and humid oils.
And then insert the needle between his so-called small spines and split the second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of moisture. And press the woman's belly as the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then cause the woman to be moistened with honeyed mucus and fenugreek mucus.
And then command her, placing her on her side, to inhale the fumes, which make her sneeze while in this position; and keep her mouth and nose covered for about an hour until the fetus is delivered.
And if both hands of the fetus are delivered first, then cause you to reduce them gradually for facilitation. But if you do not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a bench and lift her feet off it, and hold the bench close to the ground; and keep the woman so that she does not fall due to the concussion.
And if the hands are not returned inside and the wound is closed, then incise there and extract the torn part of the wound or hold the body with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be left hanging.
When the wound yews on its feet, then push those parts in, and soon make the wound smaller, and soon equalize that, and soon take a part of it and extend those little by little.
More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that turn outward with a cloth, for it will be left hanging if God wills.
And if it is not left hanging as we have commanded, then you return the wound little by little into place as you pause that according to the natural figure, for it will be left hanging with a slight incision.
And if all that we have commanded is prohibited, then take a mixture of alum and dissolved gum, and grind them together in the mortar for good pounding, and pour that over the wound on the woman's lower abdomen. And then make that incision in clear water, once you reach the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts around the wound are numbed, then perform a mirtle fumigation on it and place your hand over it. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then make that incision over a bowl, and then perform a snuffing operation at the mouth of it, and remove it, and apply a light compression to the lower part of the abdomen, which will soon become firmer.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Ensure the reduction of the hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then elevate the woman and make her go away.
And if she does not go away, then apply pressure to the region, and shake the patient's thighs with violent shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if labor has come, then apply pressure with a handkerchief, and then study the reduction of the hand, and pack the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to hold herself until it is well-packed.
Lift the foot over the patient's neck, spread their hands, and position the foot so that its sole is against the back of their mother. Hold the foot in your hand, the midwife, and gradually rotate it slightly, so that it becomes easier.
And when it is equalized and settled, then place it over the thigh as we have advised with oil and ointments.
And then command that it be moistened gradually, and when you have done this, place the cauterizing iron on a coalshovel and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be heated well; and make it snuff with a condition. The prepared fetus comes out on the side.
When the mother's pains occur in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second stage with your finger so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the patient, then incise the one causing the swelling, so that it is not retained and leads to death.
And then push the fetus into the parts inside where you have placed it, and order the woman to bear with it for some minutes, and let it be slowly delivered gently, if God wills.
The exit of two infants or many fetuses. Know that in most cases, twins appear after several weeks, and sometimes they may be born three or four, but this is strange and worth investigating. However, these are usually caused by natural factors, not supernatural ones.
And among those, if they are multiply born, one is a second, and they are separated by ciphalac (a method of separating twins), distinguishing those within the ligament at the navel of each. In some weeks, they may be slowly delivered as if one fetus, by natural labor, and in other weeks by a non-laborious delivery as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult, some of them you should deliver the fetus and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then care for those as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what must be done with subtlety and delicacy, and with delay, according to her ingenuity according to whatever is prepared for her bringing about health.
Recollection of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes in the uterus one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more ten are formed, and you must verify that a female aborts with a single fetus, and another with all ten formed, the cause of which is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife, for she must perceive it well and then place her hand on it according to what is proper.
Capitol. lxxvi.
On the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus as we have said in the division of therapy and it is not outside the body, then you must use surgery more. You must consider whether the woman is in good health and not affected by any of the conditions for which her life is feared to be in danger.
When the woman is placed lying on her back, and her head inclined sideways, and her thighs elevated.
The minister should hold that [object] in two parts or tied on the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then moisten the mouth of the uterus with oil of roses and honeyed mallow and fennel and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and honeycombs, and place her hand with facilitation in the uterus, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers will enter the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to descend over its head, and then place the fingers in the fetus's hands, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or under the clavicle, or in the proper locations of the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
But if the discharge is from his feet, then at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And let the thumb be with the right hand, and curve it at that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily and place the thumb in one of those locations which we have said, until he reaches the cause beneath.
And then place and keep another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is an equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And let it be held at all times, so that the pressure of it is alleviated as is done in extracting a tooth.
And let it be curved so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then let the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the part is retained.
Then if the part of the fetus is forgotten, let the nails be inserted in that place whether it be above or below; and do so before all the fetus is forgotten.
But if your hand is placed in front of the other, and it is not possible to reduce it due to the contraction, then cover that part with a cloth; and quickly extract it before all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the wrist or near the joint.
And do so also with the other hand and on both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it undergoes constriction during extraction, or there is water in its head, then you must insert a spiny gauze between the fingers, open the head, and drain the water, or that you use an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will be shown in the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this.
And similarly, if the fetus has a large head by nature: then you must incise it with a looped instrument, or use an alundat as we have said; and quickly extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should cut the furca, then incise where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor obstructed by swelling, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what suits you.
And if the swellings in the abdomen are suppurated or are in dropsy, then you must perforate it where the humidity that is in it flows.
And if the fistula is on his feet, then the attraction of it is light and its direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and the foot, then you must extract that which you have wrapped around your hand, and incise the abdomen and the foot where what is within them flows.
And if the other members remain attached and return the head, then the surgeon should insert his left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then he should insert his hand in the preorder of the vein, and seek for the head, and push that with his fingers into the mouth of the vein, and quickly insert one or two pins, and push them there.
And if the mouth of the vein is constricted by an abscess, cauterize what occurs to him; ensure that it is not irritated; first, do so in order to administer effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer plasters; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on his side, then it is possible to lance it: and administer what we have said about the live wound.
And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
And ensure that you do not leave any foreign cause inside the incision.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of abscesses caused by the vein.
And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have already seen a woman in her abdomen where one fetus was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is the other. It happens that after a long time an abscess forms in the armpit; and when it becomes inflamed, it opens up and begins to discharge pus.
And I was called to treat it, and treated it for a long time, but the wound did not heal.
Then I applied plasters of strong attraction over it for some causes, and cauterized it with an iron. And after several days, I cauterized another one; and I was too amazed, as there is no bone in the abdomen.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, along with the fetus present in the woman's uterine condition, which she had experienced this way for a long time, and cured her of a small arm.
And I do not refuse it to be strange, but rather that in this there is science and aid to what the physician uses his hand for in treatment.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form of vertigo at which the kidney is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you equalize the libres, at which equalization there are two vertigos at the two ends of two tubes. Nevertheless, let this vertigo be more subtle in structure, and made either of hemp or of reed.
And let the width of each tube be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides be as wide as one finger. The length of each is a palm and a half; in the middle location between two tubes are two joints of that same material tube, which are already secured. The length of each joint is about a palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additions be inserted in the mouth of the womb so that they be opened when you revolve the two prescribed virtues.
Form another one similar to that, but more subtle and lighter:
Be made of elm wood or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps. Nevertheless, at the extremity of each, there are two additions as you can see, and the length of those additions is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, opening that which is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the depth of the womb, while the metronome applies pressure where you want.
The form of revolution which the ancients described:
Form of pressing which is applied to the fetus:
Form of holding in which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like spoon teeth, upon which it is incised and contained. Form of holding lightly:
Form of holding with one hand having a spine:
Form of holding with one hand having two spines:
Form of spatula having two extremities, upon which the head is incised:
Form of two flat spoons:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more species of that kind are multiplied, you must prepare the artists, as much lighter for their operation and more suitable for the quantity of men.
And do not delay with those instruments whether you should prepare them or not, for the need of those is not excusable.
For the extraction of the second born.
When the second child is retained, you must induce labor, and then command the patient to hold her breath, and soon apply that coughing remedy, and strongly place your hand over the mouth and nose of the patient. If by this means she delivers, it is good.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover one hole and place it over burning herbs near the mouth of the mother, as with a calamus reed, ruda, anet, camomilla, scikats Arabic, cassia lignea, and santaura. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And then place a canal of reed in the mouth of the major artery, and keep it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the major artery.
And then perform the sneezing in the way we have said before, and the second one will come quickly.
If this cure does not succeed, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or poppyseed oil, and then insert that into the wound and seek out the second object with it, and do as you have found. If it is attached to the major artery, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second object, extract it little by little so that the major artery does not suffer from the extraction. Place it between the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the main vein is constricted, we have already recommended treatment by fumigation and medicinal treatment with herbs.
And if none of the causes we have recommended occur, then guard that you do not fatigue it in repetition of abstraction, but rather apply it to the mouth of the main vein and place it on the woman's thigh, and accordingly cristallize it with ointment and tetrafarmacological substance; for that will cause it to be absorbed within a few days and be eliminated.
And when you apply it, raise the bad humor to the head and to the stomach, and this leads to the disease; then you should administer sub-fumigations and what is suitable for this.
And some of the Ancients already recommended sub-fumigation with nazaroot and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, she should retain menstruation and the second exhalation:
Let it be made by sight or by touch.
Let the finer end be placed over the cohen and the wider end under the fire, and let the sub-fumigation be placed over the flames.
Let him hold it there until the sub-fumigation is consumed, and then repeat if necessary.
For the treatment of an unperforated child's anus.
When the child cries and its anus is not perforated, those should be opened subtly and gently. Then have the midwife perforate with her own said opening; otherwise, use a sharp probe, and ensure that she does not touch the ligament.
And then place something warm and oily over it; and apply ointment to it until it is set.
But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a catheter in it for several days, and wait until the child wants to defecate.
And now a fistula of the buttocks occurs due to the consolidation of a plague or abscess; then ensure that this consolidation is incised, and subsequently treated as we have said for the cure and the lead.
Of the cure of fistulas that develop wounds.
The fistulas that develop wounds with pus beneath are nodules and swellings which often occur near the buttocks or in the space of one side.
And it is a fistula or spots.
And when that nodule is old and flows with watery white or subtle rot, sometimes some of these fistulas will penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by the discharge and by the wind condition; sometimes the patient uses the opening, and strongly smells like those with worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate to the joint of the thigh and to the notch of the buttocks.
And in what is known of a fistula penetrating into the anus and non-penetrating, you should insert your finger into the anus, and introduce a thin thread or wire into the fistula when there is no pus.
And if there is pus in that area, then introduce a thin lead thread or horsehair thread into it, where you feel the thread or hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor any cause of evacuation, or worm, or flatulence as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and proceed to its cure.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, its significance is dribbling urine from there and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
And if it penetrates into the junction of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circuit, its sign is that the thread passes through here if there is no pus in the bone, and pain in the circuit of the limb; and that redness persists over time; and that it does not respond to topical medication, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those fistulas penetrating them, there is no cure for it, and the cure of those is hard work and frivolity of the leaf doctors over which they are bound.
Moreover in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing by iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and what already I have done and attempted.
And it is that the patient lies on his back and elevates his legs between his thighs, the hips inclined towards the abdomen, and then insert a lead or iron probe into the fistula if it is tortuous, where you can feel the location where the probe passes.
And if that location is near the throat, then you must insert the probe at that point in the throat.
And if you feel in the probe itself the passage already clearly revealed, or anything between the probe and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for there is no healing in that, as we have said.
Some may say that it is healthy in some men to have gout.
And for the treatment in which hope of cure is placed, you should use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously described, and insert that burning into the fistula until it approaches the vein; then repeatedly do this two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula are sufficiently cauterized and appear like quill feathers.
And then cure that with a compress wrapped in cloth until all those tissues that are cauterized are completely cooled, and then apply medicine to the flesh generating and consolidating, and if it is cured, well and good; but if not, then it may not be cured in some time by another treatment.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate inside, you have noted which is in the anus, and between that and the probe that is veiled with flesh or skin, dry the fistula in what dries the surface of the anal canal. Then dry the probe itself, and do so in the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe passes through, and by the probe it is released and cauterized.
And then cleanse those fistulated wounds which are similar to an alembic of the female genitalia and do not drain from any of these causes.
And if there is a flux of blood greater than that which comes between you and your operation when insides those wounds, then let the more severe and purgative instrument be cauterized with fire or with sharp medicine, for the cautery with fire makes good double adjustment: it both adheres to those tissues properly and stops the bleeding by the excision of humidity.
And then cure that which is caused by water enveloped in borders or in third-degree burns around the area, and then cure the wound with an ointment of hard flesh that generates and consolidates.
And in those medicines which have astringency and excision; when restoration is restored, it is healed, and you fear no recurrence.
And if the fistula has already pierced through to the perineum and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and inquire about it.
And if the tent is set up and between you and her it is of canvas or flesh, and close to the penetration, then this is not an operation in itself but rather according to the way of trust and hope.
The cause is to administer in it one of three ways: either cauterize that as we have said; or secrete that until you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to introduce the necessary objects and the cure; and do not proceed with mere excision because then you would enter the sac containing the gut, and harm would come about through the malaise against the will of nature; and properly cure that as we have said which is strong and will be healed; or lengthen that veil and clean that pus which secretes that until it is dry near the anus, as we have said, either by tent or by another instrument with a sharp extremity, and properly modify those fistulized tissues which are in the section through which you can percrustate; and properly strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound by excision, and if the opening above is not consolidated and breaks open the fistula at the part of the anus, it will be more easily healed for the malaise. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and place it in the fold of the buttock near the surface of the body and around the margin of the anus, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form.
And introduce it into that fiber包裹着几根线或围绕着这些线；然后将探针蘸上纤维插入瘘管中，直到达到其腔室。
But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus quite inside, then you extract the fiber as you introduce your thumb into the anus; extract the end of the fiber and adjust both ends evenly, strengthen each, and let this be for one or two days. When more fibers are incised into the flesh, strongly reinforce that part where those flesh parts between the two ends of the fiber are incised.
And then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the fistula's openings are not penetrable, then make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for it is not your task to do this so that you do not get burned; and place something inside that will help it heal.
The shape of the spine of the splint on which the fistula is opened: the curvature of which is acute and the other part is not acute, so that you do not get burned where it is not necessary, as you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain at the site of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be classified in two ways, for some resemble charcoal and others are like the fat of a date. And of these, some are small and large, and the pain comes from them at times and is one, and they are motas, and are external to the anus, and in their extremities.
But the ones that are external to the anus vary according to their degree of dryness, from which yellowish water or a bit of continuous blood flows, and they are classified according to the color of the body.
And the cure for that which is inside the bowels is that you command the patient to lie down and to press between where the belly bulges and the veins appear. Then you knead and suspend with your fingers those that you feel under your nails, and then strike those veins with their roots.
But if the fingers cannot feel those veins due to their humidity and softness, then take white cloth or thin or woollen flax, and extract those veins with the tweezers mentioned, and then strike them and powder some caustic powders near the strike, so that they may act as a cautery; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter on cauterization. And then cure those with the other remedy until they are healed.
And if the buttock does not respond to evacuation, then cauterize the patient with a small bite of cautery where the pain is felt, and wash it with that fluid from the bowels which responds to evacuation when the patient strains.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the buttocks, when the cause is slight, then you take those with your finger, or take them with forceps, insert them, and afterwards cure them with what we have said until they are healed.
And if you have an incision, make sure to suture them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around and insert it into the needle, then extract the hemorrhoids from the parts above, and make the thread penetrate through the other part, wrapping both ends of the thread in the part below the needle, and securing it longitudinally; strengthen the hemorrhoid with strong suturing, and afterwards remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood from the wound flows through it.
And place a soaked cloth in olive oil or ointment over the buttocks; place it there and command the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is ripe, cure those with ointment or other remedy until it is healed.
And since they are old and not useful in that medicine, you should scratch them with the point of a needle or with your fingernail while they are wet, and then apply those from the outer side over them, which prevent their healing. Then treat those that have healed.
And when you scratch them with a sharper tool than the first, while they are still bleeding and irritated; then treat those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is key, and it is not something else but a round swelling resembling the head of a nail, and it forms in the entire body, especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and because of these pains, you must treat them.
And then cut out what is in the circuit of the key, and hold it with tongs or forceps, and eradicate it from its root; and then treat that.
And if you wish, cauterize the next as preceded in its chapter.
More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, rounded prominence on the surface of the body, and veins show visible spots in most children.
And the treatment for it is to extend and excise that, or to tighten it with a thread or with a needle that holds it. And if you wish, cauterize this as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a formica is a small, fibrous or fistulated prominence on the surface of the body, and when you touch it, it resembles the sting of an ant, and is made around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a needle of oak or willow, strong, and place it over the blister between which you contain it with the circle of the needle from the parts of the leg; then return your hand around the needle as you insert what is in the circuit of the blister, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and that you eradicate the blister from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of elm or iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that above it the learning of the needle is covered and its revolution is reversed.
And if you wish, cauterize the blister as previously mentioned in the cauterization of atherosclerosis at the head of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you administer to the patient.
Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you administer, for the one used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cauteries for them should also be small.
The form of striking hard but few:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and it should be placed so that the bag is tied in this way as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (i.e., not open) like a lion's mouth, with some subtlety; and on one side of the tube there are two openings, and on the other side one opening, and the width of the opening should correspond to the size of the rays, with the larger one being slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm in size.
And it should be pierced with several openings as if it were wound around; and the space between the openings should be about the thickness of a finger.
Then place strong raw honey through those openings, using ten pieces of honeycomb or something similar; adjust the bag to that; when the bag is placed in it, stretch the head of the striker between two distinct points with firm tension, and then strike each opening: More importantly, the quality of striking should be such that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity that the patient can tolerate; make sure it is neither too viscous nor too cold.
And the patient is supine on his back, elevates his legs and places him on a cushion or a pillow; then applies oil or honey wax or fenugreek seed paste to the tip of the cautery; inserts it into the anus carefully, then the minister takes the bag and squeezes out two more doses with great force so that all in the crista is evacuated into the intestine; finally removes the crista and the patient raises his legs against the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is more effective in recovery.
More so if you intreatize that in the illnesses of solution of the belly and its evacuation, then iterate the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine cautery of iron, among those cauteries which children are accustomed to.
Of the treatment of wounds.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of wounds what is suitable for the free and the bound, and now I speak of the treatment of those who are more severe and require medicines.
Therefore, it is said that wounds are diversified according to what they are caused by and according to the place where the plaques occur.
And the causes why wounds are made are thus: by a stone impact, or a slash with a sword or dagger, or a blow with a lance, or a club, or an arrow, or similar to those causes of impacts.
More specifically, the wounds that occur in parts of the body are thus: a wound that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs.
And I hereby recommend the treatment of some wounds, as you will apply that reasoning and rule to other wounds.
And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the recall of compound conditions will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
So say that when an injury to the head occurs and it is a simple headache and not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or something similar, and has caused swelling so much as to be a large bruise and you fear the sudden onset of an abscess in that area, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; and draw out from it as much blood as the strength of it allows, unless some reason prevents bloodletting, especially if the blood drawn from the bruise is limited.
And the bloodletting should be on the opposite side of the injured area; and one must guard against swelling and against heavy food and drink.
But if some reason prevents reduction, then diminish the food and do not approach meat or drink.
And place your hand over the bruise, if an abscess has formed, applying oil rubbed with rosemary or in wine that contains astringents.
But if it is certain that an abscess will form, then place yourself over the wound, if it is recent with its own secretion and the air has not changed there spread the powder which I will describe to you shortly.
But if the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or due to a rupture and the edges do not close properly with stitches, then adjust those with sutures according to the method of suturing that I will describe.
But if the wound is already open to bone and flesh, and it is not retention but only a small suspensory ligament, then cut into that and soon cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh in its place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he takes pleasure: porridge and vegetables similar to them, until he recovers.
And if you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut out all of that and remove it, and soon cure it.
If in these plaques the artery or vein from which the flux of blood can occur is present and cannot be treated by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut one, then cut it with a blade or ligate it; if necessity prompts you that what we have said does not apply, then cauterize where the blood flow has been stopped.
If these plaques are small and few, the cause is light; sprinkle this powder over them, for before the air changes, it will consolidate those.
The manner of the powder is this: take oil of enses divided one part, blood of dragon divided two parts, and caustic divided three parts; mix all these in equal parts and sift them, then fill the plaques with this mixture, confine it well by a good binding over that to which it adheres, and coagulate it with blood.
Then strengthen it above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is not coagulated, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done alone with a cautery, when it is not possible to see or touch the wound.
And this operation is performed on large wounds when you determine that they should be paused over those and stretched, and on recent wounds whose blood has not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this powder in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to pause over those alcaus enguents degistius, or pause over those pols of the flour of ordi in water and honey that ferment; and then cure those among the other treatments until they are healed.
But if there is a fracture in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the head in what is venomous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between head wounds when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, when it is a nerve, there is no simple cure but that it should be avoided to treat it in such a way as zinc and zegi which are vitriol and resemble them in their sharpness against those nerves. And do not place any cause over the wound from cold, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the core of all body parts.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with cold water twice, some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and then applied with a compress when washed with cold water and the other toes in this manner, apply a moist ointment.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or draw the edges of the wound together, and subsequently treat it with powders until it is healed.
If there is depth to the wound or accidents at the lower part of the abscess, then perforate it in the most swollen area.
If in the wound a vein is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessity prompts you to do so.
If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or all, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the flaps of the wound by suturing over the bone of the shoulder and do not touch that; bandage it and return it to its natural figure, and strongly strengthen it with proper structure, and leave it for some days; then cure it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation until it is healed.
If the wound in the bone has already become infected, then probe it, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all that you can from it; what your hand cannot reach, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and is separated and the infection around it alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then powder it with the powder that is recommended. But if in the wound a fistula is formed, then cure that as well, and the remedy for it will be mentioned shortly in its own chapter.
If it is a wound from a spatha or couteau, and you determine its depth, then consider more whether the wound has ventosity when the evil enters; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth in it and the wound is recent with its bleeding, then you apply powder for the first hour, and do not press on it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart and brings back the evil again; instead, apply an attractive ointment and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound like an old man so that what comes from the humidity may flow; and make the patient sleep on the wound so that what is within him flows appropriately.
But if from the wound more than three days have passed and you do not observe spasms or tremor of the bad heart nor constriction of the windpipe, and often use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then treat that with garlic and the other cure until it is healed.
But if the healing of the wound is impossible, and all the time it remains open, you may know that a fistula has formed; treat it then according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is from a stab or a cut, and is simple on the surface of the foot or the thigh, then treat it with what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if it has already set in the bone, and you incise badly, then twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separated, let them lie still until the swelling subsides, as their extraction is alleviated.
And for other swellings in other limbs the cure is the treatment we have said.
Of the swellings of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And for the small disruption, it is made difficult by another method. I believe that reducing them is more difficult if you do not immediately avoid the intervention in them at their place, as they open up and become swollen, making the instrument difficult to use.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two species mentioned before.
And know that the stitch of the abdomen is according to four ways, but two stitches are common and suitable for stitching the other parts of the body.
And two other stitches proper communicate with the other parts, but more properly own in the stitch of the abdomen.
And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
So say that when the wound is small and a part of the intestine has herniated through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this is in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when the intestine becomes inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you should attempt to submerge a sponge or cloth soaked in pure wine, or gather juniper, spice, and brookweed, and place the intestine into it until the inflammation resolves.
And sometimes in such cases, wine is used for stopping the inflammation, and it is better than water alone in resolving the inflammation.
And when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine in water in which it was previously kept with mallows, for by this means it is alleviated with little cause.
And if the intestine is damaged in this procedure, then incise the disruption a little with an instrument on which hemorrhoids are embedded.
And the primary treatment is better when it is proper that no section is made, and not an occupation to dry up soon necessary and to cause fainting.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is acute, and the other part is not-acute, and the tip is subtle, but not so subtle as a spatum, in front somewhat blunt.
And when the wound is enlarged and the intestine is pushed out, then ensure that its reduction is according to its natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do so over it, for this is better.
When the rupture is wide, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must lay the patient on their back, and place their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place the head and feet higher than the other parts left.
And similarly, if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is higher than the other.
And similarly, you must administer this in large wounds and in medium-sized wounds.
And in small wounds, pause the preparation you have made, and then ensure that the minister is among your most skilled assistants. The assistant should hold the rupture entirely with their hand and adjust the edges of the wound, and then uncover it to the one who will suture for any cause nearby another.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or count the needle according to the amount of the width of the wound; then leave from the extremity of the rupture near the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure that you do not insert a thread at both extremities of the knot where the cord is left from the parts inside, before making that pass through that part; and you have already added two extremities of the thread and two extremities of the knot, and so you make four rounds.
And then strengthen the double thread on the circuit of the needle, and several times from both sides at once, and then add the two lips and the flap by decent addition; and then leave the thickness of the digit and place another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease doing this if necessary between the needles until all the contraction of the flap is completed.
And the needles should be of medium thickness between coarseness and subtlety, for the subtle ones penetrate the flesh lightly; and the coarse ones are difficult to handle in the operation, and therefore it is good that they be of medium thickness in terms of subtlety and coarseness.
And it is not good to place the needle at two opposite ends of the wound closely together, for then the flesh might be penetrated lightly and the flap will heal before its proper consolidation.
And they should not be overly prolonged in suturing so that the flap is not prevented from consolidating.
And then incise the ends of the needles so that they do not pass through the patient's flesh too deeply; place your hand over the suturing area with powders expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them there until you can tell that the flap is already consolidated.
These kinds of stitches with needles are more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suture.
The second stitch is made as follows: you should suture the four extremities, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped in thread of equal fineness and thickness.
And then, when you have the needle penetrate these four extremities, withdraw the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and returns to the side of the wound, making the stitch secure like a piece of cloth that is tightly woven.
And pause between each stitch the width of a small finger.
And this stitch is known to men.
And with this stitch, I healed the wound that was inflicted on a man in his belly, which had been cut by a knife, and it was the rupture of the major wound about two palms wide, situated around half a palm from the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had passed through the wound for twenty-four hours.
And the wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and heal it; then the viscera move again, and are restored to their positions.
And the other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle of fire, for I did not heal it with ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would apply it twice a day and kept frequent washing with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two kinds of suturing properly according to the word of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from the outside into the inside at the starting point.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain stitch according to the straight line and along the entire length of the body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then pass the needle from the inside out through the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made the penetration, then make another penetration in that limb at the external part going to the internal part; leave the end of the probe that is on this side, and insert the needle in the other internal part going to the external part.
And make the penetration with your penetration which you make penetrate in the probe at the end of the limb which is on the inside until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this lateral side, insert the probe at the end that is on the inside of the probe in the other side, and extract the needle from the hole you just penetrated, then return it to the same hole using the end of the probe that is on the other side; and extract that one from the hole which belongs to it.
And do this one time and another, and do it one more time or another time as you sew all of it that is on the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with skin thread on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew a circumference of the part of the extremity of the cord, and that you leave the other half inside until the operation is complete.
And the second species of suture which Gualia rightly employs, and this is by warming it and then sewing with it, is that you sew that part according to a thread thickness on which skilled physicians sew, endeavoring that all parts are added to their matching part in accordance with nature; and apply the extremity of one to the other extremity of the wound, and this is done as I have instructed you.
When you place the needle at the extremity of the wound on your proper side of the part from outside, make it penetrate into the part inside at that point, leaving two extremities of the thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through the other two extremities of the thread.
Then turn those individually, and make each part penetrate from inside to outside through the wound at the other two extremities on the opposite side.
This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and this is the suturing about which I previously mentioned.
This is the sermon of Gualia
And some would say that the suturing of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you introduce into these some thread, and begin with the insertion of the needle from where you should start, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the stitching pattern in which I have equalized the layers.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the abdomen, the suturing of this area is more difficult than of other parts of the abdomen.
And the judgment of medicinal treatment for plague is the judgment of other plagues.
And the cause is that when you acquire the recent plague from its own secretion before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and suture it properly, then place it over that flesh-colored powder.
And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it woolen cloths which you have prepared beforehand so that they become hard and fill with pus, and be consolidated by chafing and inspected; then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you are not present with the medicines, then place over it frequently, until it starts to drain pus, and change it every two hours, as you have been shown, until it is healed, so that you do not need other medicaments in minor preparations when the wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound might communicate injury to the principal members, then immerse wool in oil of good quality or in refined oil, and place it over the area between the groins and leave the axillae.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their intestines, then for several hours apply that with a vinegar stiptic black bile, especially if the inflammation has affected the intestine and caused an exiture penetrating into the cavity of it.
And know that which comes from the large intestine is of a lighter and more healing nature than that which comes from the fine intestines.
And it is of difficult healing that which the intestine called "gut" does not receive cure from any plague that falls into it; this is due to the great number of veins in it and its large size, and because of the subtlety of that part, and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if the process from the plague is the tissue, and you manage to obtain it recently, reduce that according to your skill, and with it reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed into it and is now black or brown, when you strengthen that with a ligature at the place that is darkened, so that there may be a flow of pus, for in the tissue are veins and arteries.
And then incise that which is another in that ligature, and place the two ends of the ligature hanging from the cut off part of the plague, so that above you may be alleviated the attraction of it by closing the opening of the tissue and the emission of the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and is small, sometimes it can be restored in some individuals. This is why I saw one who had been wounded in his belly by the impact of a lance, and the wound was old, having become a fistula due to its chronic state and distension.
Then I sought the cure for it, even though it was not completely healed. However, I succeeded in subtlely integrating that which is healthy into the area that has been cured and is consolidated.
And I saw that the area was already consolidated. I then treated the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and none were found to have been harmed by this unfortunate accident, but some suffered from their own poor dispositions, eating and drinking excessively, and frequently bathing and overexerting themselves.
And some experienced ones have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be tied in this manner: and you take large wafers; then tightly adjust the two edges of the wound and place one of those wafers with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; so when it adheres to those and strongly seals, you cut off the head of the wafer, for it adheres without dissolving.
And then place another blistering agent near the first one, and continue to make blisters one after another according to the size of the entire affected area.
And then reduce it and around the lesion; and drain those adjacent囊肿在囊袋内部愈合时排出；确保不要对患者造成不必要的伤害。
And it is possible that the intestine has been dried with fine vitriol made from the adjacent intestine of an animal, which is finer than a needle; and you should take the end of these intestine threads, making sure they are raw, and then place the end of them in vitriol wrapped, and gradually insert those threads into needles and through the intestine, and reduce that area in disruption.
And this method of suturing with blisters is simply done out of trust and hope.
But if the lesion is large and extensive, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no engagement but only drying, and it does not heal completely.
Of the treatment of abscesses and fistulas.
Know that any boil or apostema when wrapped and allowed to mature, and forms an ulcer, but is not consolidated and keeps growing over time without being incised, in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is named a fistula and we call it a abscess.
And according to truth, a fistula is a festered node, hard and white, upon which there is no pain and which is enclosed just as an abscess is. Therefore, it is called a white ulcer, that is, a painless abscess.
And in an abscess there is moisture, which keeps growing; and if the moisture is strong, it can be incised within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is thick, small, large, and thin.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them by medicine in this division.
And cover thus so that you may know the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with the hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; for some fistulas extend to the large veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the bladder, or to one of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to any joint composed thus like those of the hand and foot; and these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the illnesses of difficult cure, and do not receive a remedy or occupation; for such is travail and ignorance.
And if any of these fistulas is so deep that it does not reach the places mentioned, and you hope and confide in its cure, and want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a test with a needle or probe, and if the fistula goes straight, inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a thin lead wire, for lead being light of its body is alleviated and curved to relieve the tortuosity.
And if the fistula has horrid movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then christetrize the other orifices by their orifices, for the humidity with which you christetrize that one will be relieved of the others and flow from them.
And then inquire meticulously, according to the manner in which you can know whether here lies a vein or a nerve, and if the fistula's cavity is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula of orifices alone, and this is above all with your strength, with your questioning, with which you question the patient, and from which you derive the cause of the pain with your compression on the area, and the signs and appearances of the significations and causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood upon all those causes in true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider now if it is a proximate apparent fistula or in a place near a joint, distant from a joint, from a nerve, an artery, a vein, or one of the places which I and you call.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, stop what is within that filtration and of rotten flesh, and what is born in the opening of the flesh, or tissue and similar, cure that until it is healed.
But if the fistula is of great depth and straight, then delve into the prepuce until it is as far as possible, and remove all the rotten flesh; then apply bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have grasped with forceps.
And do this with the sharp medicine several times until it dissolves everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this, then cauterize it as we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that moist one according to what we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must incise that area where the corruption is completely halted; and place a drain where the flesh within is healed.
And if it is not yet healthy and you graft a piece of skin as you do, then you must know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then you uncover it again thoroughly and meticulously explain its condition and cleanse it with your final strengthening treatment, and then restore it.
And therefore if it is healthy, well and good; but if not, then you must know that the corruption is deep within the body, which has not been reached, and then in that case, you should merely leave it as it is.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then you extract it with fine forceps that fit well here.
And if the bones are displaced, then you must carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and from none of them do you leave any cause for future dislocation due to your lack of strength.
And if at any time you face a cause of the humidity, and in their incision there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if you are not prepared to extract the bones at your hour, then pause over the wound that which allows the wound there, and leave it within where that is near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not consolidated, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
Having done this, if you fear, pause over the wound submerged under a triple breath of oil, or a wound submerged in Egyptian unguent, or in any of the green unguents, for when they can be released, and the bones are from them separated, then the extraction is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the hip or rib or resembles those, and what is corrupted in it is only the surface, then quickly apply that resin only behind where the darkness and corruption are stopped, and then restore the wound.
If what is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and excise everything within the area where the corruption has spread, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I advise you that when dealing with a patient in the thigh, have them lie on their side and use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, who experiences pain in his thigh, and from the parts within is gout over the matter within the body where the matter has spread to the thigh, and the matter is that of an abscess, a large abscess, and it was not caused by external factors.
And then the abscess was extended over time due to the error of the doctors where the abscess became hardened, and the matter within agitated. Its cure was nearly paused when the thigh became fistulized, and you made openings in the swelling through which pus and bodily fluids drained.
And then for about two years the cure was sought by many doctors, and none of them with their knowledge in this art, managed to do so.
And there were the leg and the materials that flowed from those openings throughout his body; and already the condition of that man was totally stabilized, and the color of him was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the mouth.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones could be reached from all parts of the leg.
And then I opened myself and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was already terrible, corrupt, and deteriorated; and a part of the leg had already become corrupted where it had penetrated into the marrow.
And then I tightened what to me was revealed and prepared the exposed bone.
And I conclude that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which will be excised and sewn.
And then proceed with the restoration of the wound using consolidative medicines for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and uncover over the bone according to the first uncovering, and detect continuous corruption in the bone.
And sew that which appears from that corruption, and then I proceed to perform the cure and restoration, but it is not yet restored.
And then you uncover the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, and perform the restoration of it. But it is not restored until you incise around a palm's width of it, and extract its marrow. Then, you restore that using medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And there is no need for iteration in the operation of the section of it, but rather due to the position of the fracture and the lack of tolerance and fear of death in it, which causes it to accede in all hours due to excess of evacuation leading to bad syncope.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing is in place of good flesh lasting; and it is made well the disposition of him in his body and return the virtue of him; and it is changed in his dispositions and not forced against him in movement nor harm in any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the affected area of the body, then cut it out according to this manner: you should firmly grasp and secure that part of the prominent bone at its extremity, commanding someone else to extend that part. Cover it with a larger woolen pad over the flesh left behind, extending the end of the pad so that it draws the flesh towards the area left empty, and you uncover the flesh in the location where you wish to cut, ensuring the blade does not damage the flesh.
And place a rod or table properly under the bone, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to cut with the saw without damaging the broken flesh.
And make sure the sawing is on the broken part little by little, for if the corruption is inside the bone and does not appear in its manifestation through sensation, you may have to make another pass with the saw.
And if the bone is corrupt and not protruding, there is one continuous part joined to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fusts nearby, and join the incision where the corruption is with the continuity of the closure of the other part.
And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but out of alignment.
And if the corruption is in the axilla of the arm or the armpit, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears and where it manifests. Incise that area, cleanse it according to any disposition which is within your ability, and adjust everything accordingly, ensuring that nothing goes against your judgment regarding veins or nerves.
And you must know which are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and rarity; so that you may prepare for every kind of operation an instrument suitable to that operation.
And you must know that that operation means to you concerning the type of instrument you need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience with the ways of ailments, for when you have seen them, you will then put forth what is convenient for it from the instruments for all ailments.
And you must inform at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simple ones to which you will proceed according to your prohibition, which you will experience with the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of the vein: Let the head of this vein be in the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be in the shape of the points of a hammer.
And you should not apply any friction to the heads of the joints when they are damaged, or to the large open mouth.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the side razor:
Forma of another properly made saw: let it be an arc above and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a well-made pointed blade. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a cavity:
Form of a razor or fine one:
Form of another razor with a curved extremity:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and its extremity is like a point, and it is used in various places in the proportion of the bones:
Form like a ray which is used according to the proportion of the bone that is pierced:
And its extremity is triangular and sharp.
And it is made of iron from India, and similarly grooved like all the causes we have said about razors and incisors and saws.
For cutting bones and the jointing of bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the cure of those medicines and the cure did not succeed, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member you do not perceive by any cause, then you must enter that member into this so that it accedes the corruption, in order to expel the malady either by death or by malice which is greater misfortune of the member.
The sign of him to whom this happens is that the member becomes black before it is cut, as if already burned by fire. You may notice the blackness in the vicinity where that burning has entered that limb and has spread throughout the body; therefore, you must incise that area.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as a scorpion, viper, or rue, and similar.
And if the corruption or the blow is at the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it enters your hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the elbow, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you incise the other, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if corruption passes and spreads beyond the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and another cause given instead of this for cure is the quantity of virtue.
And similarly handle the foot when corruption spreads to the toe of the foot, then incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then incise the entire foot. But if it enters the sole, then incise the leg between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already penetrated the sole, then there is nothing but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the manner of incising the member or closing it is that you hold the thread in one part and leave which you want to incise, and hold another thread over the place; extend the assistant one thread to the parts left, and extend the assistant another thread on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads so that all the flesh is uncovered within that space left between them, then it is to be incised or closed.
And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and that when the wound is dressed, it fits tightly and securely.
And if you happen to bleed when operating, then cauterize the area frequently, or place some astringent powders on it to stop the bleeding; then return to your surgery until it is completed.
And then bind the injured member with a bandage as necessary, and care for it until it is healed.
And I advise you that if someone has an injury on their foot, when this accident happens which you and I have advised, it is a condition where blackness appears on their foot due to a burning that resembles the combustion of fire.
And that corruption incidentally begins in its said part from which it tends throughout the body.
And then that person prepares himself to wait until the cure goes to the limb with the urgency of his pain from both the pain and the inflammation, and the disease enters the joint, and the limb is healed.
Long time that corruption incident in his said hand occurs.
And then it comes to me, and I perfuse it to reflect the excess on what is placed over the hand of the medicines, near the purification of the body; and the excess does not reflect but begins to go to the other part where it began in the hand.
And he asks me to incise his hand, and I do not want to do so hoping for the reflection of that excess, more because I fear the incision of his hand to death, for the virtue of the disease was powerful.
And after he awakens from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that person prepared and incised his hand entirely, and was healed.
And I have added this narration only to serve as an aid regarding what is known about this illness, and as a guide by which it may be understood and treated.
On the care of colic and the quality of cathartic treatments with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is expelled, and the location remains clean as if it were a vessel, and the cover above it is like a thin cloth, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on bone or nerve or ligament, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged such that corruption presses into any member, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cover completely as if it were turned inside out, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not stick to the area due to corruption.
If you hope that the stricture adheres and that the corruption has not succeeded through such consequence, and in the stricture it has passed forward, then you cure that with a clyster.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large and the hand that touches it emits an odor, then treat it with a clyster using a medicinal Egyptian mixture which consists of oil, wine, and honey, each part in equal shares, and be sure to mix them in a vessel until the medicine becomes warm and can reach the specific part.
And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; clysterize it into the sinus, strengthen its orifices, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that medicine completely; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pain subsides.
And sometimes a clyster is made with ash water when this medicine is not available; you take the ashes from vitriol, put them in water; and then extract that and clysterize it until you are sure the sinus has been affected.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the water of the ashes, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with ziniar trissat, and prepare that mixture with wine and honey mixed together. For the property of honey is to modify and wash, while the wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess ofstringiness and dryness in the wine.
And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already relaxed, then administer that mixture with water to cause flesh to grow in it.
And you take a dye of dyafinicon, dissolve that mixture with olive oil and wine that isstringy; or you administer that mixture with certain medicines and apply others that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the openings of the sinew are wide in such a way that the catheter of the enema is not received, then gradually enlarge those openings with a small iron instrument, and place it in lukewarm ointment wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment while it is being enlarged.
And if the opening is large, then you add the edges of it with a stitch and leave enough quantity in which the enema can be added.
And if the opening from which the stream flows is elevated above the upper parts, then dry that area below it so that the stream can flow into it. When the stream is restricted in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated in it.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the vicinity of the lower part as you wish, then you should puncture the member for preparation so that the stream flows slightly from it according to your ability and that no cause of the stream be retained.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, who warm it at all times so that it does not come out what is stuck in it from the arm. And that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus has already adhered, or there is a tendency to adhere, then hold it until it detaches itself, or remove it after one day, and when you remove the poultice, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May it be that from the sinus there extends a subtle virus, then do not worry about the adherence of this, for the healing of it takes hold, for in some people the generation of flesh in their poultices is slow, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if from the sinus for nearly days it is sat brackish indigestion, then you perceive that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and the cause prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus like an ointment defninicon when there is overabundance in its addition of saffron.
And the best preparation for this is that you take an ointment of defninicon and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply it to the affected area with a piece of soft cloth, covering it well, and use this.
And make a semblance in that action, when there is no need for it, of applying an ointment of defninicon, honey when mixed in to be thickened, and use this. Or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind them all together over the fire with honey, then apply lines of this on cloth and strengthen it over the sinus; and apply lines of that to the honey which you have mixed and is thickened, and grind these over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes it is administered to him long-lasting aromatic incense and the celestial lily (and the celestial lily) and powder of iris and centaury, and use those simples either alone or mixed, sift them and grind over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and seek inquiry in the bones or in other hard members or ligaments; then you treat it with a fistula cure, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, nail abrasion, and incision of the digit with additional sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger or toe, and is firm in other fingers, and as it is prolonged and its cure is less prized, or it becomes a cautery apostema, or it is corrupted, and a branch is inserted that corrodes the root of the nail, and corrupts it entirely, and allows its corruption to pervade the bone within which it emits an odor, and the tip of the finger is cut off, and the color of it becomes jaundiced.
And when you have done that as we have said in the division and do not concur with your cure, then cover that part where the bone is broken and place there a cautery, for a hot cautery is beneficial in this.
If the bone is sound and the joint diseases have already compressed the flesh at the internal parts, and begin to prick and lead that, then cover the angle of the joint that pricks the flesh, and push it out and incise that flesh with ease, and place your hand over what remains of the flesh where corrosive burning medicines are allowed to act until it is thoroughly treated; then cure that part with ointment once it is healed.
If the corruption has already invaded the bone, then you must incise the bone there and extract it, for no time will heal what is corrupted in the bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading to that area, then incise there in one of the bones according to where the pain is remembered, and cure that part once it is healed.
If at the joint upon percussion or friction there is intense pain, then at the beginning lance the patient, and draw out the humor with an incision above using a sharp blade for transverse extraction of fluid, and be careful that the incision does not reach the flesh left by the joint, for you will cause intense pain to the patient due to the nature of redundant adjusted flesh in that place; and treat that area so that it no longer hurts.
Moreover, this redundant adjusted flesh is found in many people, being very soft in the muscles and very hard in the bones, or very soft in the joint.
And some of it is found in the recesses of the joint, or the natural condition of it is located in certain nodules of the fingers. Moreover, that which is found in certain nodules of the fingers is not soft, and this which is found in the joints is much softer.
And for those that are naturally fleshy, the incision should be light, and you must cut into it at its recesses with a sharp blade.
More difficult for that which is near the root of the joint; therefore guard it from cutting.
More difficult is that which is near the knee; ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh at the joint with a round cut into the bone, and nearby it will be one of those convenient joints for this, and cure that inside until it is healed.
More difficult is the consolidation which occurs to the fingers between their joints either by nature of the person who has them, or by natural consolidation, or by inflammation, or by burning, then you must cure that consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place your hand between his sheets where you have applied oil to prevent the joints from consolidating lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they consolidate as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers on the palm, then you must cure that consolidation as prepared and conform to the figure of the limb.
Of vein diseases, such are varicose veins.
Vein diseases are varicose veins, and such are swollen veins full of melancholic excesses that occur in the parts of the body, with the greatest occurrence in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel much, work much, and carry things.
Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until there is a strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the great vein.
More often, the treatment for them is according to two methods: one is to incise and draw off that black blood, and the other method is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The sectioning is done in this manner: moisten the beginning of the groin with hot water until the thick blood is resolved, which is from the groin. Then strengthen the area above the patient's thigh between the inner and outer parts of the leg with a bandage. Next, dry the vein in one, two, or three places with a wide drying technique. Use your hand to elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards, into and above it, until the quantity of blood that you desire has drained, which is sufficient to neutralize the effect of the disease.
And then raise her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted by the patient.
More specifically for the elevation of their legs: you lift the patient's thigh, if there are swellings in them, and then place them in hot water and wrap the thigh with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins are prominent; or exercise them with strong activity if hot water is not available, until the limb is heated.
And then dry the bandage along the vein by sectioning it in the length or at the end of it you should drain it, or at the lower part of it you should cut it.
And then cut the bandage with scissors and strip the vein from all parts until it appears by your feeling, and you should observe the appearance of that cord draining to black.
And then, as you remove the bandage, you see that white which is the cord.
And then you place that leg elevated and bent at the knee, suspending it on an armrest or lion's foot.
And then dry that area near that section for three digits, and then strip the knee from the upper part of the vein where it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract it and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section above that.
And do this where you extract it from the section that is higher above or above all other sections, where it is fully inserted; then incise it.
And if you do not follow this to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie it there, and then extract it. Or insert that needle and rotate your hand in all directions where it is bent. And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and will have come over the wound through that damage.
And when all of it has been removed, then place over the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, whether well-filtered or not, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted having curvature in which there is wrapping at the parts, and it is not according to straightness as we have said, then cut into that completely at all parts of its curvature and at the places of its wrapping, and suspend that with strings so that you lift that entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage that, for it will be difficult to lift that; and use your prudence there.
Shape of the cut where the vein is dried:
It is not prepared like the strings, nor of sharp point for fear that it damage the vein; and it is of rough flexibility. If it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; hence, it is in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the crus vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands of caudae as Al-Ategi describes in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India, which are arid and of little tenacity, in which no grass nor trees grow.
And the strong vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that breaks the chain as venom inside the body becomes serpents, worms, and lice, generating between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the onset of this condition is when you encounter inflammation in the leg intensely; then, nearby, the area becomes blistered; and soon after, the vein starts to protrude from the location of that blistering, seeming like a plant sprouting.
And when the extremity appears, then cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachm. Place it there and let the lead hang from the leg.
And as often as some cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and apply it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while that which is outside has been entered, for if you incise that, it will contract and enter the flesh and cause an abscess and foul swelling in the area and a bad ulcer.
Because it must be treated thoroughly and extracted little by little, until it is expelled from the rear end of the patient and no cause is left in the body.
And from this vein, one is extracted in some men that are its length about five or six palms, and I have been told that one was extracted that was twenty palms long.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that along the length of the wound, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medications; and then cure it through the treatment of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has protrusions, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and brings with it many openings, each of which is situated differently.
And thus care for it as we have said in the division and above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin, and it is called bovine illness.
This illness is named in some lands as the bovine disease. It is caused by worms that appear frequently among cattle and these few worms are native between the skin and the flesh, and they move up and down throughout the body, and are felt by their own movement from member to member, breaking the skin and coming out.
And the generation of these worms occurs through the putrefaction of some humors, just as happens with maggots, snakes, worms, and ascarids in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes in the body and rises to the head, and reaches the vein, then strongly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and this happens frequently.
And when you want to cure it and extract it, it is not done without considering its circulation and appearance according to the sensation, then check what is over it and what is left it in compression and strong construction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is palpated in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you see it being carried to the head near the ear, then apply strong strictura over the supraorbital ridge, and dry it thoroughly, and extract it; then check that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines expelling corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
On the section regarding the illness of the ear.
This illness is called nafir in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some members, and often is passed from member to member.
And now I have seen that which I will describe to you. I was called to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein of the arm. After it had risen for about an hour, I saw that this swelling moved up like a worm climbing, though less urgently than feared, like live silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain was in that area, and a blister formed in the muscle, and there it stayed for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other side of the body, entering the other arm.
And then I was told that she moved about the entire body as I observed; it was too wonderful to see the change in her and the speed with which it moved from one limb to another. And I had already seen this before in my patients in that manner, but I have also seen movements where the pain is found to be permuted from one limb to another. But not all have such symptoms as in the woman.
And I do not consider it to be so, but rather that it is because the woman was of slender body, with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this case the sensation of that swelling has changed.
And it is necessary that there be no such backward curvature in those who are delicate and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
And since you want the cure for it, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear as you expect in the way we have said, then strengthen that area and gently but firmly over it until the compressed swelling is inserted, and apply a cautery to the place.
But if you do not see it in the swollen joints, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel of the swelling, and purge those with stinking pills and with serapian pills and similar.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they lodge, for their diversity is that some have large points, small, concave, and dull, being solid; and some have three angles, and of those to which belong tongues; and of those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of suffocation is when the arrow lodges in it, pierces the bone, and sits above the skull, which is over the brain, for it happens by strong acute pain, scotoma, vertigo, redness in the palms, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and the speech is greatly impaired, the voice destroyed, and sitting at the site of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and from it seeming like an excess of flesh.
And if you see these signs in this manner, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it has pierced the heart are that it is near the left nipple, and felt at that point where it was lodged in a hard substance, not visible; and the strong movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the black and foul blood, and the coldness at the extremities, pallor of the face, and syncope; and from this you would know that death descends suddenly.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are spitting of bloody foam from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are pulsating, and the color of the patient changes, and he breathes heavily or irregularly, and demands air with difficulty.
And if the arrow pierces the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and makes the swelling great with a strong and spasmodic pain, and does not affect all the members of the muscles.
And if the arrow hits the stomach, then firmly press the wound to stop any indigestion.
And if the arrow hits the belly and is embedded in it, apply firm pressure to the wound or the skin, or the intestine which is ruptured, as there is no hope for the cure without removing the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and pierces through causing urine to leak out, and any process of it reaches the parts outside, then intense pain in the wound indicates that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other members such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, and ribs, the vertebrae of the back, the sternum, the pelvis, and their counterparts in the limbs, are saved according to major dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a poisonous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their treatment.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the lacrimal gland of his eye in the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, but nothing happened to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in the gray of his eye, leaving the eyelid behind, and the arrow was already hidden so that only a small extremity adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron where there were no ears.
And the Jew is alive, and nothing happened to his eye, which was badly injured.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was lodged in the groin, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that one had ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was already submerged in his groin; then I dissected around it, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And another arrow was extracted from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and I perceived that he died of that; and therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to any cause of his condition, I incised over the arrow and managed it, and he was healed, and no ill accident befell him.
And I found a man in whom an arrow was embedded in his back, and the wound had healed over it, and after approaching seven years, incise the arrow in the crease of the thigh.
And I found a woman in whom an arrow was embedded in her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside it, and there was no change in her condition over time, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural operations.
And I found another man in whom an arrow was embedded in his face, and the wound had healed, with the arrow broken inside. He did not experience much pain, and appeared similar to others.
And I extracted the arrow from the king's principal man, who was embedded in the middle of his nose, and it had slightly shifted to the right side. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him around the arrow wound within three days.
And then you will find the wound of the arrow stretched out; and then you will inquire about the one that feels slightly tender, but does not feel it; yet he felt the puncture and let go of his right ear, and then you will suspect that this puncture was at the extremity of the arrow.
And apply the place to be applied with an attractive and digestive plaster, trusting that the place we place it will show me the location of the arrow, so that it dries on that.
And do not be deceived by the significant spot where the arrow struck; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without incident; and during this time, the wound heals, and you remove the stitches from the extraction site over a period of several days until one day you feel the arrow inside its sheath and tell me so.
And then place a strong corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opens up. And by probing, you will find and locate the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust in the opening of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time for this within four months.
And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I widen that, and without obstaunce from them, I do not cease to refine and devise various methods of engineering until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made specifically, as will be described at the end of this chapter, and then I extracted it; and thereafter I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, with no trace left in any way.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and significance of what I have not yet said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narration nor are they comprehended by the free will.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little on motion; and on what is present compared to what is absent; and find new operations and new instruments for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are inserted but according to two manners: either by attraction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary part.
And that which is removed by the place where entry was made, or the arrow proceeding in a fleshly location and being shot out.
And if it does not obey the assessment of the hour at which it was shot, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its egress are alleviated.
And similarly, if it is inserted into bone and you do not obey your assessment, then leave that for a few days and apply attraction and motion each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not obey your attempt for some days, then you should know that you have perforated in the circuit of the arrow at that bone of the entire part, making travel subtly between the area where the arrow is expanded, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then probe with a few instruments which are suitable for the removal of it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you cut into the flesh in which it is embedded from every direction with all the skill you can muster; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those areas that must yield.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use your hand's torque and forceps from all directions until they make it yield; and with subtle skill ensure that the arrow is not broken and that it is made easy for its extraction and that of that extraction.
And if you cannot do this at your hour, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again iterate that which is alleviated. But if it makes him contrary with a flow of sweat, then you administer what we have said for cure in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue from incision of vein or nerve, or cord, and administer engen in every manner for the evacuation of the arrow; and do this with facilitation and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as you have been taught.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself so that the patient be according to the figure according to which you should place the tip of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are counter-directed from another part, or that already have proceeded to some part of the outer parts, or increase the extramitigation of the arrow by the sensation of the part above the codena often eminent; then you secure over that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then pull that, for it is made light by eysisment.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the limb according to the opposite direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and stretch it out, and place it carefully.
But if not, leave it for a few days, and then reapply it where it burned.
But if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer pressure, then insert it there. If it is stuck, stir it gently with a concave tool so that its cavity engages with the arrow's head, and then push it into place.
But if the arrow is concave, then push it with strong stirring entering it, so that the arrow expands from within.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you concave all the flesh where it entered, if possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits the foot, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough for you to touch it with your hand, and it is possible to extract it from there, then extract it and carefully remove any part of the wound where a vein or nerve might be, and cure that area until it is healed.
The form of forceps with which arrows are drawn:
Let the ends be shaped like the mouth of an eagle, so that they can grasp the arrow when it is taken out without letting go.
And these are made in special shapes, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the condition of it.
Thus, so that the instrument in the curved groove may be eased and pushed towards it.
Of femoral vein puncture.
The veins for femoral puncture, of which it is customary to puncture two, located near the ears, as Alhazen says; two herbs that are on the two temples apparent; and two veins that are in two lacrimal glands of two eyes called asbestos; and the vein prepared in the middle part of the forehead, and the vein that is at the extremity of the nose; and two jugulars that are at the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and — these are the veins called algelic —; and there are two veins on the left side of the tongue. More specifically, the veins that are punctured in the brachial region are v; of which one is cephalic, and is from the wild flax; the people call it “the vein of the head,” or sorda, and it is a median vein, composed of a branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; they call the latter the people “vein of the whole body,” while the basilica is the vein that is placed on the domestic flax and is called “citillary,” and the vulgar call it “the vein of the belly”; from the funis brachialis, which is placed over the axilla, and it is in this one that puncture is made, and it is the one that appears above the elbow due to a clear appearance; salvatella, which is the vein between the said auricular and the small one, and it is in it two branches.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild animal's heel; the second is sophena, and its place is in the thigh of the domestic animal; the sciatic vein, and its place is in the thigh of the wild animal; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The health of the veins near the ears is related to catarrhs, headaches, and old maladies of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those veins is according to what I will tell you: it should be done at the top of the patient's head, and the patient's head should be rubbed at the back of the skull where the two veins are located near the ears with a wide cloth in good friction; then firmly press the patient's neck with a bandage under which the two locations can be felt near the ears on two pressed areas of the head; and you want that at your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those veins at your right hand, here it is to be tested.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be used for incision, and then insert it near the vein between the points where the bloodletting will reach the mouth. Then raise your hand to the vein and needle it above the parts and incise the vein with an incident cut. Let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers adjusted or around that; and let the blood flow out as much as you want.
Then apply powder firmly and leave it there until it is healed.
And this has already been described at the beginning of the book regarding their incision and cautery.
More of the two arterial veins that are near the temple, for the youthfulness of phlebotomy it is considered an ancient and evil emigranea, as well as frequent ophthalmia and a body full of acute effusions in the feet.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is as I will recount to you: constrict the patient's neck with your hand until the two veins appear by sentiment for a clear manifestation, and let the pulsation of their location be felt by your finger; and then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the fleubotomi incidentially leaving it there, elevating the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the malate, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place there a clot or powder and strengthen that above with a strong constriction, and leave it until it is healed.
And now the recollection of their cases, and after that the incision, and the cutting at the beginning of the book.
And the treatment of bloodletting from the vein of the forehead is close to the bloodletting of the cephalic vein for ancient facial illnesses, headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the bloodletting from there is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient strengthens his side with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named a fossoir, of which this is the form:
Pause the point突出的那个点在排尿口的顶端，并且位于那条静脉上方，然后以适当的方式倾斜或出于其他原因敲打该点，让血自然流出你希望的数量；随后解除对膀胱的穿刺，并加强该部位使其愈合。
Sometimes it is opened with a venesection knife, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as with other venesections, or beforehand from the lateral extremity, and venesection it according to the transverse, for the bone is close by and strong; the venesection would break the bone when so subtle.
More the youth of the two veins that are at the lacrimal glands of both eyes through the forehead by inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for face diseases.
And the quality of the venesection is that the bladder strengthens its column with a bandage, and then venesection them, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And the venesection should be made according to the transverse length a little, for in that place there is no flesh; and if the venesection is subtle, make its extremity strong.
And then let the blood flow until it is as necessary for you, place your hand over those cuts, and strengthen them with one night, and then remove those.
May the femoral puncture of the vein near the nose be performed for acute fever and intense swelling, for facial ailments, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient lies on his side with his nose to your left hand, and take the fine needle for the femoral puncture and place it in the middle location of the nose according to the correct position, as the vein does not appear here by sensation, and as the blood begins to flow soon.
Cover your hand with the needle gradually and let the blood flow according to your need; then remove it after one night, as it is restored rather lightly.
May the juice of the femoral puncture cure stiffness of the limbs and the beginning of leprosy and various other ailments and corrosive ulcers similarly as in phlebotomy.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient feels each one in his side with a needle; and the artisans are over the patient's head, and the patient lies on a bench.
And gradually puncture the vein along its length with a small and ample flebotomy needle; and extract blood according to the season's quantity or according to what is needed; and make it seem as though you are dealing with another vein.
And gradually remove the needle and strengthen the two veins with a mid-stricture to prevent the patient from feeling cold, and leave a scar where the plague is healed.
And the benefit of the venesection for algire (a type of fever), it helps with small boils and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that you stand before the patient, strengthen his neck with a bandage, and then turn the lips and look at two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each one of both, and this more so where these are small black veins in the area. Then incise each one with an incisive incision.
But if you are in doubt, and do not know which of those is the most serious, then understand the incision of the largest of them, and of the most obvious.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are above the lips.
But of the two veins that are below the tongue, the juice is near the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for conditions that are in the gullet, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is to follow the illness between your patient's shoulders before the sun, and to elevate the tongue, and look at the tongue, on one side of its vein and on the other side of its vein, and the color of each is declining to black.
And then phlebotomize each; and beware that you do not finish your hand in phlebotomizing those, for they are arteries.
And your veins which are lanced in the groin are in them what customarily occurs in all men, and the lancing of them is done according to two methods, or they place under the lancing a mirtille or olive needle of fine thickness; or dry lancing with a surgical knife, and call it alnessil, and this is its form:
It is with flax that you do this, and you apply to opening the concave full veins from apparent large sources, and to those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this lancing is of lesser width and finer point, and you apply it to lancing thin veins that contain fine yellowish blood.
May the youth of the basilic vein phlebotomy, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood from the bad humors that leave the gout and the knee, and from what seeps from the foot and the belly.
And it convenes to the phlebotomizer, when performing that phlebotomy, that he well guard that and be over-cautious about it, for if he leaves the artery there in the puncture of the phlebotomy, it will incise that artery and cause flows of blood, so you must ensure that you do not perform phlebotomy at a puncture before cutting like an assailant.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by manifest appearance, then you must leave that and change to the other, or seek some of its branches; or perform phlebotomy in a location at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and stop phlebotomy with an assailant-like cut as we have said.
May you, if you wish the phlebotomy of the elbow, then before the constriction of the arm touch the location between where you know the pulse location, and place your hand over it with a firm grip; and raise the arm and stop the vein with a concave section for phlebotomy as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not fall in some space of the location of the artery.
And when you observe, as you tighten the ligament, inflammation in the area that you have touched feels hard, then that inflammation is arterial inflammation, and therefore avoid it.
And if you observe the blood flow during phlebotomy as golden like a child's, thin and clear, then you know it is arterial blood; then withdraw your hand for some time over that place; and bring your hand closer to it, and if the blood has clotted, with four or five drops having clotted, then you tighten your arm and leave it there.
And keep the patient from the moccio of the disease, and be over-cautious about it, not letting him get wet for a few days until he is healed.
And if the blood does not clot, and you realize that it is not present medicine for this, then you incise the artery if it appears to you; for its extremity will be constricted, and the blood will clot; or take some from a fistula, and do this, and take half of it and apply it strongly over the vein with strictura descent on the ligament and between other powders on the next day.
And if the wound is cut open, that is good; otherwise, then cure that as was mentioned before regarding the location of the powdered substances to stop the flow of blood.
And the cutting of the wound is difficult in many dispositions due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of stitching the arm.
More from the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that you extract the blood from the part superior to the head and from the part below the body; for this, it consists of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And cover the phlebotomist if there is a nerve over the phlebotomy site; for that is a nerve; and then if you puncture the phlebotomy and find the nerve, it will cause stupor, and its recovery is difficult, and it is not fully cured even with strong treatment. This nerve often appears in sensations; and if it is hidden in some people and is fine and not visible, then cover the phlebotomy with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you incise the vein in its length.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the feet.
And here specifically, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive branch or a myrtle branch; for it is the pure extract from all veins, for it does not leave the artery nor the nerves.
However, in some individuals, the abscess is strong, and when not phlebotomized in the first percussion, it may not become noticeable until later.
The first is that you should know that the venesection is not administered except for conservation of health and hope of it and caution against the occurrence of ailments, and that the venesection be made in one of the veins that are in the groin, namely: cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and that the venesection be made at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near eating, when there appear signs of congestion.
And the venesection be made on the third day or at the first opportunity after three hours of the day have passed.
More venesection that is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity at that hour, whether night or day, in any hour and at all times.
And you should know that an infant should not be venesectioned until it is four years old, and a woman who is pregnant should not be venesectioned except in the fourth month between the seventh and eighth months of pregnancy, and women who have passed their sixtieth year should not be venesectioned.
And when one wishes to be flеботомated in some manner, ensure that his intestines are modified before the flеботомия with a leon enema, so that the veins do not carry superfluous fluids during the flеботomия of the intestines, which are purified and do not harm the main limbs.
And the patient should not be flēbotomized if they have nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, or illness due to overindulgence in food or drink, nor for malaise from excess of heat or cold, and more importantly, flēbotomia should be avoided before colic pain, before vomiting, before abdominal distress, before increased sexual activity, before excessive work or exercise, before fasting or staying awake, and for any cause that dissolves virtue, whether bodily or animal.
And consider the subtlety of the humors before performing this if the condition is severe, with foods and drinks, and medicines if it is possible for them.
And between the bath, if any cause does not prohibit it, or exercise due to some activity, so that the condition becomes more subtle.
And pause the femoral incision at the foot of the bed, so around three o'clock, as we have said.
And I assure you that the foot of that limb should be kept on the day of all evil accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is toil or superfluous pain and similes thereof.
And to her assistance, have the causes be presented in their usual use by men, with aromatics and perfumes, and with balsams according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the femoral incision over a cushion that is placed higher than the cushion on which the patient lies.
Then extract his thigh, and rub it with your hand the femoral incision two or three times; then tightly bind it with a bandage and wrap it twice.
And if the stricture is tempered, for when the stricture is not equal, or the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then permit the body to release blood accordingly.
And near the stricture, make sure that those who are to be lanced press their hands together between them where the veins are swollen and clearly felt.
And near the lancer, anoint his lancet with a little ant oil properly; then place your hand on the vein with your left hand where you want the lancing to occur, allowing the vein to swell slightly so that the percussion is felt clearly. The vein should be like a fleeing cord when you lance it; this one is full of venosity. When you pause the lancing over that area, it contracts, and the lancer is revealed. If the lancing does not open the vein, and if it does, it is strayed.
And therefore, make sure that the lancer is attentive to all these causes.
And if the vein opens with a single puncture, then that is good. Otherwise, repeat this or another pass, allowing that area to swell slightly, or over it apply a cauterization if the area is not suppurating.
And if the area is suppurated, or the sore spreads, then you let it be for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that a severe abscess will form, nor immerse it in bath water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the vein is thin, and you fear that it will not bleed enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust slightly based on the appearance. Do this with urgency before the area becomes suppurated, for when the area does become suppurated, you should use a smaller wound.
But if you find that it has already become suppurated, then do not operate on it further, for there is no need for any reason; instead, place a part of the wound over an incision in oil, which alleviates the pain from the sore. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer an incision in oil in all phlebotomies where you have to cut the veins; they do this with tyriaca, alfadoc, and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood becomes finer and is circulated when it is thick.
And if in the place of the incision a large abscess is formed, many vesicles occur, especially to that which has not been bled at all or during the appearance of the small vein, then you apply, and hold over the area a soaked sponge in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for about an hour, for it dissolves.
And make sure to do this near the end of the bleeding from that vein with consent of the patient or another vein.
And if any black or green color remains in the area for several days, do not note this; if you wish, place over it some decoction of aloes and myrrh, or some juice of mint or of camphor, or a similar preparation.
And many vesicles occur and abscesses form from the incision of the basilica.
And place your hand over it. If then you find softness in that area, apply your compress there, as that prominence is bad and harmful; and then be sure to place over it some of what we have said, for strong fluid will flow from the arterial blood.
And apply a poultice to it where there is stiffness, so that the area may become hardened, and then cure it with the other treatment until it is healed.
And know that you must extract from the wound all humors according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the color prevailing over the blood according to what appears.
If the blood is black, let it remain until it is resolved; and similarly, if you see it thick, let it remain until it becomes more subtle; and similarly, if it is acute, let it remain until its sharpness is moderated.
And know that for one who is swollen and strong and has the need for a bloodletting of blood in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged, and the bloodletting should be thorough.
And for one who is weak, do the opposite, and know that you must extract it in several sessions, and that you should do so gradually.
And the best method for bloodletting from a vein is a transverse section, not a puncture.
This method of femoral puncture avoids the flow of blood and damage to nerves, and is more advantageous and safer than puncture according to length and breadth.
And in which it is accustomed for syncope to occur after the puncture, take a little of powder infused in vinegar or simple oxymel before the puncture; and extract from the upper part of the blood in three or four draughts.
And if it is a sensation of fullness, then take before the puncture a powder infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup flavored with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if syncope occurs after the puncture, and it is caused by the escape of foul blood, then take before drinking a mixture of meat water and subtle fragrant syrup; use its aroma, and place your hand on their foot.
And use the other causes that we have said in the division on syncope by evacuation.
And here you want to fan his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, start with him from which the venefication is by main evacuation, and the virtue of it is freol, which evacuates the blood little by little, so according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
And when you want to fan his arm and draw his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first venefication.
And when you want to draw the blood from his body in the direction opposite to which it naturally flows, do so on the second or third day after it has been fanned.
And when the body has already heated up with blood and is causing fever, draw all the blood at once in one session and ensure a large quantity is drawn. Amplify the sensation so that it happens before syncope occurs; since you have maintained all the conditions for venefication. Place your hand on the patient's pulse to control the body's blood flow, so that it does not end in death instead of syncope. When the veneficator is ignorant and negligent, this must be done over several sessions.
And do not remove the arm when you want to release it and evacuate the blood for a second time, as already the orifices of the vein are closed and it is made difficult for the blood to exit, so press upon it with firmness and slightly extend it lightly, for this is too bad.
Let it remain in the state of being phlebotomized as before; or keep this at the acuity of the phlebotomy that is coagulated by blood in the orifices of the vein; or place over it a tyriaca compress, or a sagenea, and hold that with light compression until the blood has settled.
And if the vein is apostematized, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the apostema is sedated.
And if necessity prompts you to release the blood again, and there is no excuse, then let it flow from another place or on that same location or from the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the funica or basilica, when they are not found or are hidden, for it consists of those.
And the quality of the femoral puncture is that the patient inserts his hand in water cauda when the vein becomes clearly visible and engorged.
And then bind tightly over that area of the lump with a string in the middle; and then perform a femoral puncture according to the small transverse axis, neither longitudinally nor laterally.
And let the incision be wide, and let your femoral puncture be at that spot where you make it over the joint of the hand, a little.
And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then repeatedly immerse your hand in water cauda until you achieve your necessity and let the blood run into the water.
But if you are in the days of summer, then you are excused from repeatedly immersing your hand in water cauda. Instead, allow the body to rest with the blood in water cauda during winter.
And the femoral puncture of this vein is safer than of all other veins, for it has no pulse or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is related to liver diseases.
And the quality of the phlebotomy in the liver is that you tense the hand with a ligament or with your own hand, placing it more at the base of the artery, when the vein is swollen and well demonstrated; then puncture that one transversely; and if you incise it completely, this will not cause any harm.
And ensure that you do not withdraw your hand from the phlebotomy, leaving it with the nerves of the fingers exposed and naked.
And place your hand in the basal artery and let the blood flow through it, for if you do not place it in the basal artery, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein, which is forbidden to occur.
And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt, so that it does not become completely constricted; similarly ensure that you do this for all related areas.
The treatment of the femoral vein puncture on the left side is that it is related to the diseases of the thigh.
And perform the femoral vein puncture on the other side in the same manner as you have done on the other.
And the treatment of the femoral vein puncture is for diseases in the lower part of the body, such as diseases of the veins, retention of menses, and diseases of old sores and chest ulcers, and their similar conditions of diseases.
And the quality of the femoral vein puncture is that the patient inserts his foot in warm water and makes friction thereon, whereupon the veins become apparent; then place a bandage over the joint of the foot; and cut the location of the vein which is apparent from there, with its branches on the side of the foot.
And therefore, for the femoral vein puncture, cut the larger branch or the side of the chest, and cut the location where the continuity is best and cleaner.
And if you make a ligation there on the surface of the foot, then you must guard the nerves that are left there on the surface of the foot, and place your ligation at the point where you ligate transversely, as if you wanted to incise it.
And let the ligation be secure.
But if the discharge of the blood is forbidden; then you must immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that where it is to be evacuated.
And if the ligation is made incorrectly in the first attempt, then redo the ligation with a small amount more, for the location is salted; and do not fear its malignity, but guard the nerves as we have said.
And similarly perform the ligation on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, as we have said, you should cut the tendon at the point where the wild arrowroot bone is.
And the success of the femoral incision is when pain in the hip occurs when it is seared.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient enters bath, expedites and strengthens the thigh of the sick person with a thin long bandage under four fingers, so that it does not appear except through this.
And when it appears, then perform the femoral incision according to any method that is possible and according to the transverse, which is better. Or incise there through an incision or extract there through extraction, for the place is clean.
And it is often well opened; and if you find it but do not appear by the sense of touch, then perform a femoral incision on some part of it, and that is the one that appears between the two toes opposite the auricular and the ring finger.
And guard the nerves, and let the amount of blood flow that you desire.
Then release the tension and place your hand over the site of the femoral incision to strengthen the area, for it heals readily.
Of ventilation and of the qualities of using those.
Ventos are of the lungs, or of the heart, or of the eye.
And ventilation is done in two ways: one way is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other way is ventilation without scarification.
And this ventilation without scarification is done in two ways, either by fire or with fire.
And for the ventilations administered with scarification and blood extraction, there are four parts of the body, of which one part where continuous ventilation is applied is the back of the head; and the middle part of the neck in two halves; ventilation of the chin leaves the jaw behind and the mouth; ventilation of the cheeks; ventilation of the armpits, which is on the end of the shoulder blade; ventilation of the elbows, each being two inches wide; ventilation of the knees, each being two inches wide; and ventilation of the thighs, each being two inches wide.
And do not extract the blood from the wound but only from the fine, scattered veins in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with phlebotomy; nor should you let a cupping be done by fire or any fires in any illness caused by congestion where the body is fully evacuated.
But if necessity provokes to cupping for illness or during pregnancy, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at its end, and in the middle of the month and at any time.
And when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be made more than so passed of one or two hours.
And the purpose of ventilation of the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and what is inserted in the heels; more correct is that this be closely followed by evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventilation is at the site of phlebotomy for cephalic purposes.
And it is not advisable to use for this that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it gives great discomfort.
And for this reason, it is not advisable to use the old ones, in which there are gouty maladies.
More correct is to apply the suction continuously to that area; and for this reason, you should command the ventillator to keep his hand slightly on the ventosa at the affected parts, to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
More vaporation of alkali is in the place of femoral and basilic vein ligation: and through this you contribute to asthma, and to the constriction of arteries and to the rupture of the artery's wall, and to coughing, and to congestion.
And ensure that the alkali vapor is applied only slightly, for if it is paused, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the vaporization of alum generates headaches and eye diseases, as well as migraines, and nasal congestion, and toothaches; it is in place of basilic vein ligation.
And ensure that you command the vaporizer not to press his hand over the scarification so as not to injure the artery and interrupt the flow of blood.
And if the vaporization is applied to the chin, it causes sore throat, gum decay, and appearances similar to illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of alergic vein ligation located in the cheeks.
More importantly, the ventilation that is performed over the two spoons you apply should be conducted by capillarity, which is achieved through the transfer of heat.
And the ventilation of the two openings inside the forks contributes to the benefit of the femoral bloodletting from three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalica. For the larger veins contain much blood, and the smaller veins between them carry the attraction to the three veins.
And command the ventilation to not proceed with incision, for the area is naked of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
And it is a ventilation where you ventilate the anus and contribute to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and the ulcers, leaving them alone.
And command that the ventilation be a large one, and made of wool, for the area requires strong desiccation; and incise it with an incision using fine but strong ventilations.
More winds in the legs decrease manifestly, for they carry the scab from all parts of the body, and bring about ancient pains in the hips and the stomach; and provoke menstruation, and bring about bothorrhea and adenitis; and are in place of a double phlebotomy of sophenas, and hanged, and of double calves.
But they thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the winds they hanged the youth near the winds of the two hips.
And the quality of the position of the winds is that you place the cautery at the beginning viewable and moisten it by slight suction, and do not prolong the position of the winds, but pause them slightly, and remain them constantly, so that the humors come to the area by natural means. And do not cease to repeat this until you see the area already reddening and swelling, and the scab appear.
And then you incise and continue the evacuation little by little, and place yourself in the disposition of the body.
For a man who has tender flesh, incise him only once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan to enlarge the incision slightly, and allow the evacuation to proceed more easily.
And if in the wound it becomes large, then you must incise twice; for in the first incision, open the way for the exudate in the wound and its moisture. More in the second incision, for the thorough evacuation of the large wound.
And if the wound is moist and fetid, then make the third incision to achieve cleanliness.
Finally, when we want to extract the wound fluid little by little or just a little, enough for us one incision.
And if we want an extraction of foul blood, perform a cut with the lancet; and if we know that the blood is thick, then make the cut more extensive.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision merely.
And if the part where the incision is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are strait, then the places for the cups should be gently anointed with a penetrating resolvent; if it is in summer, such as olive oil of aloes or olive oil of violets, or olive oil of ambergris, or olive oil of balsam; and if it is in winter, then use olive oil of narcissus, or olive oil of lavender, or olive oil of chamomile, or blood oil, and to those similar.
And if the superfluity is thick, apply, then oil of amber, or balsam oil, or oil of aloes, or olive oil, and to those similar.
Moreover, if the cupper has ample pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and it should be treated with water boiled with aloes or cold water, or water of jasmine, or water of rosemary, and similar to those.
And that of which the discharge is due to a humid matter, wash his bowels with wine or water of myrtle and sumac and similar.
And of that of which the superfluities are large, wash his bowels with old wine, or water of safflower, which is marigold, or decoction of santoppi, or chamomile, and similar to them.
And ensure that the bowel movement is taken before bathing; have it administered shortly after bathing for one or two hours, and ensure that he sleeps near the bowel movement.
What must be done before a phlebotomy and bowel movement.
Ensure that you consider the beginning: if the patient who needs to have a bowel movement or be phlebotomized is choleric and has acute pain and inflammation, then ensure that he takes cooling causes, such as acetic milks, endive in wine, laxatives, julep, and similar remedies.
And feed them thus like pears, chicken livers, and spiced game birds, and foods seasoned with garlic, similar to these.
And for that one whose complexion is fair, let him take to drink essarop of almond milk, or essarop of alekanabin of seeds, sumac, and wine mixed with honey and vinegar; and let him be advised to use moderation in drinking and eating, and limit his foods to pears, onions, peaches, small game birds, and squab.
And let him drink more than he eats on the day of ventilation and phlebotomy.
And let him be given to drink in some hours for some men tyriaca alfarac, or medicines of musk, such as muscada or acelita before ventilation or before phlebotomy or shortly after, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound subtiled; and do not let them take any scalding.
More the vents that are his scarsifications should be vents made over the liver, and on the belly, gout, and on the umbilicus, in the places of the joints, and the side of the liver, for these members do not suffer scarifications upon themselves.
And this is not sought by those rather than an attraction of soreness of the member, thus as we apply a cupping device on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the blood of the nose; and we use that so that there may be dissolved phlegm free from the viscera of the member, thus as we apply over the abdomen and the umbilicus; for which it thins out the member and warms it and lessens the pain which resolves phlegm.
And it is cupped on the sores when they occur in their operation or suppuration, for by virtue of attraction it strengthens the operation and eradicates the pus from its place.
And it seems to work when applied to the liver and spleen to dissolve phlegm in those areas.
And these cupping devices are applied with suction only sometimes; and at other times, they are applied with fire.
And at other times, they are applied full of clear water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is so that the cupping device may be filled and become large, sometimes with water alone or with water in which herbs suitable for the condition are steeped.
Form the suction cup with fire: let the diameter of the opening be two fingers wide, as we have formed it; and the amount of air be half a palm; and place it in the middle, at the location that is in the circuit, to the extent of its size, I draw out according to the quantity that enters it with a needle.
Let it be made of elm or citrus wood, with thick edges, equal and smooth so that it does not cause the member to deviate from its position upon it.
And let it be at the center of the elm or iron transverse beam where the candle is placed upon the fire.
And let this suction cup be much larger than the one we have tested; and use a smaller amount of air according to the illness and the condition of the one who will use it.
And the suction cups for children and those who are weak are different from those for young and robust people.
And the quality of placing this suction cup on the body is to extend the heat from the fire of decently burning wood in front of a small wax candle, and place that over the center of the transverse beam at the center location of the suction cup, so that the fire is ignited around the area where it will be placed without burning the patient's body.
And then place yourself over the limb of the patient, and tell them as we have said before, meaning when we have the fumigations and do not intend for them to hold the said and that vapor rises over that fumigation, then the fumigation will soon be dissolved.
And then apply the fire to the member according to its nature, and repeat that if needed.
More in fumigations that are administered in the disease of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transversal or fumigation, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the limb only for so long.
And this is the form of it: And this fumigation the larger it is, the better, so that it can receive a great quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguisugations are not administered in most members but only in the members in which a position of cups is impossible due to their small size, such as the lips and similar parts; or on a member stripped of flesh, such as the nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those that you have found leeches in the waters from putrefied bodies.
And soon let them lie in warm water for a day and a night until they swell, without any cause affecting their belly; and soon evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and fomentations; and soon rub the part of the patient where it turns red; and soon place them over it.
And when they are full and swollen.
And if possible, apply the fomentation to the area where it is needed more.
And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with wine and apply warm water; and rub and squeeze it.
And if the bleeding of the body is prolonged at the end of applying leeches, and if this continues, then insert a cloth in cold water, and place it over the area until the bleeding stops.
And if the bleeding is excessive, then powder vitriol trisulphate or substances similar to those causing contraction over it until the bleeding is arrested; or place warm split peas over the area and let them adhere to the area until the bleeding stops.
And clean, if necessary, the wound, when possible changing those.
And if bloodletting is prohibited, then apply heat to the area with recent bleeding or place a needle in the areas until the bleeding stops; and subsequently stop it when any bleeding occurs soon after.
And when you want them to stop, powder the areas with a little bitter almond trisulphate, or salt, or ashes, and cauterize soon.
Thus start the proceedings of the third part: of restoration. This chapter is necessary knowledge in the art of medicine; and it concerns the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
Oh, son, know that both the false doctors and the vulgar ones, as well as those who for some time have not read the works of the Ancients or have not read even a letter of their writings, claim this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it during all that time; and I have not adopted what follows, except through a long period of reading the works of the Ancients and study over my understanding of them, from which I extracted the science.
And I have directed this experiment and study throughout the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that pertains to my science and on which my experiment has passed; now I abridge this for you others and deliver this from long narration; and I abridge this at the end of the abridgment; and I show this at the end of the declaration; and I form these into shapes of instruments that are administered in it, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections from the necessity of fractures of bones, of which the introduction is necessary before we begin the recollection of limb fractures and various types, of each one. Therefore, let us begin this chapter by summarizing the discourse; and the chapters which must be understood at the beginning are those that the craftsmen must stand upon the truth of. These are you and they who are quick to know or learn this noble art over others.
And therefore, say that when a fracture or dislocation or twist or setting occurs, you must immediately turn to the beginning for a venous incision or realign it, or both, unless some cause prohibits it, such as a lack of virtue, or if it is the one upon which it has occurred, or in decrepitude, or at a time of intense heat or intense cold.
And moreover, let it be in food of fresh herbs and of meat from pigeons and crabs; and forbid fatty meats and those filling with all kinds of food that fill the veins with phlegm, until you are safe from abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to his primary position according to the custom of doing so.
And so, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then ensure that the patient consumes nutritious foods rich in both liquid and solid and heavy substances, with viscosity similar to cooked wheat, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar substances. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is facilitated slightly with honey.
And know that broken bones in young men and old people, due to the drying out of their limbs, cannot be continuously joined and consolidated according to their nature.
But nature adjusts and ameliorates over the broken bone from any part, like glue in which it thickens to adhere and strengthen it together with conglutination and firmness, similar to fire at the beginning. In no case should any cause prevent this from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to place foodstuffs of the patient, foodstuffs in which there is density and viscosity and coarseness, as we have said.
And know that the types of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull骨骨折；而脚骨的骨折不同于手骨的骨折；同样，其他所有肢体的骨折之间也各不相同。
And I will recall all types of fracture, each explained in its own chapter distinct from the others.
Various types of fracture in themselves. And the types of fracture in the bone are diverse; for some fractures are arcuate or those that occur at the sutures; and some fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as fractures of the suture lines, tiles, and additions, both primary and secondary, as when a pen is prepared to write, where there is a fracture by breakage and disruption in the head, and a small fissure-like fracture.
And for each case, there is a specific remedy or torment proper in restoring it according to the distinct recall of its place.
A sign of fracture of the bone. And by this, a bone fracture is known: it shows a tortuousness of the bone, and an elevation and prominence of the area upon touch, and the pain felt when pressing on that part with your hand.
And when there is neither obvious tortuousness nor pain, you should test by touching the bone with some movement; if the patient does not experience great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that it is tortuousness or a small crack. Touch the area with your hand and apply compression; pause over the place where you recall the remedy just at that moment, which corresponds to the location; and gradually straighten due to subtle constriction.
And perceive that the area when curved and not split into two or another part as nothing happens to it in its state, when the whole part is inflamed; then you should start from your hour of applying correction to it, having an abscess form over it with a cautery.
And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and engendering.
And know that the restoration and ligation of it is lighter than the one in which you are operating.
And then strengthen it according to the recall of the operation that will come.
More if in the bone you are operating, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And place your hand in such a way that you equalize the member's position according to its natural shape, while the parts are extended from the broken member, then force yourself to return those additions by engendering and according to any method you can in their places.
And see to it that your strength does not cause pain or injury to the patient during your operation; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess through their operations or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen through their operations.
The quality of the constriction of the affected limb is what I recount; so that you may know that the limbs broken are diverse in their smallness and in their largeness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and similar to those, see that the envelopment be of soft fine cloth.
And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, see that in those there be envelopment hard and firm, for the firm binding connects the large and strong member from all parts with the constriction equally, try that no stain enters.
And then begin, after your first binding, conveniently pause about three or four times over the place of that fracture; and strengthen your hand a little with the binding.
And then go to the uppermost part of the place of the fracture, and strengthen more so that your binding is greater than the one you strengthened around the place of the fracture. And then slightly extend the bandage around the fracture area, gradually soften the tension little by little, while you remove a considerable part from the area.
And then take another bandage and wrap it around the fractured area over the initial wrapping, and gradually adjust the wrappings to the part of the fracture; and your operation should focus on the tension in the wrapping and the softening as we said in the first wrapping section above.
And then place the stopa or cloth wrap evenly over the tortuous part of the fracture, if there is a tortuous part; otherwise, do not pause at any point.
And then pause over the other bandage, and evenly place these silk wraps properly around these areas, if there is no swelling or abscess in the location; otherwise, pause over what is the abscess area and what causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the silk wraps.
And let the silk wraps be of the size of canna ladra root, well-formed; or made of elm wood; or from palm ribs; and let the width of each silk wrap be according to this form and figure:
But ensure that the bandage placed over that fracture is thicker and a little wider than the other bandages, and the length of the strip according to what is read concerning the member in size and smallness; then strengthen on the other side with another bandage according to your first stricture; then place it from above decently according to our discussion of stricture, and that be your stricture more at that location, and the more it is elongated from the fracture, the less the stricture.
But ensure that the threads are strong in thickness and fineness, and be of fine quality; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in some cases when surgeons used thick cords for bandaging, it is a great error when they attempt to achieve equality in stricture.
But very fine threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to achieve the stricture that you want, and it is not advisable that there be less than an inch between each bandage.
But if the patient is led to believe that the bandages are close to the stricture at the locations, then place some soft wool or dyed wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures occur through a blow, and accidents disrupt the chain, and I will recall this in that part of the Capitol according to its singularity.
And know that for all broken members, they are not straightened with stakes on the first day; this is because the member, when large, cannot be held down by stakes but requires about 5 days or 7 or more, according to your safety of the onset of abscess.
And this is the way of the plasters with which the Ancients restored, which are applied over fractures and dislocations and twists.
Method of plastering for the opening of restoration of fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is of that on which no heat or cold is applied: and you should take powder of mill, which is the marrow of the flour that comes from the movement of the mill in its walls.
And prepare it thus as you can, but sieve it with white oak, and keep the preparation of the not-too-thick or too-subtle variety; and then use that.
Another way of applying plaster for the restoration of fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take asafetida, lapdanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is razit from wild myrrh tree, all in drachms 20. Take myrrh and aloes each in drachms 5. Take alochil in drachms 20. All these are to be ground and sieved, then mixed with alcohol or egg white if the patient's skin is sensitive; and use of this plaster, which is of good composition, will restore lightly broken bones and apply it to men.
Another way of applying plaster which will help with fractures and sprains: take migrach and 20 drachms of white althea. Take myrrh and aloes each in 5 drachms. Take acacia in 6 drachms. Take Armenian bark in 20 drachms.
All these are to be ground in a mortar with a strong mixture, then sieved, and prepared with water or egg white and administered.
Another way of applying plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and for sedating pain in those areas and treating fissures and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in vinegar and boiled oil, then place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, of cauterization and you expel pains properly.
Another method of plaster for healing wounds: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of a shortened plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fracture and when you want resolution of abscess: take root of althaea, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of rush, all in equal parts; mix them all together and steep them in vinegar. If the limb is not scabbed over.
But if it is scabbed over, then compress it with water of fennel or with water and use it.
Another stronger method of plaster for resolving abscesses, when you apply it for restoration of the limb: take root of althaea, seed of flax, safflower, sweet clover, marigold, flowers of violet, chamomile, all in equal parts and equal; mix them all together and steep them in water of hazel or water mixed (with another ingredient) or in vinegar, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed over the member soaked you must perform the restoration of it rather a cauterization made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and subtlety.
May Galen, however, be seen as saying that it should be placed over the broken member to perform the restoration of it and the causes in which drying of small quality of heat is thus like myrrh, resin, and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Method of poultice that comforts injury and pain: mix equal parts of cinnamon, peel of cut human skin or hazel branch, alum, and salt; boil them, strain and sieve them, and make the poultice.
May the quantity with which you should boil the lotion and then dissolve it be such that if no pain has occurred nor any swelling, and the bone is not broken, do not dissolve it for many days. And if pain intense or swelling occurs at the site, then you should cauterize or dissolve it immediately, and apply the poultice to it.
And take a cloth and a sponge soaked in mule urine, submerge that in clear water, and with it wash the area until the swelling and pain cease; then place the member to rest for an hour; afterwards cover it with well-soaked linen in vinegar and oil or rubbed oil, and wrap it overnight until you are sure of no abscess forming, and that the inflammation of the member subsides, and the pain is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle bandage lightly and do not strengthen your original binding, but keep the area subtle until it is healed.
And if you see that the abscess and redness and pain and inflammation and all these accidents are already alleviated, and there is no need for a poultice or bandage, then proceed to apply it as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of the conditions we have mentioned occurs in the member, then keep it wrapped for three to four days or five to seven. Sometimes all this is left on for twenty days according to how you find by the healing of the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and settles into the coagulation of the flesh around it.
And then adjust the tightness more than in your first constriction, and adjust according to the distension of the patient's abdomen, as reminded by the previous memory.
And if you see that the place of the fracture is already drying and shrinking more than hollow, then observe that the nourishment is forbidden to reach there; therefore, soak that area with water of whey for the whole day that affected that; let this be done in all three days; and adjust the tightness a little, and by this operation supply the member with nourishment, and it will heal slightly.
And what the healing leaves do another time when the member is not restored to its original state, according to how hollow it is, and is restored according to tortuosity, is an error in their operation, and a great fear; if they were right about this, they would enlarge the Ancients' works on their books and have done this operation.
And I have not seen them do this, so it is more reasonable that they do not do it.
Capitol second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
The species of fractures are motas, and their figures are various, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of spaza, and the impact breaks all the bone into pieces, leaving the bone thus as if split in wood, and for this reason, this species is named ascial; or the spaza incides on some part of the bone, and cuts the flesh but does not pass the incision to the marrow of it; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of the fracture that is contric和平，您想了解这段文本的翻译吗？还是有其他问题需要帮助？
And this fracture is penetrating, which nearly reaches the periosteum, which covers the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
And of fracture, it is weakened in the bone, in the subtlety of the hair-like fibers, and for this reason, this species is named the capillary fracture.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by compression or by the strike of a shoe, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave location as when you strike an earthenware pot, and it is part of their entry into the internal parts.
And mostly it is found in the bodies of humid bones, such as those of children.
And to all these species of closed fractures, they are usually painful as if by separate stellae. And I will return to the recollection of all this in its place.
And we know all these species of fracture through detection by touch and by inquiry about their appearance and the sign of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary species is known because it is discovered on the bone, is scraped, and limits over it by touch, for the fracture appears black.
In the cure of fracture consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and when you see by the accidents that there is a manifest signification over fear, such as vomiting of colera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, and sensation in them and redness of those, and likenesses to them of the accidents in the major dispositions, then do thou suppose it is not healed.
And if you see unusual accidents, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
And the cause is that if the injured person comes to you in the beginning of the injury and the injury is from the winter days, then consider that you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is from the days of summer, then consider that you cut to expose the bone on the seventh day, having that what has been left on the bone is corrupted by the fatty tissue, and that unusual accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the fatty tissue covering the brain and is very fragmented and rubbed, then consider that you incise the fragmentated part and rub it, according to what I have recounted to you.
And you should raise the head of the patient and uncover over the bone according to custom and your manner as is possible according to the shape of the wound, and let it be light over the patient.
And if it happens to you to detect the bone, flow of blood or abscess caut, then you should press upon it with what covers, and it is that you fill the area with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the wound rest until the abscess is subdued, and you are sure of the flow of blood; and then begin at the circumference of the bone and in its excision.
And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the bone with an incisor straight such, and this is its form: And then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And then use more the incisor more lateral than the second.
And note that you should name the incisions variously, of which some are longer than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and located at the ends of the acuity of their extremities, and they be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not concute and leads it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then note that you should perforate in the circumference of it before you administer the incisions along the travels, which you name shallow incisions.
And they are named thus only four of them, which do not reach the end of the bone until they are near it, so that the travel has a rounded extremity or margin over that upon which the head of the needle is left acute, resembling a small margin or circle, which must not be submerged and pass the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these incisions, of which each suits the thickness of each bone. Within this, ensure that the extremity of all is acute, and the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
This is the form of three species of travel: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the traveler over the bone and turn it with your fingers until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, remove the traveler to another location, and pause where all goes through the quantity of the size of the ray or around it.
And then incise with the scalpel that which is between each part of the bone, and make that subtle cut over it at the end due to levitation, as we have said, while you are removing the bone, or by your hand, or by some other cause through certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as forceps and fine tongs.
And make sure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
And so, after you have perforated the bone and separated it from the cavity if it continues with it, and you have extracted that, make sure to rasp and level it with the roughness of what is in the bone using another instrument resembling a scalpel, but let it be sharper and more subtle than other scalpels.
And if some small part of the bones is cracked and shattered, then take that facilitating material which you should use for the splints; and then cure the wound with lint and ointments which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which dissects Gualia and cuts it with great caution; this is its saying: at the beginning you must necessarily start uncovering the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and placed your hand on the extremity of this slow and cheerful scalpel, which has this form:
And it is that the lenticular part is flat and you should not incise for any reason, and the acute part is divided into two cuts lengthwise, as you see; so that the lenticular part is fitted to the keyhole at the face of the incising acute part on the bone.
And then strike on the incising part with a small hammer as you incise the entire bone with ease, and you be certain of the panniculus that it does not occur in the accident you fear in any way, and if the surgeon was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were sleeping.
When any fracture occurs in the region of the foot at certain bone locations, it will incise that part at the extremity of the cut bone, and will deliver that part with ease, for it is relieved of its harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the foot, and what is severed or remains from the bone is its surface, and it stays there rough and fine particles underneath, then you must rasp that roughness away and eradicate those fine particles with fine razors, which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer them most conveniently in all places and according to the right place for your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And you must administer according to your judgment, using the edge of the razor to start the cut and then proceed with the finer part of it, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach the point where you can administer the thick and the fine part of all.
In any other small fractures or fine fractures, you must administer care according to what you have done for correction of it.
And it is because they are not taught about all those who have studied that art. And place this over what we have written about in great fractures.
And if the bandage is torn when you are extracting the bone, then take cloth according to the size of the wound, and immerse that in olive oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another piece of folded or triple-folded cloth, immerse it in wine and olive oil, and place it over the first one, doing this lightly enough so as not to weigh down the dressing. And administer salt on top of that, but do not press too hard except according to the size of the wound.
Leave it to this treatment for one day or two until you are sure of no abscess forming; then remove that and administer medicines if there is excessive dryness, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and arsenic, and similar substances.
And you make these medicines into a powder to be撒布于伤口之上，如同干燥的粉末；普遍而言，应使用具有洗涤和不刺激作用的所有药物。
And guard that the wound in your cure be clean; and do not let it become surdy of ointment or other; nor leave to add virulence in it; for when adjusted over the linen of the brain, corrupt that and spoil that, and chance upon the evil aprop that malice malign.
And it happens in the scapha of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most especially when the cure of it is neglected, and blackness in the surface of it; and therefore consider when it happens to the evil that the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious and totally hopeless.
And if no blackness happens but from the medicine that is applied over it, and is in virtue of that medicine which causes that blackness, then take a part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, and line those with a cloth, and place it over the scapha; and cure it with the species of cure that you find appropriate until it is healed.
Capitol. iii.
Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together with some additional cartilage above, or one of those few cracks, because in the nose there are two bones. The part you leave intact is cartilaginous and is not broken; therefore, do not damage it but apply friction and soothing.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must introduce the small piece into the nostril, and equalize the fracture inside according to your previous indication, and outside with your thumb, so that the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this as I have facilitated for you, and make sure that the pain in the patient does not worsen due to your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and you cannot reach it, then you must equalize it at the extremity of the ridge where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make it appear as such.
And if the limb has restoration on it in the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or half a month, you should give it rest from the apsema caut.
And then insert into the extremity of the nose a piece of cloth wick, if the fracture is in one part, or two cloths, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the larger quantity swell to fill the nose.
And thus some of the ancient restorers say that the cloths should be soaked in broth, and changed throughout the day, but I have not seen this; instead, use a cove where the wick is soaked in honey comfit powder; and leave the cloth until the bone is firmly set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes insert into the nose instead of a cloth, a hot pack wrapped in linen cloth; and do this when the nasal fracture is severe and breathing is not prohibited.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use cloths.
And if another abscess occurs, apply a cauterization, plaster the nose with wax or cloth soaked in vinegar and oil, or with a diaphoretic.
And if no abscess occurs, when it is necessary to plaster that area externally with sesame seed flour and pine bark powder in honey; then place your hand on the patient's forehead, and do not touch the nose for any reason.
And if the nose bones are broken by a small fracture or are comminuted, it is necessary to split those areas, and extract them with instruments suitable for those; then close the incision, and treat that area with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters appropriate for this.
And if a swelling occurs inside the nose, it is necessary to treat that with washes and administer lead pipes internally until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not displaced, consider whether the fracture is only superficial, not broken into two pieces and bent inwardly, in which case its perception is light.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert your right index finger; and push the softness of the fracture inward with ease to the parts outward, with your other hand on the part outward of the bone; do this properly as much as that.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you should apply extension to both parts according to rightness so that the alignment of them is possible.
And if you notice the loss of teeth along with disruption, then strengthen those from which you expect the roots to be of gold or silver or cedar; and place your hand over the broken jaw, and place another hand on the doubled cloth, and place a large star-shaped stake decently made, or a single piece equal in length to the jaw; and place that above as it suits your bandage and application, so long as it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to take rest and tranquility, and stop his food intake for a while.
And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any way, on the seventh day you incise and remove it; then correct what is already altered in him and plaster the area with powder of molybdenum, or with ocher, or with flour of comfrey, provided that you have bathed his wound, and place a lion's wool bandage over the plaster.
And then, once this plaster is properly applied to him, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until the fracture is healed and strong; for major fractures take three weeks to heal.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said about major fractures in the treatment of it until it is healed and drained.
And if the fracture is comminuted, then consider whether it is a severe bone separation or displacement. Then you should carefully handle those displacements as needed during the removal of the fragments.
And if the openings of the wound are narrow, then enlarge them according to the quantity of your necessity using the flebotomy.
And when you have completed those stages, and there is no longer any need to remain at those steps, then use the openings of the wound if they are wide; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that suit this and cover the area until it heals.
Capitol V.
For the restoration of the furcula when it is broken.
When the scapula is broken, you must treat the muscle of the anterior part, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
When it is broken, separated, or completely severed into two parts without requiring stages, the restoration is easier. When such separation occurs with stages, the restoration is more difficult. Or when the fracture involves the wound.
And the operation in this case, when the fracture involves the wound, is that you have two ministers present, so that one holds the assistant and guides the broken scapula, and the other extends the neck towards that part.
And then equalize the fracture by placing it in the groins as it is made to form according to its nature, neither on a too prominent part nor in a concavity.
And if you need more extension, then place a fold of the patient's clothing or wool, and let its size be according to your necessity; extend and elevate the fork and press the fold with your hand as you equalize the fracture according to its nature.
And if you cannot stretch the end of the fork to the parts outside, because it is obstructed by the hip, then place the patient on his side with his neck bent, and place a half-cushion over the muscle.
And the minister presses the muscle on the sides until the bone of the fork reaches the hip, and then you correct the fracture and equalize it in the groins.
But if you feel the tendons of the fork and they are swollen, then cut over that area and extract those tendons easily.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you will make an incision in it with one of the bistouri tools which you have prepared for this, after having placed your hand on the greater trochanter to guide the instrument; and this instrument is either a wooden or iron rod, of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the cavity; and its width according to that which you have needed from it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
But the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; that it have two extremities thus like a fork, and one extremity broad and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound which you have incised when you have extracted the fragment of the bone is wide, and you are certain of a carbuncle forming, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear a carbuncle forming, then you manage the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the incision in the wound.
And if an abscess occurs, then fill a cloth with warm oil and wine, and place it over that area.
And always ensure that the splint is not too tight on the broken bone; and so cover that you may see the wound daily, for when the dressing becomes moist or you see the splint already loosened, then you adjust this and strengthen the binding.
And then place the patient's head on their pillow, and place a cushion under their neck, to elevate the support of that part during sleep; thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm is laid against the side of that.
And do not remove the bandage unless there is an accident or abscess in the place, within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see the face of it indicating this, and adjust to the constriction and restore that, and let the fracture of the furcula be restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and made comfortable according to the need in twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less than that time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the shoulder.
The spatula tart is broken in the middle of the fracture and not from the fracture itself but from the margins.
And when the location is broken — and it is broken in the middle of the location — and it is not known otherwise by touch, then according to the figure of the fractured bone, prepare that place and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of the technique which is within your ability.
And then place on the area powder of ground alum and stopover; and then place dust of doubled cloth; and then place over the splint on the table a thin strip according to the quantity of the spoon all or a little more.
But if you leave the splint concave in some parts of the spoon's location, then you equalize that concavity with stopover; and then place the splint according to equality.
And then strengthen above with adhesive ligature long and firm, and firmly place the splint so that it is not displaced from its location.
And consider the bandage on any day; and every time it becomes moist, reapply another time and strengthen and equalize the splint if it is displaced from its location.
And place the patient on their side.
The spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bond, and that you know securely which one is from the bones whose beginning was not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you proceed from the place of the bone to the joint, then place a ligature there, cut over it, and hold it, doing as we have said in the fracture of the scapula with an apostematous abscess.
Capitol VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location; however, its ends continue to be constricted and fragmented.
And the accidents when the foot breaks in its middle decline towards the internal parts, causing great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, swelling, and vomiting; these are declared in the cavity of the broken bone and are not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that they are laid on their back, and a cushion is placed between their shoulders; then press on their muscles, adjust their spine against the backs of two chairs, and carefully perform the operation and equate everything in every way possible until the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And then place it on the plaster and sponge, and place it over a thin wooden board covered with tulle or cloth similar in lightness, so you wrap that with a cloth; then carefully place it around the broken bone so it is not too tight; and tie it firmly but decently several times along the back. And consider the bandage at all times, and when it becomes softened, strengthen it.
And if necessity causes an abscess or pus, pain, or boil to develop in that area, then you should incise and drain it, relieve the pain, or treat the boil. After you do this, remove the plaster and correct whatever has occurred by treating it according to the method of healing; then reduce the amount of plaster if needed, and adjust the bandage as it heals.
Chapter VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large bones that join at the two ends; and from the extremities of the front part, such contact does not cause fractures because they are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of this is not hidden from you through the examination with your hands.
And the restoration should be done such that you equalize the fracture with your hands according to the possible method, ensuring it is properly set according to how it fits, and then apply a plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the inner parts, then it causes severe and piercing pain in the patient, similar to the pain that occurs when there is pleurisy. For this reason, you apply a dressing to the bone; and it leads to difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting due to irritation; and this is of difficult cure.
And already the Ancients were ingenious in that matter engaging themselves.
And from them it is said that you place the patient in a position where foods generate inflammation and distension, so that the belly becomes swollen and extended, and the fracture is driven to the outward parts.
But let us consider this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate a carbuncle inadvertently; and if it does happen inadvertently, then help is already on its way.
And some of them said that it should be positioned above the abdomen and near where sweat exits with strength; and this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the abdomen might drive the superfluities to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said: that the area should be covered with wool that is already submerged in oil, and powders should be placed between the ribs until it is full, which should be bound equally as you wrap it according to its roundness; and then treat the patient with a regimen of food therapy and medicine.
And if the patient is strongly constrained in such a way that they cannot endure it, and you puncture the skin with a knife to drain the fluid, be careful about the patient, then cut over the place, uncovering from the broken rib, and place ourselves above that instrument which we hold ready, remembering the action beforehand, and cut the bone easily, and remove that.
And when we adjust the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with缝合，我们用药膏敷直到愈合。
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in diluted oil, place your hand over the area, and cure the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And let it be wrapped in linen over which he sleeps, until it is healed.
Capitol. ix.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the spine and neck.
In some cases, when fractures occur in the bones of the neck, one should apply traction and friction, similar to that used for vertebrae of the spine. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will recover or not, then consider whether their pulses are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot increase nor extend nor strengthen those, and when you press them with your fingers or poke them with a needle and do not feel pain in them, then you know that it is not healing, and in such cases it is fatal.
And if you press them and feel pain in the area with your fingers or poke it, then you know that the bone's marrow is saved and that the illness will heal by cure.
And if you examine the vertebrae of the neck and its appearance related to this, and you want to know if it will recover or not, then consider the pulse in his feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, accede to what happens in the pulses, and when they press on their thighs, let them breathe and eat as they wish, and sometimes lie on their backs and want to urinate and cannot, then you know it is fatal, and then do not bother with the cure of them.
If no other cause occurs, the cause is better and more slight.
And the cure for this is to perforate for the extraction of the abscess caut that you place over the lower or lateral part of the spine, or with slices of fresh garlic; place over it for several days until the abscess is extracted.
And then place one of the comforting and soothing plasters, and cover it with a layer of lint; order the patient to take rest and be tranquil, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if it happens that you need to scrape the bone surface or any cause already separated from it, then make sure to dry the wound and hold that bone; then close the two edges of the wound,缝合如果伤口较大；然后用一些膏药敷在那块肉上，直到它愈合。
And if the heel of the tibia is broken, and it is near the knee, then you should insert your left thumb into the wound, and align the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible by second intention; then place a plaster and bandage over it, if needed, and strengthen it.
And if you feel broken phases in it, then work on that, stop the bleeding, and treat the wound with the cure that comes after it is healed.
Capitol.
For the restoration of health.
The bones of the feet are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and they split along their length and decline toward the inner parts; and accidents occur in the patient with pain at the site and puncture, and the leg is stupefied when it is fractured.
And the restoration is that you place your hand over it while it is still at the fracture, which is the shape of the leg.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of the leg, then you straighten it according to how it appears to you by equilibrium, and place it so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the length or has already declined toward the inner parts, then you place the patient on his side and prepare to restore that fracture. And when you have equalized it, place a plaster over it, then place the wooden or copper rod over it, and strongly bind it without fearing puncture or removal of the rod.
And equalize the cavity so that it fills the space in which it will receive the binding according to equality, and command the patient to lie on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess forms during the extension and its restoration, stop the extension and its restoration until the abscess is sedated with the cautery, then place a salve over it according to what has been previously described; then return to the restoration of the wound, and bind it thus tightly.
And if this happens in the bone during fragmentation or comminution, then treat it accordingly.
Capitol.xi.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the adjutrix.
Adjutrix is that which is between the codex (or cubitus) and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a strip of coarse cloth according to this form:
And attach two threads at the ends, and then suspend them from the elevated area.
And place the patient on a cushion; and then throw its broken arm onto the strip so that it reaches the midline of where the curvature of the strip is attached.
And place it over that with some heavy weight, or the servant extend it to the sides. And then the doctor ensure the fracture is held in place together, while the fracture returns to its proper position.
And the other way is that the patient be reversed on their back and suspend the neck with a thread; and then command two servants that one holds what is above the fracture with their hands; and the other holds the lower part of them; and each hold it in their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen over the fracture with one splint and over another place another splint, and each of the two servants stretch at their parts.
And if the fracture is near the extremity of the muscle, then place the middle part of the splint on the tendon and leave the other end over the fracture to hold it.
And similarly if the fracture is near the knee, then place the splint in that location and over that knee.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and when it is equalized according to what is needed and applied properly, then strengthen it if no abscess occurs.
But if an abscess does occur, then leave the stricture for five days, and place a clean bandage soaked in vinegar and rubbed with oil over it until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen it.
And the way to strengthen it is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then wrap a cloth bandage around the plaster; and adjust the arm over that support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
And place the cloth firmly over the assistant's arm so that the arm is in the position of a splint, without prohibiting anything due to a broken bone.
And then use splints.
And you should place that splint over the fracture which is wider and stronger than the other splints; and place the width of each splint at the width of the finger, and the length of the splints according to the breakage plus three fingers in total.
And then firmly place the cloth around the splint which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And make sure that your cloth is tightly around the area of the fracture. And when the fracture is longer, make the cloth less tight.
And so, if you adjust the position of the splints and the cloth as we have said in the hour when you restore the member to its position, then do this.
And if you fear an abscess, then leave the string and needles for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the string in all parts for three days so that no accident occurs at the puncture site or inflammation; or is forbidden food to reach the member by virtue of the superfluous tension of the string; and therefore adjust all this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not release the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's head be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place yourself over the assistant who is holding a full pot of woolen cloth, and consider at all times during the night or day that the figure of the broken limb should not be distorted, or that the string should not become loose, therefore adjust this according to your skill.
And administer food to the patient according to the order we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is subtle at the beginning until strength begins to return; then increase the amount of food.
Four days after the assistance and support of his legs are provided, they should be strengthened for ten days; then it is good that they be loosened and a bath should be administered and ointments applied which correct that.
And if the fracture is still tender, then do not loosen it for ten days or two months.
Capitol. XII.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; of which the former is small, and is that which we call the humerus, while the latter is large and is that which rests on top of the smaller one.
And if the major bone is broken alone, or the minor one, and both are fractured together.
And when the minor bone is broken above, then the restoration of it is easier, and its recovery is more easy.
And when the fracture of the thigh is broken, I leave the fracture bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And worse when those two bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small thigh bone, then it is convenient for the doctor to restore it, which involves a slight extension facilitated by equalizing the parts.
But if the large thigh bone is broken, then you must apply more extension.
And if both thigh bones are broken together, then you must apply stronger traction.
And you must place your hand firmly to restore it and extend it over a cushion, while placing the wrist of the hand above, more than the others. And the big toe should be lower than the other toes, and the thigh should be placed on a tilted bench.
And place a cushion in front of it at its height or straight, so that the thigh does not have to work.
And then the minister extend the arm of the affected side and place it either on his hand or linen, and another minister extend similarly above.
And then the doctor realigns the bone within the joint according to the best form that can be achieved.
And if there are complications in the fracture of the bone, then you must thoroughly reduce the entire piece to its place with your virtue.
And if there appears a separated complication that cannot be rejoined as hoped in the restoration of it, then you must set it and bind it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is comminuted, I have dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore take up the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you apply a linen cloth soaked in oil and white wax, making it intermediate between thick and thin, and tightly wrap the linen over it with a fine thread so that the abscess can be drawn out; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared from powder of malachite mixed with olive oil, and place a bandage over it; ensure that the stellate bandage is placed on that fracture more laterally and stronger.
And you shall know that the number of ribs in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one bone or two bones together.
And return your compression firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the compression is most intense either above or below the fracture, apply it a little more strongly according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened cloths, neither hard nor rough. The strong flax, which is strengthened, should be of properly mixed thickness between fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as often happens to the limb, then you must immerse the limb in water until that pain ceases.
And let the limb not be bound until it has rested, and then return the compression.
And if the stricture is already softened and the bone is healed and appears like those, then correct all of this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excess stricture, so that you soften that a little and leave it for some days until the nourishment flows to that, and then strengthen that.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then you should not let it dissipate within about 20 days or around those.
And place the hand of the patient above its virtue of movement agitators, and make him sleep on his back.
And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or in 32 days, or less severely in 28 days, and all of this depends on the complexity and disposition of the virtue.
Capitol.xiii.
On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers there may be fracture, and do not damage them but rub them gently.
And when fracture or rubbing occurs to the hand, then make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about a hundred seconds according to equality, and place your hand over the extended one.
And then extend the broken bones and the doctor align them where they should be with good alignment.
And then place plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cauterization; and then place the candle above according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
More so if the tear is inside the palm, then make a bandage like a half circle of cloth, and command the patient to hold it tightly with the torn palm; and then have it wrapped long on the hand.
And let the candle be of cloth in which there is grease, so that the cloth adheres to the palm; and hold it tightly as needed.
If the fracture is in the outer parts, then you should place another piece of wood above the bone and another below the part, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if you were turning your hand at the wrist between the fingers with grains.
If you happen to fracture one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, adjust it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm side; if you wish, place a small piece of wood on the right side so that the fracture is elevated and not displaced.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then adjust and splint it on the finger where the fracture occurs; or splint all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small piece of wood over the fracture, as we said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and subsequently, the placement of cauteries and opposites—during your operation—according to what you see when any cause from those cases arises, as per the repeated narration of the case.
Chapter XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the iliac bone.
The iliac bone, when fractured, is felt according to where it protrudes forward and where it rises above.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, while the patient lies on their abdomen and face.
And then the minister extends the ligament to its proper place according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is near the rim of the iliac bone, then place the ligament at the outer part of the hip joint, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip joint, then place the ligament at the hip, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing his hands close to where you have reduced it according to the natural form, and the bone is joined by good conjunction; then apply a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the member with an abscess. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for a few days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandage should be done as follows: first, wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the talus and the ligament of the thigh.
And insert a long piece of flax between the thigh and the leg bandage near the wound, so that the ends of the flax extend above both parts, then wrap this over the bandage and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
And then place something on the thigh at the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the void between the waist and thigh with soft cloth, so that the constriction may be constricted.
And then begin the strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps, and the farther you are from the site of the fracture, your wraps should be lesser and lighter and more flexible.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the parts where it reaches the foot's cavity, and tighten both ends of the straps on the other side so that the padding does not shift from its place.
And then place the constriction over it such that it does not interfere with the limb's corrosion, abscess, or inflammation and resembles those conditions; if any of these conditions occur due to some cause, then note it down, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said previously.
More so if the bone is badly damaged where it should be placed, then make sure you align it as much as possible; otherwise, set it in place and immobilize it, and treat the area from which the memory was recalled until it is healed.
Sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by adjusting it with stays, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But more importantly in the restoration in such a manner, it does not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, or another side is applied, then it is necessary that the one from which it was taken should limp.
And know that the hip is strengthened in ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complexities and other arrangements.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs less frequently, but it often causes more severe and prolonged atrophy.
But if it does occur as a fracture, then it is merely a crack or tear in its parts, and this can be one or several cracks, and above all it is characterized by pain.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized where what is broken from the parts of it among the fingers is added and joined according to what is possible by equality, facilitation, and fabrication.
And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen it above on the stricture to what is appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositional measures which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and apply a poultice to those injuries that are opposed to any accident to what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the restoration of the fracture of the flank.
Know that in the flank there are two bones, of which one is large and is named after the flank itself; the other is thin and is named false.
And accidents to the species of fracture occur as they do in the two bones of the arm, and for this reason the restoration of it is done equally as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones together, the joint becomes dislocated in all directions.
And if the thinner bone is broken, the joint becomes dislocated in front.
And if the thicker bone is broken, you find the fracture, and it is one of those causes that are beyond your control.
And then administer extension, reduction, and ligature of the tendons according to this method.
However, if the joint fracture is old with visible spots, let the extension be less and lighter, and rely more on your virtue.
And in the joint, if there is any reason for operating on the arm, when you align the tendons and complete your entire operation, then take pieces of wood from the bottom, which are placed under the causes that are stopped in shoes, and make them from palm branches; choose those with little thickness, not too thick like those used for binding, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the space between the foot.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the top part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be placed below at the base location of the foot.
And then place the two stakes in three positions of both extremities and the middle position. For this structure, the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and it should be kept in good position.
And then administer a brace of wood according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in such a position that it maintains its movement.
And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it carefully, and keep it free from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of these causes occur, immediately treat it accordingly until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures affect the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and do not fracture but are treated in their proper place.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones are displaced relative to each other, then the patient should place their foot on a prepared surface as shown.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated beneath those bones, and apply pressure, and align those bones back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place the foot on a small table with two pads.
Then tightly wrap the foot with the bandage in a proper manner, as you have already wrapped it with cloths and other materials.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some bones are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have shown you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger straight according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side. Then lay the skin on this table, which you have previously prepared, and tightly bind it with a bandage.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then you place each finger straight according to its quantity wrapped in a linen cloth, and support the table under the base of the foot, and standing on one of the ends of the table cut into the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes that we have mentioned in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and support thee in every accident as one should.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the patella bone and the groin of the man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, place that piece in the inclined groove, and then slightly incline it towards the upper part of the leg by a little, and keep it stable behind.
And then the midwife fills the bone with cement, and it is done in the thigh as desired; then the woman is anesthetized, and her leg is gradually elevated little by little, for all of this must be done before the part of the thigh as desired so that the fractured bone returns.
And then place powders on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cement to facilitate it; then let her urinate, return to that position according to the method in which you placed it at the beginning, and then return to her original powder.
And do so for seven days or until it is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and tightly sew over the wound a cannula of reed; then insert the entire bladder into the wound, and soon blow into the cannula to impart virtue within that the bladder be inflated inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
And it should be filled with pus and left for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh of a man or a woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures and those that rarely occur, especially to him who has some study and use and understands this my free will; for that fracture means to you in the major disposals via rightful in the restoration and in the stricture of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh of a man when it is broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place it over the wrapping of cloth, and let it be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and may it be healed.
Chapter XV.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are dislocated.
It is convenient to treat those upon whom a fracture dislocation occurs, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the shoulder blade, or similar. You should set and bleed that part frequently, provided that the conditions for bloodletting are as we have said above.
And if the dislocation flows pus, then you should set it with retention, attempting to sprinkle over it zinc trisulfate, unless another cause is present.
And soon begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then you should delay the restoration until the sixth day, once the abscess is lanced, and not approach it on the seventh or eighth day, for then you will bring about worse accidents.
If the bone is broken and protrudes outside the joint, then you must puncture to reduce it and equalize it with your hands with as much ease and little extension as possible.
If the extension is not easily reducible with your hands, then you must reduce it with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being about seven or eight inches and its width according to the size of the wound; and for this, the doctor must take one or two of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all types of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends, with edges at the outer ends; and be thicker at the top, thinner in the middle.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek as "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of the limb may be raised above the end of the prominent bone.
And push it in quickly so that the bone returns and is aligned with some equation.
And strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is slender and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone in this manner, then incise that part as seems fit to you among the incisors we have mentioned; it may be one of the bones in any manner it is possible for you.
And quickly remove that which remains in the bone of roughness and small fragments.
And when the bone is reduced, and after reduction, if the patient finds great pain in the limb, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you will find greatly beneficial for the patient.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vitriolic vinegar tightly bound black, and properly in summer, and do not pause over the wound to cauterize or any other cause which might be oil, so that no accident of burning or corruption happens.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon following the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it heals with scissors and use coverings according to the size of the wound.
And take great care that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times doctors have caused harm to their patients, leading to death or a severe, corrosive illness, which is unhealthful. And if the lunar eclipse is slight, moist, different from the strictures of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain adverse accidents which we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not pause over applying steams, but rather use hard cloth coverings instead of steams and strain it with those.
And when after one or two days the plague begins to appear, with a braza (a measure of length), then you lift the cloth which you had placed over that arm, and then administer calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus with tetrafarmacon and similar.
And you should remove the bandage and observe the plague at each day in the morning and evening until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that the suppuration flows from it to the parts left open.
If the plague persists for many days and is not consolidated or separated from the arm, then you should know that here you are dealing with serious cases, so carefully examine the plague by touch. And of those serious cases that are separated and extracted, and those from which the member does not separate and causes pain, forcefully incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you find pus or corruption in the plague, it is stiomenia or some other form of decay and putrefaction. Then you should know that this requires treatment, for which there is a preceding narrative described in its own chapter.
And in that which hole the lesser worm is located and you make present your hand: when the large bone is broken, you will lie over the limb thus as the bone of the thigh and of the helper and resemble those of the great limbs, and do not presume its traction nor the extraction of it because certain motas may happen by this to the death; having left that which can rot, for strong it will fall by itself in about 20 days or 30; and then cure the wound if you see it, and if not leave that.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of nodation that occurs in the vicinity of any fracture.
Motas visible occur in this nodation near the site of fracture healing, especially close to the joints, and alter the appearance of the limb; therefore, you strongly prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the nodation is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties, such as aloes, enses, mira, cercacollo, acrassia, and resemble those; try to take some or all of them, confirm that they are either bitter astringents or bitter of hooey, or bitter agreeable, place one of these on the nodation in lint, and constrict them over it with good constriction.
Leave the compression bandage on for several days; then remove it and put on another, while the knot is being loosened; or strengthen the lead sheet hanging down, as lead has the property of tightening whatever is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot has already turned into a sore and strengthened, and necessity requires to completely open it, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and prominent part, or cut that away with forceps while it is being loosened; and treat the area until it heals.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of fractures when restored and then, approximately, the limb returns to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb returns to its natural state, this is not done for many reasons: one reason is the abundance of solution of the ligament and the joining of it is not done according to what is proper; or due to excess compression of the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excess ointment application; or due to excessive movement at an improper time; or due to insufficient strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body of the patient weak until the pain increases in the patient; administer baths; and insert cautery and joy into him.
And then place your hand over the limb, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with bitter water, until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Chapter 22.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously and prohibit the operation from which this results.
When the limb, already reduced, is nearing recovery from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and healing, and this is due to the shape of the limb itself, nonetheless the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, so you do not need to receive the opinion of someone who believes that part of the limb is newly broken.
Nevertheless, there are many skilled surgeons and restorers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable as it leads to great fear from the sign of which is fatal.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then soak them in water of a color similar to that of bile in which are infused soft herbs, such as those of hyssop, centaury, and melilot, resembling those; and let it be made into a poultice with a poultice of softening, like well-prepared duckweed; or what is pressed from the juice of centaury and is wrapped in gray of flax or oil of cinnamon, and applied with that; or what are pressed figs and are steeped in goose feathers, resembling those of the medicines named as amber consolidations.
And sometimes it is dissolved by frequent light friction applied to the more humid areas, and movement of the limb should be administered at all times in all hours.
And if tortuosity has already gone before and is made strong, turning into a stone and necessitating its cure by knife, then it must be that the pus above the cecum is removed and the continuity of the bone is dissolved and incised. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be administered on the bone with fine incisors, and facilitated in that with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
Of speech on dislocation.
Dislocation is the displacement of one of the joints of that location, rendering movement prohibited and distorting the figure of the limb, causing great pain and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to immediately attempt to reduce it, and not delay the reduction process. If delayed, the area can become infected, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of infection, as severe spasms and intense pains can occur.
More specifically, when this occurs, you should prepare for an incision in the foot to drain the infection, and allow it to rest until the abscess has subsided; then, apply warm water compresses and oil to the limb, and attempt to reduce the dislocation with ease.
And each member be treated with the water of which the memory will come to its place.
And I have already and ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body first up to the part next, then leave.
Chapter 24.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without a tooth; and the dislocation of both is caused according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their places and made somewhat softer; or they are completely dislocated, and at the part where the jaw meets, saliva flows from the patient's mouth, so that neither can have it nor close its mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped in a cloth.
More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place by itself with little cause.
More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and full, it must be reduced gently, and should not be delayed entirely.
And the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert his thumb from one hand into the corner of the dislocated jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hands remain outside and equalize; and command the patient to cease moving his jaw and allow those to return from any part; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are completely dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it on powders of cloth with cerate, made of wax and rubbed oil; and apply it with several soft cloths.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not get wet on either side; do not force them to gargle for any reason; having their food ready by a lion skin, when the pains subside and their jaws are moistened, then wet what they want.
And this should be given easily, and you must not work on the aperture of the mouth; let them eat, drink, and breathe freely, when their jaw is healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then blisters often occur, causing frequent fever and a constant dryness. The belly of the patient is also strongly swollen, with severe vomiting of pure bile.
And when you see this, then know it is fatal; and blisters often occur to those upon whom this happens in a few days.
Chapter XXV.
Of reducing the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the leg inside by its continuation to the foot; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outer part, and this is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his back and extends his legs. And then apply your palm to the area with strong pressure, for it will return.
And then place your hand over the area with the plaster and powder, and strengthen that.
More so, the extremity of that which is connected to the coccyx does not get dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and equalized as we have said and according to what you have at hand.
And then place your hand over the area with the plaster, powder, and extract, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this cure, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner other than three ways, of which one is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated above the muscle, which is called tart; and it is not dislocated at the back parts by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the front parts by the nerves.
And it is mostly dislocated outward at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those where the muscles are few, it is easily dislocated; more so in those where there are many muscles, it occurs with difficulty.
And often such persons suffer from a blow or strike, and the muscle of the person develops an abscess due to a boil, and becomes inflamed because it is already dislocated.
Then cover what you are especially over them with, and then proceed in the cure of them.
And the dislocation is known when it is in the parts; then you must palpate; so that you distinguish between the displaced muscle and the proper muscle, for which you find a clear difference; and you find a concavity at the head of the muscle. When you palpate the head of the muscle, it feels like a hollow space, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear, nor can he move it with all movements.
If it is dislocated, you must palpate the foot or upwards, and then you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a gentle reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand from above; then places his fingers on the dislocated parts and palpates them, elevating the joint with strength at its place, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it properly; then places his fingers there so that it returns gently.
If, however, it does not return through what we have said, and only from the beginning of the dislocation accident, for several days, then it should be bathed in cold water and a moistening poultice applied, as if made with roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and this should be administered.
And then the patient is laid on his back and placed in a position where the titillate of the skin is equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand on the spina, elevating the head of the muscle by its virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it does not suffer from the parts below, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it does not suffer from the parts below, for then it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and it is that you make a person present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of that lathe, and insert his muscle under the titillate of the patient, elevating the titillate above the parts above while the patient hangs in the air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the parts below of his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then see that something else is suspended, so that the gravity of the injury returns quickly.
And it is reduced gradually in another manner: and it is that a long pole be placed with its head round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed under the patient; then place cloths on top of the pole's head, and the patient standing according to the length of the pole. And extend the hand on both sides of the patient; and stretch the body of the patient with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this cure: and you should take a pole whose length is two braccia, its width four fingers, and its thickness increased in the palm of your hand according to this form.
And place cloths on the round head of the pole so that the pole does not press against the patient.
And then place the patient's thigh, and extend your hand or arm along the shaft between the parts, and lay the shaft on the helper and arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the stairs according to its width, and the hand extended along the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon heal.
And when the instrument for it is completed according to any manner that is at your disposal, and then cover the affected area with a cloth of equal quantity; then place an ointment prepared from powder of mallow seeds and honey over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and firmly fix the cloth over the ointment, with the hand attached to its neck, and let it be, without moving the hand for seven days.
And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is strengthened, for this is more conducive to the healing of the condition.
And then the food should be given more than seven or five times, and an exercise should be performed. And therefore, if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to repeated attacks by humidity or for another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery three times, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the plaster and stricture are reduced over it several times, and still not healed with cauterization and cannot lift that arm to parts above, then you should know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either incised or extended or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
For the dislocation of that which is caused, you should pull the foot and the calf or the parts behind, the reduction is performed by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And it should be applied to the other structure, and care should be taken that it be cured.
And if there is a delay in the healing and a decrease in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until the swelling is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the shoulder joint is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation of the shoulder is not hidden; whether you observe it quickly or feel it by touch, depending on the shape of the displacement. When you reduce the dislocated shoulder into place, this is clearly evident to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or reach its own muscle.
And note that if an apostema (abscess) has formed, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it reaches the apostema. For if it does reach the apostema, the reduction becomes difficult, and even with strong measures, it may not be completely healed. Especially when it is in the rear parts, for this type of dislocation is worse than all others, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
And the restoration of it, when that is possible to reduce, is that his hand be extended between two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on the knees and leave him, and he push the joint with the heels of his hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
And have two ministers stretch out their arms, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not disturbed.
And then rotate the arm completely around, since it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease of movement; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion where there is inflammation and exudation from white pus, and be extended in a downward position, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then it should be released; and therefore if the joint is formed in that location, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then iterate the poultice and ligament, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and then release it.
Moreover, if it happens to it that gravity affects the reduction of the joint, and its position is in movement, then administer moistening in bath and subtle friction and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a time, so it is a matter of much motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then immerse it in water, and when soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then iterate over it for a time, so it is a matter of much motion, one time, and the second, and the third. by means of bathing, when it is warm.
And if you wish, place your hand over that wet and flaccid groove at the edge and press strongly upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and you are restoring it to its proper state.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the treatment of shoulder dislocation, it is the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it is crucial that there be speed in the reduction when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The physician then places their hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper place.
But rather it should be considered if the palm is already placed on the abdomen of the hand, then the patient pause the two of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior, then place the two of his hand, so that the position of the hand of the physician precisely on the table, in order that the hand of the doctor falls over that potential of the joint.
And so, if it returns quickly, that is good; otherwise, then strengthen that and apply a compress yielding to the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, do not suffer nor be unable regarding the reduction of it until days pass.
But rather the joint is to be reduced according to its tortuosity; and do not note any cause in the patient, but let the hand be softened and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are torn or cut, and then there is nothing in it but that it be strengthened with a cautery near the site and fortify it with this you confer some cause.
And since the gout has returned, then place over the compress which we have recommended, and let it be softened and strengthened for five days; and then release it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
If the movement in it is stopped and some gravity occurs, then loosen that with water cautery and some friction several times, until it is alleviated.
Capitol.xxix.
Of the cure of dislocation of the fingers.
In some cases, dislocate the fingers all at once.
And when one of those fingers is dislocated on the side of the palm or in its middle part, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns.
Then hold the base of the finger, suspend that part which was dislocated, and leave it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it until the finger is straight in that same day.
And when it is night, treat that part according to the aforementioned method, and do not cease to loosen and move it during the day, and treat it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And make it seem as if you are doing that, if it is dislocated in the abdomen by your hand, hold that part and do your first operation, until it is healed.
And make it seem as if you are doing that when it is dislocated in other parts.
Capitol.
For the treatment of dislocation of the second lumbar vertebra.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the lumbar or cervical vertebrae, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper position, then there is no cure for that part, and death follows the patient.
The sign of this is that the patient's excretion is forcibly expelled against their will and they cannot retain it; often, several members of the patient or both hips or two arms of the patient, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its place, for multiple times it is displaced and multiple times the removal of those to four parts is performed.
Then it is already mended at the rear parts and named jaundice.
May the cure of it be that when you consider whether jaundice arises from retention, then in that case there is no cure and neither does it heal entirely.
May it be that in those cases where jaundice arises from congestion or percussion or semblance thereof, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at length, in which the most returns to a prophecy; but I will now abbreviate that of which the few exceptions from too much of it are for my proximity to your understanding, by which I have herein expanded and formed various instruments from which I shall show and expand that.
And of those, only the one that arises in the two sides is cured as I recommend.
And the patient should be extended on his back as close to the wall as possible, and kept moistened with a cloth so that his feet are not irritated.
And place a straight stick, inserted into the ground at the end of the arm near its head, and another stick across his feet at the other end of the pole.
The minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in the ground; another minister should hold the other end according to that form.
And wrap cloth around the head of the patient and tie it tightly with a ligature; extend the end of the ligature to the stick which is placed at the head, and tie that there. And wrap strong ligatures around the hips of the patient under his armpits, and support his legs; and adjust all the ligatures and tie those to the other stick which is placed at the feet.
And the minister should extend the ligature to the part of the stick, and do not move both sticks and the ligatures in which they are placed, but they should not be fixed exactly as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength so that it returns, or he places one hand on a table and adjusts his feet on the table so that it returns.
And if it does not return in this way, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia, and dig a hole in the wall where we said was near the hernia, in which between the ends of the table. And then place the greater part of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end. He presses well so that the spine is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved in your hand; and when you stand on the ground, place the base of the hernia at the heel of two sticks, whose length is that of one arm, and place its top at the heel of two sticks similarly positioned. The distance between each stick should be about one palm. In each stick, thread a cord, and secure each end firmly to the ground so it does not move.
And there should be a round stick for the turning, and it should be rotated in the two holes of the two sticks.
And at the end of it is a hole through which the stick passes, the length of which is one palm's breadth as it is rotated; and in the two other sticks, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments you have stretched in the feet of the patient in the hole through which you place its head, and the ligaments you have stretched in the thighs of the patient in the turn where you place its feet.
And then you should place each turn and have a minister twist the turn with his hand, and the doctor straighten the spine as we have said.
And when the spine is returned and the area is straightened, then cover it with a paste of honey, and some wool; place a slice of table about three fingers or slightly wider in diameter, and the length should fit the area of the swelling, and on the part of the spine.
And then apply the honey which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until it is healed.
And if there is any danger at the site near the end of healing, then ensure that medicines that mitigate and relieve are administered for a long time through the table as we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is applied in that location.
And sometimes accidents occur near the end of the vertebrae in the back, and are caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone for which you should already anticipate so that no suspicion arises about it with this medicine, as it will greatly affect you and cause death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should occur only due to dislocation, and not due to what occurs in other small joints with little movement and concavity.
And the joint of the elbow can be dislocated in four ways, namely dislocated to the internal parts, or to the external parts, or to the anterior parts, or to the posterior parts.
And primarily it is dislocated to the internal parts, and little to the anterior or posterior parts.
And the sign of dislocation to the internal parts is that when you adjust the healthy leg's knee against the sick one, the unhealthy knee becomes longer and more prominent than the healthy one. The sick leg cannot bend its foot; this is the place where you should cautery the felon, so that the head of the swelling is treated here.
And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the external parts is that the symptoms of this condition are contrary to this accident.
And the sign of one who experiences dislocation to the anterior parts is that the knee swells according to the complement, but does not bend, and the pain in the kneecap persists. If it is forced further向前翻译这句话：“并且，对于那些希望将区块链技术应用于实际项目的人来说，了解如何选择合适的共识机制至关重要。”
And a sign of dislocation in the rear parts is that the hollow does not expand, nor can what is in front bend what is behind, and the thigh is shorter than the other, and the hip is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from that place.
The main sign of this dislocation is that you consider whether the dislocation is old, and if it is an ancient one, you have already treated it nearby by reducing it according to its position. However, this is not part of the entire treatment; then, you should not guess or form a presumption about it.
For the recent dislocation, which is one of the four species of dislocation, you should reduce it by returning the joint to its proper position and extending it to the internal and external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left sides, for it will naturally return and you will not need any other treatment.
Moreover, if it does not return in this manner, you should prepare a strong counterpoise and extend the thigh from the part behind or from its hands, or with linseed which is soaked over the hollow; another minister should stretch the hand above to try to grasp the tendons of the foot; then, strongly apply linseed on the back of the thigh, and have another minister hold the end of the linseed.
And it is the extension from his side inside to the angle at the side of the furcula, or from the back side to the side of the diaphragm.
And it is the extension of all those in one piece so that the patient's body is elevated from the ground and hangs suspended.
And this type of extension is special for all four.
And so, if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be good; otherwise, for every type, it is necessary to do what I will say about its own treatment.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is on the inside parts, ensure that the patient's body is revolved over their side; then place the bandages around the ribcage in that location where it lies between the head of the ribcage and the place where the angle is located; then extend the bandage above the part of the angle to the other side of the furcula.
And then another minister firmly takes hold of the thighs, and compresses the area around the bad hernia and extends it outward forcefully, for that which returns to its place.
And this species is of a gentle cure for which that member is reduced compared to other species.
But if you excuse yourself and do not follow the instruction for this cure, then carefully bind both feet of the patient together firmly, gently, over both the ankles and both the insteps.
And let the length of each be the quantity of four fingers, and let the bad hernia's flap be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the hernia is suspended over the top of the stake, and it should be in the hand; let the length of it from the ground be the quantity of two braccia.
And command a strong youth to hold the thigh, and let him suspend it above the hernia, while another youth holds the thigh with great strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
In the proper reduction, when dislocation is at the upper part, guide the patient's leg according to what we have recommended in the healing of gout; and strengthen the ligament on the side of the affected thigh and on its knee.
And then place two poles to hold him, one on his foot and the other on his head; and let the poles be adjusted above the peg inserted under which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not damaged by the pole being between his thighs, for you need to maintain the extension of the parts left in place.
And then each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
When the dislocation is in the front parts, then you should slightly extend the thigh, and proceed according to this narrative about the leg; the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the popliteal region of the injured side, and then cuts with the other hand, and by that cut extends it to the front parts leaving it at the place of the kneecap.
If the dislocation is in the rear parts, then you should not extend the limb to the front, but elevate it above the ground; having done this, you should place it on a hard surface, as if it were similarly situated when the wide end is dislocated outward, as we have said regarding its position between two flat surfaces; and it should be placed with its face up and the ligaments extended, as we have said, not in any other manner.
A compress should be applied on the area where the joint is displaced.
Then, once the reduction is completed as it should be — and you notice the sign of the reduction, which is that you can extend both knees from the injured side, and when you see them equal and the limb expands its usual space, then you know that the member has been returned to its proper place — then adjust two cushions and wrap tightly with a bandage so that the width is not altered in any of the parts; adhere the limb to rest for three or four days.
And then compare one leg with the other, after separating the linen and wrapping.
When you see them equal in swelling, then know that the dislocation is healed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of swelling, then return and apply a poultice to that area, and extend it according to your first structure, and leave it for three days.
And then allow that area to gradually recover its mobility over each part for some days, until it is comfortable.
Capitol.xxxii.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and to the back parts more than to the front parts; and it does not dislocate to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that when you command the patient to apply their arm to their hip; then you know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all manners of it is that you make cease the labour straight, essay that it already extends its limb over this; attach your two hands to the face of it, and place his foot between your feet; then return his soles to your palms, and keep those between your thumbs on his soles with strength, and another minister extend his foot so that the sole returns to its place.
And the sign of its submission is that its limb attaches to the thigh with light, non-laboring effort.
And then apply that and attach the limb to the thigh, and place those constantly with a bandage for three or four days, and then remove those.
And do not use the labor of ambulation for some days until it is healed and comforted.
But if the reduction of it is excused to you, then administer strong extension to the limbs of which in the cure of the hip the preceding narration was given.
Capitol.xxxiii.
Of the cure of the dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by a small movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the injury, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either on the inner side or on the outer side.
And the sign of the dislocation of the ankle is that you see the ankle swollen from the side where it is dislocated.
More the cure of the reduction of the ankle is by gentle stretching, and it should be done with ease so that it returns to its normal position.
More in the cure of the ankle when it is dislocated according to the injury, make sure you straighten the limb properly, and have a strong and brave assistant at the back of the injured leg in the middle of the location.
And then place your right hand on the upper part of the foot, and with your left hand, hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the ankle.
And then draw the foot to your right hand, and towards the left side twice, and extend the left side; and push the foot's sole towards the right, let the leg bend as it works.
And do this twice according to how we have counted.
And then push the foot's sole towards the third bend of the leg, and you are at the knee.
So if it returns in one or two pushes according to this manner, and if you press the foot well, that is good; otherwise, then iterate the operation, for when it does not return.
But if the reduction is forbidden to you as we have advised, then place the foot on a board on the ground, and fix a stick firmly in the ground, and let it pass between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around it so that the foot does not slip.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with the cloth tied around the back of the foot; and each minister extends themselves against the extension of their part, and the stick remains between the patient's thighs, holding that in place, so that the body of the patient is not drawn towards the left side as you maintain its extension.
And then the doctor equalizes the dislocation with his hands, while another assistant holds the healthy thigh at the place left vacant, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
And then as the dislocation returns and you declare the health of the reduction, then apply a strong plaster to it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And beware of the nerves behind the tibia, for the lint over that area should not be strong and severely irritate it.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the lint is moist, replace it.
And then remove the lint on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. But if it is necessary for the patient to walk before that time, then there is no guarantee that the dislocation has not been dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive treatment.
And if an abscess occurs during the operation, then you should manage it at the place where we previously described in our narrative, in another location for treatment and fomentation, until it is ripe.
Chapter XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the feet.
Make sure that which is dislocated is reduced with slight extension; and what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
But if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on the ground or on a table, and keep it thus as if walking.
Then place your foot on the ground, and keep your own foot above the area where the joints are located. Gently press that part with your foot using force, so that it returns to its proper position, and observe that it is reduced without any prominence appearing in that location.
Then place the abdomen of the foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which should have two ends. Gently stretch and maintain this structure firmly for three days; then release it and allow the walking rest for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the types of displacement that occur due to sprain or fracture or any other cause.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the treatment and restoration of it, mistakes can lead to death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the treatment of it, but only someone who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious; and who delays, neither burning nor presumptuous. And who uses at the beginning of medicines that lead to the cautery as much as necessary, leaving the cure to the divine judgment, rather than to him to whom you hope for a healing from loss, in alleviation of the disease, and in which any hope appears. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before it develops into an abscess that requires cautery.
And then, if the limb returns as we wish, proceed to administer treatment that leads to the cautery of the abscess and heals the sprain with what is suitable for it from the drying ointments.
And if dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must realign their joints, doing so as we have said in simple ailments that precede these locations in the earlier parts.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you from your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true self those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God bless. Amen.
