O, children, now that I have completed this book, which is the last of the science of medicine, for the completion of which I have attained its end, and through its explanations and declarations, it is evident to me that I complete for you here this treatise, which is part of my surgical operations.
For the operation of surgery is well established in our region and in our time, yet it remains largely private, despite the importance of its science and the clarity of its principles. Only a few brief descriptions can be found in the works of the Ancients, which correct many errors and hesitations, but the understanding of it is limited, and its force and art are diluted.
And it is clear to me that I should vivify that order in this treatise according to the way of explanation and declaration and abbreviation; so that it comes into line with the forms of the instruments of cautery and other tools of the work through the addition of declaration and preparation, which is necessary for these causes.
More the reason why a good craftsman does not use his hand well in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and that its actor before this had to be exercised in the science of anatomy which Gualia knew entering into which he understood the youth of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the sinews, their number, and their texture; and of the veins pulsating and the quiet ones, and the places of the movement of them.
And for this, Hippocrates is said to name the hand as primary, more in the small work, and most of all in the art of the hand.
More over, we have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book; for whoever does not know what we said about anatomy, will fall into error on account of which many men will die, as I have seen too many of those. For some are formed in this science and go from there to another science and its experience.
For you saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor who incurred an apostematia scrophulosa in the neck of a woman, and damaged some arteries so that much blood flowed, and the woman died among her many sufferings.
And there was another doctor who almost drained a stone from a man who had been suffering for a long time, and the stone was large, and it came to him, and he removed that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for the stone to be extracted, and I see that due to the size of the stone and the position of the patient, he will likely die.
And there was another doctor who took a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black servant who had a fracture in the thigh; and due to the doctor's ignorance, he extracted the fracture, placing it over the wound with cushions and splints of strong structure, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then the dislocation according to his desires, and then the reattachment, and then the leaving for a few days as commanded that we release the ligament; and thus remain until the thigh and foot heal properly, and proceed to recovery.
And I was called to him, and prepared to untie the bandage, and peace and an attempt to alleviate his pains was achieved.
But still, as the corruption was confirmed in the member, I could not refrain from stopping that, and did not cease to wander the corruption in the member while the illness persisted.
And there was another doctor who incised an oncotic abscess, and it ulcerated for several days, during which its malignity grew significantly to the detriment of its lord.
The cause is that the pain is purely from melancholic humors, and does not affect everything completely, but rather affects a member that suffers from being attacked by all.
And for this reason, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation be devised in two ways: one where the operation is associated with health, and another where the work is risky in the major dispositions.
And I have already existed here in all parts of this libretto where the operation is full of error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this and leave that, so that the leaves do not find a way to speak and to disgrace you.
And therefore take your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and your patients with felicity and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God seeking salvation and praiseworthy success, and lay aside the terrible illnesses difficult to cure, and keep your weapons against what makes you fear, so that sitting in your faith and in your name you are not betrayed: for more remains to your glory, and more in this world and beyond to your sanctity.
Gout is already dissected in some monastic works: Do not treat illness falsely, so that bad doctors will not be named.
And I have already devoted this livre according to three chapters.
Begin the division of the livre, and first with the first part. The first chapter ordered in the head of the foot, on the forms of the instruments and on the tools of the cautery, and on what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on dryness and perforation, and on suction cups, and on boils, and on the extraction of arrows and similar, all categorized and organized by the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the cure of sprains and similar conditions; a chapter organized by the head between the feet, and by the forms of the instruments.
I will describe the qualities of the cautery and its ingredients, and in which conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the cautery's juice and its ingredients is long and tedious, subtle through science, and a hidden secret; many wise men have already spoken extensively about it, and they are in disagreement. For my part, I content myself with a small portion of their sermons, fearing excessive length.
And thus it is said that the cautery benefits all conjunctions universally which are of flesh or sinew, except two conjunctions, which are joint connections of sinew.
In the joint of the leg and foot, which are of flesh, they will dry up; for some said that the cautery is beneficial for that, while others said the opposite, that the cautery is not suitable in disease which is due to quality and dryness, for the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inappropriate that a disease which is of flesh and dry should be healed by what is cautery and dry.
And you dismiss those who say the opposite, that by cautery one is cured in all joint disease and foot disease that comes in men's bodies, for when you compare man's body and its humors to the nature of fire, you find man's body to be dry.
And I say according to that speech, for I have already experienced this several times myself.
Yet I do not consider that it comes to this that one who is already experienced in the practice of cautery through long exercise in the Capitol, and who knows the diversity of human joints and the disposition of diseases in their various forms, as well as the causes of those diseases, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of those diseases.
In other complications, it is not about your fear, and especially in the wet diseases, for all doctors are agreed upon those, and they do not differ in applying cautery to them in youth.
And know, children, of the secret of curing by cautery with fire and of its goodness, concerning the cautery in medicine that burns, for the fire is simple, and its action reaches only the member being cauterized and causes no harm to other members when properly applied.
And the action of the burning medicine reaches that part in the members where it touches, and strongly makes come into the affected member a disease that is difficult to heal and quickly affects it.
And fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not cause anything but to evaporate excess. We are already well aware of this through experience and a long service of studying the art regarding the true causes; and for this reason, I excuse myself for the length of my discourse. If it were not that this matter is not written freely in this pause, and if you had not kept your secret about fire, its quality in operations on bodies, and how you expel diseases through its expulsion, I would have spoken philosophically demonstratively, which would have been appropriate for your ears.
And know, sons, that they disagree about the time at which it is convenient to make a cautery and when the best season is spring.
And I say that a cautery is convenient at all times, because the damage caused by accidental timing is submerged in the youthfulness of what is seared by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary pains, strong boils, which do not tolerate delay due to fear of those caused by evil intent, which are greater than minor damage entering through time.
And this is not done on your feet, or, sons, they do not consider it other than the common people and the foolish doctors, since for that illness which is cured by cautery it is not convenient at all times, and they pause that consequence.
And the cause is not thus because they consider it so, for a cautery is not other than in place of a medicine which alters the composition and dries the humors which are the cause of the venous pains.
Yet, however, a cautery in excess over medicine for the swiftness of its efficacy and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
It is possible that the patient's illness may return at some point in time, depending on the complexity of the ailment, its location, and its nature, as well as what has been prepared in the body through the accumulation of superfluities within it, or what has been acquired in the body through foods and similar causes; but if the ailment where a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few superfluities and humidities, such as a dental cautery for pain and similar conditions to that one, it is possible that no pain will return in it, but this is done in small amounts.
It is more common to say that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a direct remedy, not as much as what we understand by it, for I believe it is not a cure that benefits either from medicine or from any other cause except the cautery.
The cause is the opposite; and I understand that a cautery is the last remedy of medicine only when one has tried all methods of cure for certain ailments, and those medicines have not been effective, and then, at the end of the treatment, one administers a cautery, which benefits in that case. And at this point from here begin the last remedies of medicine, not according to the understanding which I understand of the vulgar and too many of the foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that a gold cautery is better than an iron one, and they would not say this only because of the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
And they said that the place for cautery does not burn, since it is not absolutely verified, for I have already tried this and found that it works only in some bodies and not in others. A gold cautery is good and better than iron as they say; but when you make a cautery with fire of gold, it is not determined to you, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, and prepares to receive fire; and if you adjust over the ignition, the gold melts by the fire, and settles in the fire with some sheets so that the artisan can cut through its occupation.
And for this, you should make the cautery with iron more lightly and more precisely in terms of the operation.
And I have already ordered this chapter on the cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the thigh between the feet, so that I delay the asking for what he wants.
The first chapter.
This cautery addresses the cold and humidity over the servel accident of which there are two causes, these being the cause of soda and much traumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the neck and the ears flowing, and much sleeping, and tooth pain, and colic, and generally all illness that comes through cold, thus as paralysis, soda, and apoplexy, and similar symptoms in those illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, you command the patient to be evacuated with a mild purgative for the head for three or four nights, according to the virtue of the patient and their age and habit.
And then command that his head be shaved, and place the shaver between your hands on a tilted bench and have his hands rest on his own feet.
And then place the razor from your palm near the mouth between the patient's palms. More over, since the correct location has been determined, mark that location with a needle, and then heat the olive cautery of which this is the form:
And then place the heated cautery over the marked location with a needle, in such a way that it descends slowly, with your hand gradually pressing it down, and you rotate it.
And then lift your hand slightly and look at the location, and if you see any part of the bone being revealed, as much as a grain of millet, then lift your hand. If not, return your hand to that iron, or another one if it is cooled, so that what I have said can be seen on the bone.
And then take a little of salt, dissolve it in that [liquid], and leave it there for three days.
And then place yourself over the wound in the boge (leg) and leave it there until the scar of the fire is destroyed. And then cure the place with ointment of tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
And we have said that when the wound is opened wide, it heals better, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the condyle should be cauteryed within the bone, and that the cautery should be left in until a part of the bone's surface is adhered.
And then scrape away what is adhered to the bone, and then cure it.
And others say that the cautery should reach the marrow, pressing forcefully into the bone until it cools, and this is Alphécourt's method. And they estimate from that place exhale the vapors of the head.
And let the wound remain open for a long time, and only then be treated when it is healed.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery for all, only in some men according to fear; leave that one, I advise you, it is better for health when it is; for the head is developed by solution of continuity of the head as we have testified in other members, and especially when the head of the patient is of cold nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, I advise you; use that one and do that for health.
Capitulate second.
On the cautery for the head.
When in the whole head there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain that is prolonged in the patient, and he uses garters, cohorns, cap purges, plasters, poultices, pillows, bandages, and face masks, and especially if the head has already been cauterized with a cautery which does not improve his condition from any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not cold or shows no great pain, then that cautery should be replaced by another. And then cauterize that on the top of his head between where the seam has split. Incise the seam and uncover the quantity which we have counted, and cauterize that with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the place which is called vas, — and this is the place where suction is applied. And raise your hand here, but do not uncover the skull, for the patient finds great pain from this different from the pain of all other head cautery treatments.
And I shall say this cautery in its place, for know that the cautery on which we cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that on which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Head, top.
Of the cautery treatment for old migraines.
When there is a sharp pain in the rear part of the head, or a dull pain between the temples, the head should be treated with medicines that purify the brain, and the other treatment I have described for diseases should be administered; and if this does not help, then the cautery treatment can be performed in two ways: either with a sharp burning medicine, or with iron.
May a cautery in medicine that burns be that you take a piece of alder, incinerate it, and abridge the extremities of it from both ends. And then apply the place of the pain in the temple with a lancet laid into it, where you make the incision and leave the needle, which is to be concealed.
And then strengthen over the place stopped by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove and draw the alder, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then cover over the spot submerge in balm until the area heals.
And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do what with some burning medicines which I have written in the second treatise of burning medicines.
May the cautery be performed according to this manner: ignite the cautery from which this is the form:
and it is called a clavicle, for its head has the form of a nail and in the middle part there is a small prominence.
Then place your hand over the location of the pain, and retract it—so that the artery which is left is not burned—and slowly rotate the small iron bit.
And if the amount that is burned due to the strength of the cautery is as great as its size, lift your hand so that the artery is not burned which is left, so that there be no flow of blood.
Then immerse it in salt water and place it over the area, leaving it for three days. Then place it near a warm fire, and cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize at the end of the knife edge according to the cautery, and beware of cutting the artery in this not very ancient migraine.
Capitol quarter.
Of the cautery for ancient headache.
When you cure a headache as we have said in the previous cure and as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and the cure does not help, and sometimes because the disease is worse than what we have said about the first cautery by medicine or the cautery by fire, then you must heat the surgical cautery until it is white-hot. Place your hand on the place of the pain along the length where the greatest part of the said lies, or just above it; and after that, for a moment, firmly press that area to make the artery incise and penetrate into the bone.
However, you must guard against the continuation of the jaw, which is weakened and should not be used for chewing, and ensure that the nerve which affects it is not adhered to, and that no spasm occurs.
And if it concerns the care and caution regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, for in its incision there is fear, especially for one who ignores what he does and is not studious or careful; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I will recall the regulation concerning the flow of blood incident to the artery according to its manner, in this place of this book.
And if you see this illness in the patient that does not tolerate this cautery and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize it in the middle of the foot as we have reported, and cure the wound until it is healed.
And if you see, apply the cautery which we have said in the chapter of stretching the artery with a cautery, using two knives. This cautery is better and more suitable.
Chapter V.
On the cautery for pains in the ears.
When there is pain in the ear due to cold and it is treated with conservative methods and another treatment as I have said in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, which is called the puncta. This is its form:
And then puncture near the beginning, and lead it to the environment of the whole ear thus as a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of each place if the pain is in any part. Lengthen the cautery of the ear gradually more as you have tested the place.
And if the cautery of these points on the whole ear, and quell it, then cure the places among which they are healed.
Capitol. vi.
Of cautery for the tortura.
Tortura which is cured and treated with cautery is none other than due to the qualities of the wind, as we have said in the divisions of the ailments.
Avoid cautery for the quality that causes dryness or spasm of the nerve.
When you cure that quality of tortura with jerras, capipurgi, and guarismes, and find your cure ineffective, then when you treat the malady with three cauteries: the first on the ear, the second a small prick in its temple, and the third on the conjunction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the malformed part, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healthy.
The method of cautery is to apply the cautery at the outer part of the ear near the top of the ear, and above a small area on the crown of the head, and elsewhere on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the affected part, and then place your hand over the area where the quantity of the scab has been burned.
This is the method of the cautery, and it is the specialty of the surgeon, the form of whose practice is described below. Yet more subtle is that you use just a small amount, as if seen; and cover it with a small piece to avoid unnecessary coarseness.
Then cover the area with what is described and let it heal properly.
Capitol VII.
On the cautery treatment for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it as we said earlier and there is no fever in the patient, then cautery it with four cauteries: especially on all corners of his head; and with a cautery in the middle of the head, as we said; and with a cautery on the scrotum. The method of cautery is made according to what was said above.
And it has already been cauteryed on the stomach's opening; and it is more rearward; and then proceed with what you are doing.
Capitol. viii.
Of the cautery for oblivion made by flame.
Give to the patient at the beginning large stones and pills of the service decanting.
And then place your hand on the head of the patient and cover it with a plaster as described in the treatise on plasters.
And place it there for some moments, as this is a method of cautery. And do so according to the method and order which I have already said.
And therefore, if by those means it is cured; and otherwise, then make three cautery marks on the rear part of his head, which should be descending from the upper part of the head into the lower part of the neck. And pause between each cautery for a moment, and then proceed with the cautery as described.
But if you add more heat and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle location; and if you have a greater addition of heat, then cauterize there above the two horns.
And proceed with the cautery while it is healing; and let the cautery be in the shape given as shown.
Capitol.ix.
On the cautery treatment of ulcers and the moistening of the entire body.
Cover that you process in modification of the head with stones and as we have said; then place near the head of the patient, and with cautery there on the middle part of the head, and with cautery on all horns of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of softening of the body for more and the illnesses tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cautery there with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and afterward with a cautery between where the spine meets it, and lift your hand. And then cure that where it is healed, and this be an olive cautery.
Capitulum.
Of the cautery for epilepsy.
No is it cauterized the epileptic, but only if the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore cover that you modify the brain of the patient at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the illness is great and is tolerable the exception of medicines.
And if the child does not tolerate the medicines, then for several days beforehand, prepare masticatory remedies that modify the food.
And near the head of the patient, apply a cautery in the middle of the head according to the preceding method, and another cautery on the occiput, and over each horn of the head he cauterizes. And if the patient is strong and tolerable, then apply the cauteries I have said, having first paralyzed and softened the body around the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And apply olive cautery as previously described.
And if the patient is a child, then use a fine cautery according to this method.
Capitol.xi.
On the cautery for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are damp and gross flame, then apply a cautery using the cauteries we have described, having first paralyzed.
And if the cause of melancholy is excess declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then let him drink what purifies his brain according to what was previously divided.
And near the head of the patient, and properly make a tortora over the circle on the middle of the head, then place that in the center of the head.
And the patient is lying on his back, and is held from all sides.
And place the liniment; it is particularly worthy to be applied before sheep. And heat it over the fire for tempered warmth by measure, which the patient can bear when more is applied. And place it in the middle of the head in the circle, and let it remain until it is rubbed.
And do this for the patient once a week. For the other regimen, let it remain until he is cured; or if you wish, make a cautery by making small points according to his condition. Otherwise, keep your hand on an appropriately ordered cautery: this is a special cautery that moistens the brain in equal measure.
And then place that folded cloth on the side or in the folds of the garment.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery for water descending into the heel.
When you have declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient what modifies the head of it, and keep the other free from all moisture.
And make that powder in bath with decoction for several days.
And then command him to rub his head, and cautery that with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cautery that with two cauteries on two temples if it is the beginning of ysmen in both heels, or on one temple if it is the beginning of water in one heel.
Place the cautery on all the veins and arteries which are left by the cord; and let the cauteries be in that length in the breadth of the temples.
And guard yourself from flows of blood when it is cauterized; and if you see flows of blood, stop it with some medicine which is within your reach.
And I will come with wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the cutting of those, and caution about flows of blood.
And sometimes it is cauterized in the neck with two bones on either side produced properly.
Capitol. XIII.
On the cauterization of ancient tears.
When tears from the feet are ancient and frequently occur through the veins and arteries which are in the obvious location on the head, and it is verified that these are superfluous phlegmatic discharges, then cauterize that area with a cautery as we have recounted in the Capitol of the beginning of water flowing in the feet, and with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two towels, and with two cauteries on the neck placing two bones. And if you need to stitch, then sear that area on the full length of the hairline at the edge of the forehead with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV.
On the cautery treatment for nasal odor.
When your treatment for the condition as described in the division does not improve, then you prepare and give to drink to the patient three times the decoction of cochias; and cut his hair, and cautery him with a medium-sized cautery and an olive wood cautery. And then cautery that area with a sharp cautery on both hairlines, leaving the hair slightly.
And be careful not to scorch that area.
And the use of the sharp cautery is as follows.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of the eyes.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery, and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that over the two eyebrows with a small one on each side, and let them be long from the temples. And the length of each cautery according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but according to the amount that the inner part of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol. XVI.
Of the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the skin is converted in the inner parts and fistula of the eye.
When the skin of the eye is converted in the inner parts, I probe the eye, and cauterize there according to two methods: either by cautery or by applying burning medicine.
If the cautery is from fire, command the patient to lie down in such a way that his skin is exposed as if those who bathe him do, with their hands extended and equal; and when you hold it there, strengthen the edges of it with a bandage so that it does not become inflamed before the skin is grown over it.
Then, when the skin is grown over and extended, place the head of the patient on a pillow, and then press your hand over the edges of the cautery tentatively, marking it in the shape of a laurel leaf, which will be the beginning of the mark on the skin.
Then place it carefully immersed in oil or mustard on the wound.
Then heat the cautery of which this is the form.
Then apply the cautery to the marked figure, gradually in small stages, until the surface of the wound is burned, which should appear like a laurel leaf, entirely visible and proper.
And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the heel already contracted and the hairs of it raised from the puncture of the heel.
And therefore raise your hand and leave it there for three days, and place it over the wound between that the scar is eradicated. And then cure that with ointment until it is healed.
But if it returns through the skin for some cause near their origin and the eyelid becomes softened, then make another time the cautery over that, all as you have done first.
But if the skin is in the eyelid, then cauterize that when it is raised to its natural place and made equal, so that the skin does not cover the heel.
But the cautery with burning medicine is that you command the patient to lengthen and make equal the skin, and then form it into the shape of a mulberry leaf using a piece of cloth.
And then take a known soap and fresh lard in one ounce. Mix those ingredients well, do this quickly so it is not rubbed too much; then spread this over a piece of cloth made thus like the leaf of a laurel, and place that over one or both areas; place the patient's buttocks partly immersed in a basin of oil, and the patient's head in your lap.
And place the said over the medicine and press it slightly so that the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is on him thus like fire.
And then, to verify that the bite has occurred, let go of the medicine and apply it again in your lap; therefore, when the bite ceases, place the medicine back on and wash the area with water; then consider if the eyelid is already raised as if washed; if so, apply heat or incision, for then this is good; and if not, return to applying the medicine to the place where it has not yet been applied, without disturbing your operation and contracting the area.
And then place your hand over the area between which the knot of the adhustio should be eliminated, and cure that with an ointment or something else in which it may be healed.
And if necessary, you should keep careful vigil that no medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened or some cause affects the skin around it in the wound, then repeatedly apply your medicine to that area where the eyelid has become softened, and do so in the same manner as at the beginning, and soon let it heal.
This is the method for washing the eye.
And know that the eyes of humans vary in size and smallness, and therefore your incision should be made according to this.
And the way of the right path should not be hidden from those who study in this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the lacrimal gland of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and do not perform your cure accordingly, then when you cauterize it in this manner: command the patient to place his head on your thigh, and let some minister hold the head of the patient between your thighs in such a way that it is neither hurt nor agitated.
And then place the cautery on the vein in the flesh or over the blister on the sole of the foot.
And then heat the cautery, the form of which is as follows:
which should be cylindrical, like the form of a cane or a bird's feather quill, from one end of which the cautery is made.
And if you wish, penetrate into the other end. And if you want, let it be similar to a needle.
But nevertheless, that which is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is opened, and draw from it clean and dry that which comes out. And if it is not opened, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold your hand a little above the cautery near the root of the nose, so that your hand does not touch or burn the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostrils and destroy that area.
And so, if your cautery at the beginning enters the mouth, that is good; and if not, then reapply the cautery one or two times if necessary; and leave it in this manner for three days, and then place your hand over that spot to keep it warm and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then place the sharp corrosive medicine on it until the bone is uncovered and scraped as you see fit in your chapter.
And another way to cauterize a fistula which some first doctors will say: find the place of the fistula and do it there and then pause near that fissure like a thin line which is the form of it. Put in there the quantity of one ounce of melted lead; and keep your hand there with good retention, so that the bad humor does not enter through that where the melted lead does not penetrate to that place; and continue to pause over the hole of the bad humor as in album of honey or in water, for lead adheres to the place of the fistula and heals that by marvelous healing.
And if the fistula is healed as we have said of the cautery and the cure, well and good; but if not, then it is necessary to administer atra belladonna and reduce the fistula to the nose according to what will come in its proper place.
Chapter XVIII.
On the cauterization of the wound from the boil.
Small cracks often occur in the lips, especially in children's lips.
Then when you cure those cracks as we have said in the divisions and your cure is not effective, then heat the small surgical cautery according to this form that is taught:
Let the cavity be as per the subtlety of the knife.
Then place that heated cautery precisely in those cracks until it reaches the bottom of the cracks.
Then cure that with cerote until it is healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery treatment of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms in the tonsil region or on the palate or in the tooth sockets, and then develops into a fistula that breaks open, becomes chronic, or is reformed as a fistula, and your cure is not effective, then heat the cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, place the heated cautery in the tract of the fistula, and keep your hand there until the hot iron reaches its bottom. Do this one or two times at the end. Then cure that with what we have said about the cure until it is healed.
And so, if the pus is removed and it is healed, that is good; otherwise, it is necessary to expose the area and fix the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
chapter .xx.
Cauterization of the teeth and mollification of the gums.
When the gums are softened by humidity and the teeth are loose, first treat those with medicines and do not wait. Then place the patient's head in hot water, and soon after, heat the cautery to the form which will be given shortly. Try to pause the cautery over the tooth and insert it into that area vigorously, keeping the cautery there just a little while so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
Then lift your hand, and repeatedly apply the cautery several times as you see fit.
Then the patient should close their mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, then spit it out, as the loose tooth is sealed, the softened gum is tightened, and the corrupted humidity is dried up.
Chapter XXI.
Of the cautery for tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to inflammation or there is a swelling or you cannot achieve relief with medicine, then the cautery for that area can be performed in two ways: either with a calf's horn cautery or with a fire cautery.
The calf's horn cautery is when you take the horn of a calf and blisters that part with iron, then take the blistered part and wrap it around the end of the probe, and immerse that in the blistered horn, placing it over the painful tooth forcefully to ensure it becomes inflamed.
And then repeatedly do this several times to ensure the virtue of the fire permeates to the root of the teeth.
And if you wish, immerse a piece of wool or cloth in the horn mentioned above, and place that over the painful tooth, and hold the ignited iron over it until the iron permeates to the root of the tooth's cavity.
Moreover, however, the cautery with fire, you must attend to the shape of the wound or iron, and in its core there should be some coarse material so that the acuity of the fire does not reach the opening of the patient.
And then shape the cautery in the form that will come, and place that one on the tooth and put your hand between it so that the cautery is well rubbed; and do this several times to prevent the pain from worsening or on that day or the other.
And ensure that due to the effect of that cautery, the patient opens their mouth properly and keep it this way for about an hour; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cautery it where you will stop according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol.xxii.
On the cautery treatment for protrusions.
When the hernias are filled with phlegm and humors that are not obedient to digestion by medicines, and you have lightly digested those with medicine, then apply the cautery to the form of which this follows: having two open extremities so that smoke arises from one end through the other, and place that ignited cautery over that apostema for one minute, and another if needed until it reaches the root of the apostema.
And if the apostema is small, then place the cautery according to the quantity of the apostema, and after three days, place it over the center where the fire has burned.
And then apply ointment and dressings until it is healed.
Capitol. xxiii.
For the cautery treatment of hoarseness and constriction of the throat.
When the humidity in the venous channel of the lung is present, especially when it is due to a cold constitution, then you should evacuate the patient at the beginning with laxative medicines, and immediately cauterize the vein in the swollen area.
And beware that you do not apply the cautery to the vein nor burn the ligament of the lung, but only a little.
And cauterize it with another cautery at the junction of the neck in the rear vertebra of the lung. The cautery for the lung should be applied according to the previous method.
And then cure that with what was preceded until it is healed.
Chapter 24.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are due to cold humidity, and the patient has no fever or tuberculosis and is suffering from an old ailment, then cauterize it with two cauteries over the furcula at the swollen areas of the thighs and groins; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot area between the two breasts; and apply the cautery to the neck according to the form previously described.
And if you wish, let your cautery puncture with the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the punctation of ear pain.
And let the puncture into the cells for those; and then cure that with what you apply when it is healed.
And let the cautery having three prongs; for this cautery, you can make three punctures in one go according to this form:
Capitol.xxv.
On the cautery for titillic, which is the head of the helper.
When the head of the helper is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and is not immobilized in the hour of its return, you should reduce the dislocation while it is about to naturally return, and then by a small movement, it will be dislocated as it tries to return, as we have testified. First, reduce the dislocation, and then place the patient on their back or on their side; then elevate the codena which is in the inner part of the citillic to the outer parts above the thumbs of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then heat the cautery having two heads; this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain where that penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cauterization will come when of two heads cautery.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and because these cauteries are VIII.
And then place on the cautery some salt for several seconds, and then attach the patient to a stretcher, so that the limb is not moved for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is above and the thumb is treated, then cauterize over the muscle with a cautery on the clavicle or with pointed cauteries, so that the joint is confirmed and the humidity is reduced and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
Of cautery of the stomach.
When pain in the stomach is caused by wet humors that extract from its composition and multiply within it, and if your therapeutic methods continue without success, then you will see that the disease is on his back expanding, extending its hands and things. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one at the heel with a cautery of the size of a thumb, and two at the sides of the cautery, forming the shape of a triangular cautery; leave a space between those not closely applied to avoid scab formation.
And if the depth of the cautery is the quantity of two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cautery be as shown in this addition. If you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; this is a cautery in the shape of a circle according to this form:
And cauterize the stomach by puncturing where it is scared by this cautery: and you touch the stomach with a pointed cautery according to the quantity you desire, and then cauterize that area with points; and cure that with the therapy that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
Of the cautery of the sore foot.
When pain in the foot occurs due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness that has affected its natural structure through an excess of superfluous exit, and if the ill state is not relieved as we have said, then cover the foot with what we have mentioned and do not confine it, and instead ensure that the foot is raised above the level of the hip bones, and often try three cauteries in this manner and with this quantity applied to the foot below the hips, letting the person lie on their back.
And let the space be that which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the right side of the body.
And do not apply the cautery too strongly or for too long.
And if the quantity of what is applied equals the size of the cautery's tip, and it is not adjusted; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then lie down, which has already extended its parts, and raise their hips.
And it is possible that you may use this cautery with a surgical cautery when your subtlety and prudence in the art are required.
And guard that you do not overheat in the cauterization, so that the subtlety of the entire cord is sealed, ensuring the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for here the cord is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the Perforation of an Abscess on the Foot with a Cautery.
When there is inflammation or an abscess on the foot and you want to know if the abscess is in the flesh of the foot or in the skin, then if it is in the flesh of the foot, the patient experiences a severe and acute pain.
And if it is in the skin of the foot, then the pain is severe and often so intense that it exhausts even the doctors with their treatment.
Then ensure that the patient is lying on their back; and place the spot where the abscess is to be incised with a tent; and heat the cautery which resembles a wand, the shape of which was shown in the previous page. And cauterize there and within until the entire chain be burned, until it reaches the cyst, until in healthy flesh.
And then cure that by curing the other abscesses until they are healed.
And ensure that this cautery used is one that the physician has studied in the art of medicine and in which he has had many experiences of maladies; but from these experiments, some times it has been heated for this operation, but otherwise leave the other to me, as it is better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cautery for plague.
They said that the ancient cautery for plague was made by roughening the surface of an iron rod according to this method. This is what you should do: take from the rough iron rods one long strip, which is about the thickness of a finger.
And then immerse it in oil and place it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that area which is between the continuation of the furcula towards the neck; with two small cauteries guide them, one slightly inclining to the side where the beard begins, and with two cauteries in what is inclining between the fifth rib and the pelvis, inclining slightly towards the rear sides; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries at the rear sides; and one cautery in that area which is between the two shoulders, and two cauteries from the two outer sides of the foot, place the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And make sure your hand is not on the cautery, but rather in the middle of the electrode in operation.
And some ancient doctors said that certain men use a cautery made of iron resembling a ray and burn that, and place it in the area between the ribs until we reach the abscess and it is thoroughly healed, as we have said for the abscess of the groin.
More in this perforation of the cautery there is no fear, for he will soon occur at the place where the fistula does not heal.
Capitol.
Of the cautery of the sore.
When you cure the illness of the sore, as we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, the cautery on it is according to three ways, all of which are correct. Of these, one is that you make three or four lines according to the length of the sore, following the figure of the cautery iron, the figures of which have been shown before.
And the thickness between each cautery should be that of a finger or a little more, and the method of the cautery should be the method as we have said for the cautery iron.
And do not hold your hand on the cautery; let the patient be over its back.
And another way to cauterize is that you heat the cautery with two flammable substances, which we have said in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and lift the chain which is in the middle of the seam so that it permits the passage of the left thigh's jazer.
And let your elevation be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that the cautery can be applied according to the breadth of the body.
And then insert the two flammable substances, ignited mote, into that space where you penetrate the chain from the other side.
And then remove the cautery; and thus he makes four cautery marks.
And if you do, cauterize with the cautery heated by three flammable substances.
And then you cure the cautery when it has been allowed to burn for too many days, as this is more conducive than the other preceding causes in the healing process.
Capitol XXXI.
Of cautery for hydrocele.
Cautery is not used for hydrocele but for the area properly affected.
When you treat the hydrocele, follow the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division. Do not deviate from your cure; instead, use four cauteries around the swelling and one on the stomach, another on the flanks, another on the back, two between the spinal vertebrae, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery be approximately that of a needle.
And leave the cautery open so that it heals over for a long time.
And do not evacuate the ill side during the cure near the cautery where it should be added two incisions, and it will be assisted by a healing remedy.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is seared should be oblong according to the form described above, and it is with this that the two olive-shaped areas are seared as described previously in its form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery treatment of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen and filled with yellow bile, make a cautery treatment on the feet over the arch of the foot near where it is between the ankle and the toe, and lift your hand from the cautery without twisting that area; then lift your hand, and do not return it entirely, as the yellow bile drains.
The cautery is to be done as follows: And over each thigh, make two cauteries, and on each thigh place the cautery at the end of the surgical blade. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one end of the cautery at the top of the thigh and the other end in the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, make two cauteries.
Leave the wound open for a long time so that no water remains from it.
And then cure the ailments which we have said.
Capitol XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdomen.
When the abdomen is affected by cold and humidity that penetrate into its weakness, this involves the digestive and retentive virtues, which are in the stomach and in the intestines. This is treated according to the methods of treatment, and sometimes the patient suffers from a cautery of vital virtue. Therefore, perform the cautery on that with a large cautery over their own stomach as described previously in the cauterization of the stomach, using the cautery of the circle and four cauteries around the circuit of the fine fibers, using a fineawl cautery; or use a large cautery over aloes, or two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then perform the cautery over the pentelich and over the intestines, and strengthen it by applying two cauteries to the stomach near the inguinal region, which is a perfect cure for the youth of the quality from which you do not err.
Capitol XXXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for ancient hemorrhoids.
When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors or corrupted humidity, and they are cured as we said in the division, and you do not apply your heated cure, then cauterize three times on the pus spot below the two small triangular bones, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is inflamed and the food he eats is not digested, and his face appears flushed, then cauterize him over the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the armpit, and another on the groin with a cylindrical cautery. Let the cautery remain open for some time, and cure him until he is healed.
Capitol XXXV.
Of the cautery treatment near the site of excision.
When you incise the artery, then apply the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the incised artery, and keep your hand there until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this one or two times; if there are more veins, then cauterize each of them according to how we have counted, and place ointments on them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on some areas, it is more effective in healing.
Capitol.xxxvi.
Of the cauterization of fistulas that occur in the parts of the body.
When nature does not comply with the work we have recommended in that place, and the patient is frightened by this, treat it with a cautery.
When there is some fistula in the nature behind and it is ancient, corrupted by good health and moisture, therefore what is most fitting that you test is to use a subtle probe, and then know the quantity of the depth of it with the front said probe.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery in this fistula, and according to the quantity in which you insert the probe.
And iterate over that with the cautery until those corrupted vessels burn up thoroughly one time or two or three, according to the quantity of your necessity.
And guard yourself from burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes to the cavity of the bladder or the intestine, then guard yourself from all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshly location and you realize it is not penetrating.
And then cure the area once it is healed.
And if the area is sealed, and the materials are separated from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you can see that it is completely healed.
And if the materials are not held away from it, then you can see that they are penetrating or in the vicinity of the wound causing corruption, or this comes from one of those causes which will be recalled in its place.
Capitol.xxxvii.
Of cauterizing the warts.
When warts hurt due to cold or excessive dryness, and thus the patient's pain is diminished, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery over each wart using aawl of which you will recall the procedure.
And strongly cauterize with the second a little more, because three line cauteries will follow, and thus they will be deeper in the healing process.
Capitol.xxxviii.
Of cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to friction and humidity, such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cautery the bladder in that part, starting where the skin of the penis begins, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and another on the left side.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the size of the patient's foot; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the two, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be applied according to how it is done.
Capitol.xxxix.
Of cautery of the meatus.
When there is venous congestion and humidity in the meatus, and for this reason, conception is prohibited, and the patient's menstrual flow is disrupted or delayed, and joint pain occurs due to this condition, then it is necessary to cauterize the area with three cauteries around the navel circuit, as we have said when discussing the bladder cautery; and apply a cautery over the lower part of the foot, or use two cauteries, and ensure that the cautery is applied properly.
Capitol.-xl.
Of the cautery for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humors infiltrate the region of the ankle, and are causes of displacement of its location, a sign of this is that the swelling extends over the other leg when compared between them. And the location of the dislocation is applied to the outer side of the foot.
Then cautery the ankle of the foot with a circular cautery, as you have marked around the region in the form of a circle as it is turned, so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
And the shape of the cautery as described above is used in the cautery of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not present, then use three large olive-shaped cauteries.
And the cautery should be applied according to the intensity of the pain throughout the limb; and then care for that which remains until it is healed.
Capitol. xli.
Of the cautery treatment for the sciatic vein.
When pain in the leg occurs and its cause is cold and humidity, the patient is treated with what we have said and you do not apply, and this is outdated. Instead, let the patient suffer from large humors by using stinking pills or artificial ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cauterization in this case is according to two methods: either with burning medicines, or with a flame.
Sir according to two scientific methods, of which one is to cauterize that area over the back of the leg with three triangular cauteries in this form; and do so with good depth. And the spacing between each cauterization should be the width of one finger, whether the cauterization is small or large.
More often, apply the cauterization in the middle of each location on the back of the leg, as there are four cauterizations.
And if you wish, cautery the circle around which the form precedes in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, which should be a circle that burns the entire circumference.
And this is the way to cautery for the ankle when pain is localized to the ankle and not extended to the thigh.
But if it is extended to the thigh, then cautery both areas on the thigh around the location where you will return the ankle that causes the pain; and with one cautery on the heel, a little should be applied to the cylindrical part.
And if it is a surgical cautery, the depth of the cautery should be according to the intensity of the circumference.
And if you return the ankle where the pain is extended near the base of the toes, then cautery that area with three or four or more points if needed.
And if the ankle returns pain to be felt in the thigh, then cautery that area with a surgical cautery.
Guard yourself in all cautery that you do not end with the cautery to such an extent that you burn nerves or great artery, and because of this you are badly affected or contract something.
And I have already seen others who cauterized on the nail and ended with the cautery, and the bed was inflamed between where the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted all the flesh. And then follows a severe colic, and often death.
And if the pain is in two parts, cauterize each one according to this manner.
And the wise will say about the cautery for gout, of which this is the manner: make it resemble a circle of iron where the circumference is the width of one palm; and let its holes be according to the size of an finger bone or at most a little more.
And inside that circle, there is another third; and let the space between them be the quantity of the joint of the foot; and may those circles be opened in two parts; and let the length of those slots be one joint or two joints, and make at those iron margins decently fitted into the circles; this is the form of it:
Approximately it is ignited in the fire until it turns red and gives off sparks, and then it is placed on the part of the foot, the gout colletted over the sole. And therefore cauterize it with three round cauteries in one go.
And then let it be for three days; and apply a plaster with honey and let the wound remain open for many days; and cure it by anointing it until it is healed.
Albucasis says: Oh, my son, we have little used this kind of cautery for the fear of looking at it, and because we have found few things regarding it.
More from the good cautery for him who suffers it, and find it in that place.
More, a cautery with adhering medicines consists of making two circles having a perforated frame in which the smoke from the iron door is placed; let the length of the walls in their thickness be two nuts or quarters.
And if the space which is between each part of the quantity of the swelling of the digit; and be opened and below, and contain themselves among them according to this form:
And then place your hand over the part of the ankle where the patient is lying, and hold your hand over the part of the ankle; and take some hot water and pour it between two circles, and let the quality of that be like fire little by little, and have that for the quantity of one hour, and suffer the patient the biting and sticking of it — since that empty space bites like fire — until the biting ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all around the ankle with cold water.
And then let it be for three days and place your hand over that border until the blackness of the stuck state fades, and let this be for some days, and the redness will go away; this is derier in juvenescence.
And then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
And if the pain is extended to the thigh or the leg, make an incision in it that contains water according to how it is done in the water.
And this is the way of water caudation, and I have already written that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Recipe for alkali and for a fire not extinct from both parts one, trim the ashes in a new cauldron of which the part left is pierced by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters it.
And place the bottom of another cauldron over the heated one, and pour water gently over the live alkali and ashes so that they are covered by an inch, and then take those up with your hand for good compression, and let the water droplets from the sharp water fall into the part left in the heated cauldron.
And then adjust all that water, and pour it over another live alkali and renewed ashes, for which that will be of strong acuity, the which is administered in most operations of medicine and in cautery of other members, for which operation makes use of fire.
And of some medicines that are coagulated wide, such as tesselice and mel anacrete, it is tried that they be mixed.
And Gualia recounts an operation and cure of an ancient man suffering from water pain and sciatic vein pain. The doctor magnified the good deed and said no other treatment was necessary, for he was cured in one session as recommended, for his condition improved greatly with baths and exercises as instructed.
And it should be applied with a warm compress, and if no warm compress is available, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be tied with a few threads and placed on the water where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and it should be bound.
And it should be left in place for three hours or until the patient feels relief from the application.
And then place it in bath water, and when the patient's body is warmed, insert it into the soil, for the pain ceases and the patient is cured.
And be aware that no use of cautery in these medicines should be made except near the body's evacuation.
May I also state that when making a cut in the sinew vein, cauterizing it will make it heal better; and the way to use the cautery is: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the layers of the foot and between the bones.
And place a cut in the dry wool and immerse it in fire to make it char; then place it over the wool and let it expand. And repeat this, and continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and pauses the pain.
And this way of using the cautery is called the calf cautery.
Capitol. xlii.
On the cautery for joint pain.
Sometimes pain in the two sides is caused by multiple reasons, such as compression or percussion or excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to those, through the infiltration of wet matter.
And the cautery is not used for burning but only in this single instance where it is applied due to the infiltration of wet matter.
Therefore, open, and place evacuating pills near the affected side where the pain is located, three lines in length according to the width of the area. Also, apply cauterization or more if signs indicate on each line, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of the cauterization.
And apply the cauterization with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, apply the cauterization with three or four cauteries using a medial-pointed cautery in this manner:
Capitol. xliv.
On cauterization at the beginning of gilbositat.
Motions observed in this illness among small children; and the sign of the beginning of it in children is that they experience difficulties with their structure during play, sleep, elevation, and movement.
You find in the lower vertebra of the spine and those nearby that they are beginning to overgrow the other vertebrae.
And when you see this and want to treat it, then sear it with a cautery that is circular according to this form: that the cautery cover all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, sear around the vertebra with a pointed cautery two or three lines wide. And let the points be close to each other.
And place it over the area until it is healed as we have said.
More importantly, ensure that the cautery is not applied in convulsion caused by nerve spasm.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus, gout caused by cold is treated in a manner of treatment and not relieved by remedies, but rather by cautery.
And you do so by cautery at the location of the joint on the foot with pointed cauteries.
And the olive-shaped cautery, of which this is its form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pains rise to the toes or other joints, and you must treat this, then cautery the affected toe with three or four points using the olive-shaped cautery.
And if burns from the cautery that these cauteries be necessary for you, then cauterize that part and do not press too much your hand against the cautery before, only around the size of a cone.
And if the pains penetrate to the ankle and shin, then apply the cautery which we have said in our chapter.
And if the pains are only in the toes and it is called cramp, then prick along the circumference of the tendons as they revolve, pricking in those two lines.
And if the pains remain in the fingers, then prick along the circumference of the tendons on each finger and on the back of the hand.
And if the pains persist for several days in the elbows or muscles, then cauterize the areas around all parts of the joints.
And if you do not evacuate the bladder properly and with the reception of medicines, then even if good regimen and flux are done, this cauterization will be sufficient for healing, God willing.
Capitol. xlv.
Of cautery for ruptures.
When there is a rupture in the groin and intestines are seen in front of the hernia sack at the genetival region, and this begins to appear nearby, then when you order the patient to leave his meal for that day and use soothing remedies so that the opening of his abdomen decreases.
And then place the patient between your hands over his groin, and command him to keep his legs together until the swelling goes down or the sack or intestines become visible.
And then return those points in the thighs and touch the rupture over the bone of the femur, marking the extremity of which seems like the diameter of a circle at the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery with which this is the form of it:
until it is heated hot and glows with sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent it from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and place it in the middle of the thigh; repeat this on another side if you have not successfully placed it in the bone in the first attempt.
Observe wisely the position of the intestine during your cautery, that you do not burn it, so that no harm comes to the patient or great evil occurs.
Be aware that when you use the cautery, do not touch the bone, as it will affect your operation.
Ensure that the cautery for children is fine according to their size and measure.
And then care for the place of the cautery for three days among that the scar of the fire wound heals.
And then care for it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient remain on their back for 10 days until the place and wound are sealed.
And ensure that you nourish him according to the length of time for his cure, so that the intestine does not come out. You must make great efforts to heal.
And when it is time to lift him after 10 days, properly apply a plaster, and keep it for another 10 days.
And he should rest and replenish his food and drink, and use strong voices. For when he follows this regimen for complete recovery, he will surely be healed.
And I will describe the cure for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. At the beginning, and if they do not tear further, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size; this is what is drawn from the cord in the same way as the tender part of it. Then care for it as we have said, and it is not sutured.
And some have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, rather than with forceps.
And place a line there for the width in the slashes above the rupture, and another line on top; then place your hand with a triangular cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol XLVI.
Of the cauterization of the fistula.
When pain in certain limbs persists due to inflammation or percussion and does not respond to medical treatment over a long period, then you should cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the size and nature of the cautery should be according to the magnitude and smallness of the fistula, its virtue and development, and the location and pain associated with it.
Then if the fistula is cured by the first cautery, that is good; but if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily, those pains are punctured in a nearby limb to achieve the cautery where the disease lies until the fistula is healed.
Capitol forty-seven.
Of the cautery treatment for leprosy.
Lepers are sometimes treated with a large cautery, especially when the species of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
And so, if you want to cauterize that area, consider whether the leprosy is common and of that kind cured as we have said in the division and neither this nor that. Then fear that the corruption may encompass all of his body and all of his composition; therefore, cauterize that area on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, leave the second space from it, place the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on the horns; and one behind, on the neck or shoulder.
And finish your hand with the cautery a little inside where it makes a small impression in the mouth, so that the scabs are displaced, thereby alleviating the expiration of gross vapors; cauterize on the tongue according to necessity.
And if leprosy is already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you cauterize there and those cauterizations which we said in the head; on the extremity of the nose, and on two cauterizations on the two mammary glands, and on two cauterizations on two vertebrae of the neck, and on six cauterizations on the vertebrae of the back, and a large one near the coccyx, and one on the spine, and on two on the hips, and one on each hip, and on two on the knees, and one on each knee, and on two on the elbows, and two on the muscles, and two on his foot bones; cauterize there over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and on each heel of his feet, and on the knuckles of his toes.
And guard the nerves which are over the heel that you do not burn those.
And sometimes cauterization is done with one cauterization on the bone of the pelvis and another on the entrance of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more tightly you adjust the cautery, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery as they do elsewhere, since their body is already numbed.
And know that the cautery should be large or small according to the limbs and joints, as directed by the species of the instruments.
And then cure the cautery with a mixture of roasted flour and honey, as well as other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
On the cautery for stupefaction.
When some limb is numbed or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and does not heal, then you cautery that numb limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery penetrate the thickness of the skin a little. And then cure that which is ointed until it is healed.
And sometimes parts of the body, such as the head and feet, and the spinal columns on both sides are cauterized, and the vision of the nerves which run through that member is impaired, and the stupor is aggravated.
But do not presume on this, but only those who are skilled in the anatomy of the members and the distribution of the nerves throughout the moving body.
Capitol XLIX.
Of the cauterization of ulcers that become morphew.
When ulcers are old and you do not apply any of the medicines' ointments to them, then cauterize over that with a cautery, proceeding according to the quantity of the paste of the cochenil. Let the white and the color of it be remedied, and its color be changed.
And then cure that which is anoint with flour of ergot and lentils in roasted oil and leaves of rosemary, or pigeon droppings or turkey droppings, each having one part, all being mixed together. Then place a cloth over the area until it is healed.
Capitol I.
Of cautery for the knee.
When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery in the circumference of the area as it is revolved.
And the wise will say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle spot; but to me, this is not visible, for I fear it is ulcerated, and I have seen this a few times.
And it is more proper to cauterize in the circumference of the area with a circle as we have said, or with several cauteries.
Capitol II.
Of cautery for ulcers.
When some ulcers are delayed in maturation, this is either due to excess fluid making them so, or due to the patient's condition, who is old and decrepit, or has little strength, or due to time, and you want to hasten their maturation; then cauterize in the circumference of the ulcer with several small puncturing cauteries; and leave those that will mature on their own.
If you want to make a puncture with the cautery, then ignite the cautery of which this is the form: then place it in the middle of the affected area where the needle will penetrate.
And if you place the cautery in that location, let it be, so that the arm will be relieved; and then cure that which will be healed.
Chapter II.
On the cautery for corrosion.
Corrosion is a gradual corruption in the member, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosion in a location where a fire-cautery is to be applied, then ignite the cautery with a few large and hot coals, according to what is appropriate for that particular location affected by corrosion.
And then cauterize that completely as you remove all the corrosion and do not leave any cause of it.
And allow that for three days, and place a hot cautery on the areas previously cauterized only after all the sores have been completely eradicated and all corruption removed.
And treat that with ointment generating flesh.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy in the area where there is no corruption, that is good. But if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are rotten in the corrupted spots.
And after treating with some medicines several times using sharp medicine, which is half the treatment of a cautery. But however, a cautery with fire is more beneficial for slight wounds.
And I have already explained the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, so use that when you need it.
Chapter III.lix.
On the cautery of wounds and similar conditions.
Small stones placed in the painful parts of the foot which are called clavus, and it is a large, penetrating injury that affects the foot; and cautery there is done in two ways, one with fire and one with water-caused cautery.
The cautery with fire is to heat the concave cautery resembling a backward hook, which is made of iron according to the quantity that can contain the stone from all parts, and it should have fine edges.
Then place that heated cautery over the stone, and quickly move your hand with the cautery in a circle around the stone until the cautery reaches the depth of the stone. Let it be there for three days until it begins to blister. Then apply a poultice to it with wild thyme boiled in salt water, and let the poultice remain on it for one night, so that the stone is removed from its place.
Then treat the area with a cream of generative flesh until it heals.
If they are not converted, and motas (small blisters or lesions) occur on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then when you administer cautery with water, take a quannaula of elm or iron or a cinder stick, place it over the nail; then put some water in the quannaula, withdraw your hand, and move that with compression of your hand from all sides, pressing the margin of the quannaula on the root of the nail, and you will find the water flowing through the hole of the nail; wait for the patient a little while after the bite of the flowing water for an hour, then remove that, as the nail will have its roots eroded.
And do the same to those and then the other, until you come over all of which they have in their body.
And then cure those pustules where the nail roots have been eradicated by applying ointments on which the flesh will regenerate.
Capitol. liiii.
Of the cautery for trembling.
When an ache or tremor occurs due to friction in the nerves or from fever of a similar cause, then you should cautery it with four or five cauteries on the spine, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and one on the foot, and one over his stomach, using an olive cautery.
And the tremor in him subsides, and recovery from the illness follows.
Capitolium.
Of the cautery for ailments affecting the body.
When in the body abscesses have formed and pustules have developed, which are made of thick corrupted materials; then at the beginning as they appear, the fistula should be cauteryed with a fine cautery using a branch of myrtle, the end of which is extended over the fire; or with an herb from erestologia longua; or with a flat cautery.
And sometimes a cautery is applied additionally at the beginning of its expulsion according to this manner; and they do not believe it, making those who are diseased healthy.
More over I must say that this should be done near the evacuation by phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of the cautery treatment for flux from an injury due to arterial incision.
Often when flux from an artery is incised, the wound which needs to be lanced, or from the incision of an abscess or cautery on the member, it appears, and is difficult to heal.
Then when such a case occurs, you hold your hand over the orifice of the artery, and place it there firmly until the flow of blood stops, then remove your hand, and let it not leak.
Then place the olive cautery in the fire for a few large and small puffs, by number many times, and blow on them until they are well heated.
And then take one small or large according to the place and the wound in which the artery is broken, over that vein pressing strongly as you have previously tied, and hold the cautery close so that it is narrowed and restricted that blood.
And if the blood is expelled from the hole of the artery when you tie it and narrow the cautery, then take another cautery prepared among the cauteries which are in the fire, and therefore do not cease to do this one after another so that the blood is restricted.
And make sure you do not burn the nerves here, and that no other evil comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrict the blood flow using a cautery in this manner, especially when the artery is large, unless one of four methods is used: either with a cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, which when it is extracted, its ends are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or it is tied with filth or with resin by strong tension, or it is paused over medicines from which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and they should be tightly bound with a pulvinar in a proper constriction.
But he who administers proper restraint to it with flax and with tension of cloths or by the position due to burning causes and similar ones, does not relieve it so well.
But if he needs to do so for someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then open it carefully with his finger over the orifices of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction within which the sore has been left from the upper part of the wound, and on the archery, let the finger not be removed; and above the archery, sprinkle water mixed with a strong flegmative while the sore is congealed and swollen; and more apply heat in case cauterization or medical necessity.
Of incision and perforation and fistulas and of phlebotomy and of wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter all illness in which cauterization with fire is convenient and phlebotomy, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for those of the forms of cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters of the subiranetat of the cap between the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter in that manner, so that the one who desires this may be relieved of what he has requested.
And before you begin this, hear, sons, that in this chapter what is treated pertains to the fear of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And hear, that you be in great caution, for in the operation which is in this chapter, motes of catz evacuation are used, which if it is a case where life is at stake, you should perform the aspersio of the vein or incision on the apostema or accretion, or excision or purgation of the wound or extraction of the arrow or incision of the abscess, and operations similar to these. And of all these, there is always fear and trembling, and in the most serious cases, death.
And I warn you that this applies to you in cases of fainting, for in some instances, your methods may be mistaken for the methods of those who are unskilled. And some of them will go to their illness and die, this due to the intensity of what they find from their illness, and for the length of the illness, and in the illness is fear which means death.
And of those, the ones who give you their ache and tell, you expecting that their health will improve, and their illness is harmful.
And therefore you must consent to only those who come to you, of which this is the manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume on any cause but rather certain science which verifies what you must do, and to which a successful outcome brings praise.
And use in the cure of all your patients based on their prognosis and indication of where health is converted; for in that you have assistance in gaining fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, God imparts His understanding to you and does not withhold direction and protection, for this is in His hand.
And I have also arranged this chapter distinguishing it into chapters as previously described in the chapter on cautery, concerning the cure from head to foot, so that you may be aided by what you ask for and of which you have need.
First chapter.
Of the cure of water that is contained in the head of the child.
Know that this illness often appears in children during childbirth and when the mother's strength strengthens the child's head.
And sometimes appears for hidden causes that are unknown.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I have seen, it has led to death, so I have been left with the work of treating them.
And I have seen that a child's head was filled with water, and his head remained always swollen until it could no longer bear its own weight due to the size of his head, and more because the humidity increased inside leading to death.
And this humidity is added either between the tendon and the bone, or it is caused by placing the bone on the cushion.
And if the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, you should make a slit in the middle of the lesion in a width, such that the length of the slit allows the humidity to drain, and this is the form of the incision:
And if the humidity is much increased and the abscess is larger, then here you should make two slits in this manner:
And if the humidity is on the bone, the sign of this is that you will see the edges of the lesion open completely, and the water oozes out when you press it with your hand on the inner parts; this is not what you want to hide. And if the humidity is between the tendon and the bone, you should make three slits in the middle of the lesion in this manner:
And quickly extract all the humidity; then strengthen the slits with bandages and feathers; on the fifth day, pour oil over them; remove the dressing and cure the wound with lint and ointments, strengthening the tendon with equal parts; let the patient eat dry food of little humidity until the limb is comfortable and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which consideras regarding the size of the abscess and the collection of water; for in some instances it may be more in the occiput, or in the anterior part, or on the right side, or on the left; and therefore attend to the incision where the abscess and the filling with water appear, and do so according to what is most convenient for you.
And observe that you do not incise the artery and attempt to let blood from the patient by that flow of blood for the evacuation of moisture.
Chapter II.
When we encounter a catarrh or wound in the ears or foot, this is an ancient practice, and you should not rely on the treatment of medicines for it; rather, the proper treatment involves incising these two arteries.
And therefore when you want to incise those that the malady root has its head, then rub the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and strengthen the neck of the malady with some cloth; and consider where lies the vein; and the places over which lie the auricles pressing, and they are hidden in almost all men.
And then press over the artery with your finger, and incise each one with a sharp knife along the path of the vein, and do this for the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the knife leaving the artery and cut it at the points above its divisions.
And let the length of the incision be two fingers wide, for when a vein is cut, the bleeding occurs at the pulsating exit, which bursts forth with frequent spurts.
But if the artery does not appear at the incision, then measure from the auricle the quantity of space of three fingers, and press there with your finger, and make the incision into the flesh.
And that which flows from the wound is a quantity of blood one uncia, and much or little it flows, and all this is according to the quantity which appears from the virtue of the malady and the distension of the artery of the leg.
And then consider the wound, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of suppuration, then incise it so that no abscess forms.
And then strengthen the wound with down feathers and cloth lint, and then cure that by applying ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
When an old or acute migraine occurs due to damp conditions and the quality of the air in the temples, or if it is a strong old pain similar to those, and is treated according to the methods of medical cure, and this does not relieve you, then we have resorted to the extraction of arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
And the manner of the operation and extraction is that you raise the skins which are on the temples; and understand the apparent artery in the temple where it is shown to you by your own pulse, and is hidden in only a few men through the violence of cold.
And if it is hidden to you, then lift the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the place with water until the artery becomes clearly visible. And then you take the spatum of which this is the form: And then you burn the artery with that as facilitated until you reach the artery; and then get onto it with oil and extract that to the upper parts while you withdraw that from the codena and discover that of the tunics which you leave there, from all parts.
More if the artery is thin, then wrap it at the extremity of the oncia, and then incise a part according to the quantity for which the extremities of the oncia are lengthened and contracted, and no flux of sand will be found, for if not incised, the sand will not rise from there.
And then evacuate from the vein one. within three.
And if the artery is large, then you must divide it into two places with a firm double fold of each or with long cords, and do not touch it until putrefaction occurs before the consolidation of the wound and ensure the flow of blood.
And then cut the superfluity which is between two threads; and do this at that time or shortly thereafter.
And if you wish, cauterize it with a cautery on the bone and with a surgical knife at the points where the threads are cut; and this will take the place of that operation.
And it is better to do so unless the patient has fever or is of cold nature; for a cautery is of those causes that help in expelling humidities, and therefore it is better in convalescence.
And you must then make the extraction of the arteries that you have placed in a proper location, and they should be packed over with properly made dry powders, and be covered with medicinal plasters until it is healed.
And if while working another time you encounter a flow of blood from the artery, then you should constrict that blood, with a cautery or by filling the place with cotton, and firmly hold your hand to restrict the blood. And if for any of those reasons it is not at your present, then hold your hand over the area until the bleeding stops, and apply the place with water of strong refrigeration until the heat calms down, and strengthen as necessary.
And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, after you have marked the two places with hot probes, and hold burning coals over them until they reach the bone and cut the vein into two parts, so that what is between the extremities of it can be extended, which are not consolidated by this entire cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the heat of the two knives be sufficient. But if the pain is acute as if cut by two knives, near each cautery, and you do not incise the flesh with speed.
So when there is some swelling, keep the heat of the fire on those areas and the flesh is incised slightly.
And this method is better in all works and more slight.
And let the space which is between two knives be the quantity of the swelling of the digit.
Capitol quart.
Of the cure for feet with acute and sour tears.
When there are sour tears, and the body is from the veins which are on the sole of the foot, and you find no cause for the cure in medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation on his forehead as if it were being walked on by ants, and the feet become weak and softened so that their skins are well known, and the eyelids are scalded by the acuteness of the tears, they should use the old method in the cure of those for this operation, and number that cure among the passing things.
And you command the patient to stretch the skin that is on his forehead, and then incise in the forehead three equal distances according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length of a little movement of the tears which are in the lacrimal gland, and the third on another part.
And beware of the beginning of the arteries which are in two branches, and keep your hand away from the continuation of both jawbones. And if the space of each incision the quantity of three fingers, adjusted.
And if you have a piece of sponge equipped or dry cloths at hand, place them over which to dry the wound.
And then insert the tip of two sharp instruments, the form of which is the incision: that is from the place between the temples into the second incision. Exsorve all the fluid that is between two incisions along the crest which is above the bone, and then do the same for the middle incision into the second incision. Then scrape this exudate and insert it into the first incision another time with another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other.
Then place the blade of the scalpel against the adjacent flesh, open the ligament, and the blade inside the bone. Insert it there until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the feet.
More importantly, continue the incision to where the ligament appears, and then do the same in the middle fissure between the other fissure.
And after the bleeding has equalized, express the areas of the ankles with a concave tool.
And then place your hand over any gouty crack in the old skin, and place it above those powders mixed in wine and oil and vinegar, ensuring that no abscess forms.
On the seventh day remove the bandage and administer a strong infusion of walnut or hazel water, and then cure what is ointed with basilicum oil and others so that the wounds may heal.
Chapter V.
For the cure of tears due to catarrh and those drooping from the inner parts of the head.
When there is a severe and continuous catarrh, and the tears from the eyes are small and diminished, and their look shows debility, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the skin around them is affected, and in the forehead there is acute pain along with an extreme swelling, then you can judge that the humors and catarrh do not come from the internal vessels originating within.
And the best cure in such cases is this: you should command the patient to rub his forehead, and then incise a small crack right through the center of the forehead. Start from the left temple between the two temples; the incision should be into the bone, extending your hand along the ridges of the temples, which are prominent, and should involve thorough excision of the bone.
Dry all the blood on the sponge or dry cloth and then place it between the two lips of the fissure with a piece of old cloth or a dry cloth. Strengthen it further with powders mixed in wine and oil so that no abscess forms.
And when you uncover this and see that the abscess has diminished, then wash the bone where it begins to have new flesh grow, and then cure it with an exsiccative regimen which causes the flesh to wither, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of resin and mix them, and from them make a plaster and administer it in these wounds of the flesh's nativity.
Chapter VI.
On the cure for what catches in the ears.
All cause that catches in the ears is of four species: either it is mineral stone or a cause similar to stone, such as iron or flint, or it is from plant matter such as dust or bean pods, or it is a fluid cause such as water or wine and substances similar to them, or some beast.
And when purgation occurs in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor swell in the ear, and you place the ear in the sun, and if you touch the foot, then it distills in some cause of olive oil or sesame, then return the extraction of it, and make him sneeze with a condiment, and plug his nostrils to prevent sneezing. And place some pieces of cloth or wool in the circuit of the ear, and extend the ear to the parts above, where motas (small particles) are likely caused by these causes.
And if it is not caused by motas, then perform the extraction of it with the instrument called gesti epicicarios subtil, of which this is the form:
And if it is caused by motas, that is good; otherwise, then perform the extraction of it with a fine onci of little duplication.
And if it is not caused by motas, then make a cannula of wire and insert the end of the cannula into the meatus of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and olive oil made milder so that it does not open except the cannula. And then extract the bowels with strong traction, for too many views as we have recounted.
But if it is not extracted in this manner, then take some alummed salt or vinegar apparatus on which the organs are placed a quantity of paws, place that at the extremity of the ray, and then wrap about that corner decently. And then insert that into the channel of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And so if it is not extracted by all the causes which we have recounted, then you cut to excise that which tends to become an abscess or spasm.
And the manner of excising it is that at the beginning you mark the patient's leg from the thigh to the knee according to the virtue of the vein, and then make a cut between your fingers and convert the ear to its upper parts, and make a small fissure in the cartilage of the ear and insert the grey matter there. And let the crack be of lunar shape through which it reaches the heel, and if the heel is infected, obstruct it if possible with appropriate instruments; then, over that crack at that time apply velocity, and cure it within the time it becomes healed.
And if the cause settles in the ear, it is one of those oils that plug and are inflamed, then administer the cure and extraction of it; but if it does not yield to your application, then take fine thin spatula according to this form: And administer the extraction of that oil which is embedded in the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place it on fine wicks, and properly extract it in those areas or with a subtle gesture, or by incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
But in the water which has entered into the ear canal that the patient uses for sneezing at the onset of illness, and fills their ear with some old oil or vinegar, place it on that ear where is the water, and if by this is forced out, well; otherwise, then take small pebbles of iron or lead according to the length of the finger, heat those in the fire a little, and have the patient insert one of those into the tube of their ear and jump over a piece of that part and strike it with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear. Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out.
Do not stop applying leeches until all the water has been drawn out. And when the water has been sufficiently drawn out, take either paper or wax, and put one end in the ear and extend the other end in fire until the wax is burned.
And place another wax and do this as many times as necessary until all the water has been drawn out, and remove that with a cannula as previously described.
More in the extraction of matter entering that ear, if it is a small mass, proceed similarly and treat it as we have said in the division. But if it is a large mass that appears prominently within, then perform the extraction with speed and precision, and the cause of it is less significant compared to all other causes that appear in the ear.
More in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the tractatus de distillacions, and if your treatment does not seem to be effective, then look into the ear with the sun.
And if here appears any cause of worms, then extract that with a gesture or fine forceps, but if no such cause appears, then take a cannula and open it wide, for this is its form: I insert the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity that the patient can bear; and then I suck it out by strong suction, performing this many times until all the worms are extracted.
But if it does not obey to your assistance, then you open and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with that which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, for this is its form: And make that of silver or gold, straight, with a small hole in it, and a flat surface on top.
And so it should be done to ensure that it is in the cavity of the catheter here where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the wick and wrap it properly around its end, then place oil in the cavity of the ear, or the juice of some herb, or any medicine you desire into the catheter — which is in the ear —, and then insert the wick carefully above and squeeze your hand on it with a gentle compression until the oil is expelled into the cavity of the ear and the disease feels the oil inside.
And what is infused into the ear should already be heated over a small fire. And make sure that the medicine you will distill into the ear is not too hot, for ear medicines cannot tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the Treatment of Ear Abscesses.
Sometimes children contract abscesses in the flesh of their ears from their mothers' non-perforated navels, and this occurs in some adults as well, with an abscess forming in the ear meat due to a wound or without any apparent cause; sometimes this abscess forms in the preauricular area which does not show external signs, and at other times it forms in the outward parts.
And that which occurs in the prepuce of him, which does not involve the visible part, is in the major disposition for difficult healing.
And in that where you can see the part, make sure that you place the patient in the sun and look at it. And if you see an obvious swelling, open the small incision under which this swelling is located:
If the extremity in which the width is small, where one part is acute and the other is not; and the swelling is of two lion's teeth so that it does not irritate the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hidden flesh in the ear or in the meat of the ear, then make small incisions and cut deeply enough to remove all the flesh.
And if the obstruction is in the prepuce of the ear, then take a thin lion's tail and heat that wire slightly in fire, and place it in the flesh of the ear.
And therefore, if you sense an abundance of what the patient has in sufficiency due to the weight of excretion, relieve the oppression by facilitating evacuation; and make sure not to injure the nerves of the ear.
And then place the cloth in the ear according to the amount of the swelling which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the healing of the wound; or that you infuse it in water and pulverize it over the dry trissa and use it; and if you see the ear already perforated, then clean it thoroughly and change the liquid with another one which you wrap in a cloth made of rubbed oil, until the abscess is reduced; and cure it as it heals.
But if a blood flow occurs, then immerse the sponge or cloth in cold water, wring it out, and place it on the ear, and use the other treatment which constricts the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII.
Of the care of an eyelid that has become inflamed.
Eyelids that occasionally become moist, and some become dry.
Then ensure that you have those hand towels or sponges, and wipe away the foam from their mouths, and place your hands over these areas.
But if there is pain with a flow of hot blood, then cauterize those areas with a thin cautery.
And the best cautery treatment is near the incisions, and the wounds return when there remains any cause of their bleeding; and when they are cauterized with fire, those wounds are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Care for inflammation of the eyelids caused by hot blood.
Spots appear in the eyelids caused by some cause which is similar to inflammation in its strength and hardness, and for this reason it is called inflammation.
And this is an addition of thick moisture in the eyelid above and below.
And the operation is that you consider whether the enlargement is present in it where it appears from the eyelid and is felt throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
And make a fissure there for the width, and then probe it thoroughly with a probe to facilitate drainage, and lift that and cut it.
And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it is healed.
And if it is small, you will not suffer ill from it because the ointment restores and heals it.
And if the enlargement is decreasing within the parts of the eyelid, you should reduce the inner surface, then probe the eyelid and lift the enlargement with a probe, another that you choose for incision, and press it thoroughly. If the eyelid by incision is stretched, then do not notice any cause for this.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and dress the area with a bandage until it is healed.
Capitol.
For the treatment of excoriation above the eyelid.
Excoriation is caused by grays that are generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and especially in children, it aggravates the ulcers in them and affects their catarrh, potentially leading to death; they cannot look at the clarity of the sun due to this, which causes tears to flow into those areas.
And for this, you frequently apply them on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces covered. And only on the eyelids of their cheeks do they have wet eyebrows, which already show swelling and the apparent presence of excoriation in the ulcer; and when you press the area with your thumbs, you can feel the excoriation within those areas.
And some method of operation is in that the patient rests their head on your hand, and then cover them with a cloth. Make a compress according to the quantity it contains powder from all parts, and place it over that and press with your thumbs so that the excoriation is added at the center of the circle, and then in the middle of that wetness let the vapor incident through a crack according to its width, such that the crack is no larger than the crack made in a ventroscopy.
More in the preceding cavity where you cut the cord completely until you reach arcernach, for in the later operations proceed with arcernach through a crack according to the form of whiteness.
Then extract those from the sheets which you have wrapped around your thumbs and revolve between your right and left hand until they are dispersed.
And make sure you do not press on the crack so that you do not damage the sphincter and loosen it.
More if your alternach does not appear at the beginning of the crack, then press a small piece of fecilitat into the crack as you proceed with alternach; then extract those as we have said; and then margin draps of linen in water and vinegar and place them over the area to strengthen those with powders.
And then anoint with salt and place it in the cavity of the crack to remove what remains of that humidity.
And then cure it until it is healed.
But if an abscess occurs in that location, then cure it by applying medicated plasters until it is healed.
Capitol. xi.
Methods of palpation of the whole body.
When there are natzez (swellings) in the eyelids of the eye, caused by a tight fit of the natural skin and becoming hard, then those noso (nerves) of the eye become ways of ailments such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and tissue until this is the cause of destruction of the eye. This condition is called tactinir del huel, and it is cured in four ways: by cautery with fire; or by acute medicine as previously said in the Capitol of cauterization; or by incision and suturing; or by cantharides as I will say.
And so hold the head of the patient in your left hand; then place the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it can be turned, good. Otherwise, insert a needle into the one where the thread is attached at the base of the eyelid, and push the needle with thread above, and let it penetrate—near the margin of the eyelid where the skin arises—and through the skin, and pull the thread up over the eyelid, then turn it back.
And then place the skin tightly against the stream of secretion from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland; and remove the humors and place fine powder of coto or cloth dust on the eyelid, and cover the eyelid with a tent, as if it were the shape of a mirt leaf.
But I must observe that the shape should be according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for this varies in women, for those in whom a large amount of secretion from the eyelid is required according to the degree to which the eyelid becomes softened.
And then place the stream along the two lines you have marked, and start from the major lacrimal gland into the minor lacrimal gland. And if your incision near the natural skin is as thick as the king's thumb.
And then place the needle in one of the angles of the incision, and scrape the entire area, and close the two edges with a stitch using gut or fine wool thread, and clean the wound, and adhere what remains from the threads on two sutures for some viscous causes. If you want to do this, and otherwise, leave it untreated.
And after that, let the wound of the veins heal in three or four days, and then cure this.
And if you wish, let the wound heal without suturing, and cure that which dries and contracts, for when the eyelid is swollen, you should apply the sealing of the wound and its incorporation; but suture is better. Therefore, so say the ancients.
But if it is tense in the patient, and is of good operation, and not out of fear.
And another method of healing is to figure the eyelid like a leaf of myrtle, and then elevate the eyelid by three inches separating and bringing together according to this form:
But if this is not possible, have the needles, and this is unequal, then take a needle on which there is thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the major lacrimal gland, and the other thread near the minor lacrimal gland, and adjust between the ties said threads equally, and then raise your hand for elevation equally, raising the entire codena over which it was marked as we have recommended.
And then adjust the two edges of the wound with a stitch, and cure that which is within until it is healed.
If you happen to make an incision or a fissure, sew that apostema with thread and keep it clean, and apply ointment.
And sometimes on the eyelid, its skin should be converted. Then use the incision that we have said; but stitch in a few places more artificially.
To treat burns according to this method: And you should convert the eyelid and split the figure that is inside according to what I have recounted; then, by art, make two cannas or two thin astelas whose length be according to the length of the eyelid and their width a third of the width of the space. And you have incised at the extremities of each part where you have the threads.
Then add a thin layer over what you have excised from the eyelid, and tighten the cannas of each part with strong tension, and leave it for some days. As the knot by the tension will die and become rejected, it will fall off as it heals itself.
If it is delayed, then cut the threads, and immediately cure the wound while it is fresh.
Therefore, when the swelling subsides, lift the eyelid and do not prick the skin.
And this is the way to make two canes as follows: and have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol.xii.
For the elevation of pricking skin, use an awl when the skin is taut.
When the skin is unnatural, hard, rough, and pricking, in the operation for this, you should use a fine awl and place it on that fine thread. Then, carefully adjust the ends of the thread in a very delicate manner using small clamps. And the length of the threads should be the width of one palm.
And then you compose another fine thread and place it briefly, using the ends of that if you want.
And then place the patient's head in a towel, and near the sun so that your work be declared, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the edge of the cut skin, adjusting it with forceps, and make that penetrate deeply into the eyelid, while extracting that from above the natural skin.
And then pull the skin upwards and insert it into the incision, with one or two or three pieces of skin and not more.
And then pull your hand there so that the skin is outwardly moved with forceps in the eyelid with the natural skin.
More if the skin is grasped with forceps and not moved outward, grasp the skin at the edges with the needle you have prepared, so that when the forceps are removed, the skin will be left behind.
And place the bandage where you can see the wound, for then you will hold the lint and dip it in the dressing, and clean every part thoroughly, leaving the wound open for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a longer piece of hair from the natural hairs, and elevate it there, or leave it until it grows to an appropriate length, and then elevate that.
Chapter XIII.
For the cure of an elevation in the upper eyelid.
When there is an elevation in the wound, and it is caused by a contraction of the eyelid that contracts towards the right or left side due to poor healing of a lesion or section or cautery, it is called leporine. This elevation can be either natural or accidental, and is caused by the consolidation of a lesion or sections or cauteries, or resembles them in its condition.
May the manner of the operation be that you make that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in it at what is between those one leaf of cloth, and tie those together until they are healed.
And do not forget that you use the cure of it from the causes which desiccate, constrict; for if you do so return to exacerbate even more evil than there was before any time.
Use for those causes that mollify thus as fenugreek, and steep it in water in which it is high and seed of it, or ointment of aloe, which be liquefied by some of the oils, and immerse that leaf in it, and cure with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate all that is not consolidated according to the form that it was at the beginning.
And this operation which we have said, is nothing but a correction of exacerbations that do not return the form of the area as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
For the cure of ahcration which is done in the eyelid, let it be known.
This ahcration which is done in the eyelid, which is named naturally ahcration; and it can be either natural or accidental.
More commonly, it is caused by a wound or a cut or a cautery or other similar reasons.
For the operation, you should take a needle and make a double thread, place that needle in the flesh, and pass it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal so that the thread reaches the two ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the upper parts with the needle and sew it with the needle, and incise with a broad blade. And therefore, if you return the shape of the eyelid as it should be, that is good; otherwise, take the ray and place it in the torn figure, and with it convert the eyelid, and make the two fissures on the edge of the eyelid.
And if the ends of the two cracks at the angles of the incision, which you have made where they converge, and from them an angle is made such that when they are gathered together it forms a figure of them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then close the flesh there with the amount that is the length of the sharp point left from it, which is the edge.
And then adjust the separated parts with the thread of wool; and then cure them with what we have said about the moistening medicines and the plasters until they are healed.
And if you incise further through a crack or suture or cautery, then you must make an incision along a flat line on the skin of the eyelid according to what has been previously described. And then separate with the plaster between two lips as we have said.
In the sum of the discourse on incising when above or left over, let it flow in the operation according to how it is prepared in the form of incising, and that is in the form of diverse spots.
And the skilled artisans at all times prepare means in every manner which is possible for him to cause the figure to return to its natural form or near it, and that malformed condition according to what suits him in the operation and the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol. XV.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in men, they attempt to solidify the eyelid above on the white of the eye, and to prohibit its ease of movement and its natural actions. Therefore, you should introduce the sharp edge of a needle between the eyelid, leave the eyelid, and elevate it or extend it onto the upper lid.
And then you incise the adhesion with a fine needle, which should not be of great sharpness, having a slightly obtuse tip so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation, and leave the fluid so that it does not affect the eye's sharpness.
And let your incision be such that it separates the adhesion easily so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and all the adhesion is healed.
And then place in it enough salt water to wash with; or boil it with juniper dissolved in water.
And then separate between the eyelid and the wound with salt water, and place over the wound infused wool in honey, and for the first day use conservative treatments until it is healed.
Capitol. XVI.
On the incision of the eyelid and the prominence of the flesh of the lacrimal gland.
Know that the eyelid is divided into two ways: one is nervous, and it is like a thin hard thread; the other is non-nervous, resembling a white congealed moisture. When you touch it, if it must be cut, it is easily divided and no part of the cut is left in it.
And both species do not begin but from the major lacrimal gland where it slowly covers the eye and prohibits both light and movement.
The manner of treating the incision is that the patient places his head in the supine position, then opens his eyes, raises his eyelid with your hand, and subsequently picks up the corner of the skin with an instrument and extend it to the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert either a horsehair or a bull's hair or a cow's hair, or similar hair, or a strong thread, or gradually double the tip of the needle and place it in the middle of the skin, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie the skin with thread; and extend it to the upper parts, and scrape off the hair from the skin which heals the pupil. And then you follow that with the hair to the back of his neck.
And then you make the incision in the groove of the lacrimal gland with a fine needle or small scissors, and leave the natural flesh of the lacrimal gland so that by this incision it does not develop continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the thumb is placed on the sole of the extended foot or on venom, as we have said, and then it is excised with lion's tooth, which is the form of it:
And be careful that with the lion's tooth you do not touch the cornual membrane, and even if there is a rupture in it, and that the pupil is perforated.
Then apply a little salted honey or of vinegar made from wine, and leave it there for another day; and take care that what is applied within heals.
And if the thumb is not nerveous and you cannot put the needle in it, then treat this kind of thumb with medicines, and it is healed as I and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise it, then open the space in the thigh and take a sharp lion's tooth of heated steel according to this form: of fine steel. And if you see that it is rarified and confined within the ulcer, then distill from your mouth into the wound of flesh made of syrian or hemp wool or salted silk, and apply the other end to this one.
And then perform the operation on it until all of it is removed, but if a counter-pustule forms in the wound, then leave that and treat the beginning of the pustule until it is healed.
And then continue your operation on it until it is healed.
The eminence of the tear flesh, if noticed in the wound by great damage, suspend it with a needle; and incise that part, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut off the flow of tears.
And then distill into the tear duct wool or syrian wool until it is healed.
Capitol. xvii.
Of the incision of algazardenic and of that which has arisen from flesh joined in the whole.
In the heels of some, there arises fleshly growths that are covered over, situated near or strengthened against the eyelids and lightly binds the eyelids to the parts outside, being assembled close to the cheek.
More importantly in this operation is that the patient places their head on a pillow; and then open the heels of that person and collect all that flesh with convenient incisions, using forceps or tongs; and then cut the flesh at the beginning before everything is finished with the scalpel, and keep watch over the wound to ensure you do not lose track of it for your operation.
And your incision should be made in the manner we have described in the incision of the thumb, or with small scissors using which the flesh is collected according to the form that will come in this chapter.
Then, once your incision is completed and the entire flesh is reddened, fill the wound with salted salve, or sprinkle it with a powder of rogar similar to that of corrosive medicines, and place a wax pledget over the wound outside until an abscess is assured.
And if there arises any cause for guardency and is seared with caut, and fears apostema caut, then leave the whole and cure that apostema by what yields that apostema, and then iterate over that with operation between that be healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which you encounter in the healing of this kind.
Moreover, however, you must know that you should allow all healing of the wound by natural means or by accidental means, prepare with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that this member is suffering from this operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of knowledge in the wound.
Surgery shows us veins that are prominent on the wound and prohibits their operation, and they expand the wound over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, you must consider whether the wound in which surgery is to be performed is strong and if there is no other illness in it. Then, you collect that knowledge.
And you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins at one or two inches according to your discretion; and let that inch be of subtle doubling according to this form:
and the two inches gradually in one piece according to this form:
And then gather those veins with fine threads, with subtlety, and cleanse the wound hour by hour, while urging those veins to remain open and be rotated.
And be sure that you do not let the blood reach the extremities of the spatum; and if your operation in the middle of the day before the sun, be firm in your operation that you enter only those veins.
And when you have completed, then distill in the wound vinegar or rancid oil to make what is open from the scab acrid.
But if this is not possible in that hour, then plaster everything with what relieves the pain, and leave it for a few days until the pain is relieved and an abscess secured.
And then repeat over it according to how the patient manipulates it as it heals.
This is the form of the forks:
Capitol XIX.
For the reduction of hernias to the nose.
When you treat hernias with a cautery or with sharp burning medicine, according to whether the narration of its history precedes and it is not cured, then do not perform any operation on it. Instead, if there is an abscess, wait for it to mature, and then drain all the moisture within it, and once the pus is revealed, expose the bone.
And when the bone is revealed and corruption or blackness appears within it, then treat it with an instrument of which this is the form:
And it is named "sharp head," and it is made of iron, and its head is round, holding it such that it is made with points by filing or delicately punctured (as in the following form).
And place him over the corrupt part of the bone, then return that between the thighs called, and press your hand little by little so that you know that that corruption is flat.
And let this be done several times, then restore the area caused by drying and constricting factors.
Then if the area is consolidated and has good hidden flesh and the diseased tissue is cut from the body and heals over forty days, and does not renew or become gangrenous and no accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this manner: you shall uncover the bone with an iron or sharp medicine, and when the bone is uncovered, then take three strips according to this form:
Let the end of the iron be triangular, and the shaft be narrowed towards the end in this manner as you see.
And place it over the bone, and let that be close to the lacrimal; then extend your hand a little along its length, and return your hand with the strips so that they penetrate the entire bone, and that feels the patient's pain through the air that passes by when you move your hand.
Then restore the area with medicinal powders drying as they are accustomed.
Then when the flesh and area are hardened, the matter which was effusing to the surrounding parts returns to its place, so this is lighter on the patient.
Capitol.xx.
For the reduction of the prominence of the heel.
When the heel protrudes completely and there is no damage or diminution of the covering, then you should relax the foot, subsequently apply scarification and bleeding at the neck six times, then place cold liniment made of acacia, aloe, eniset, and resin over it, and finally strengthen the poultice on the heel with powder.
And the method of powders is that you take cloths soaked in oil of lions, and each cloth be folded into four parts; then use those folds.
And then place those one over the other according to the quantity of what they need. And then strengthen those with a hard cloth bandage; and repeat the cups with suction several times; and place the cups, leaving them tight all day and night.
But if meantime the ligament becomes softened, then leave it slightly stretched.
And place the ligament tightly both day and night as we have said.
And if the swelling has already subsided, that is good. Otherwise, then repeat the ointment with the powders and the bandage and the cups until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the prominence of the uveal membrane.
When there is disruption in the uveal membrane, and then this prominence protrudes and proceeds outward like a degree of swelling, and its shape resembles that of a person. If you wish to incise it, the operation on it is as we have recommended. You should insert the needle into the margin of the uveal membrane from one side to the other, just above where you left off. Then place another needle at the lacrimal part with a double thread, and allow the latter to penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position. Next, incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uveal membrane in the circuit of the needle, then strengthen it.
And then extract the needle and place yourself over the wound filled with honey album and let the thread be in it until it dissolves.
And then cure the wound with what comforts him in which the wound is healed.
And sometimes gather all the parts in a circle of cloth under the wound, and then let a fine needle be perforated through the cloth to the bottom of the wound, allowing the humidity albuminosa to drain and descend, and exit soon.
And then strengthen it until it is healed.
Chapter 22.
On the cure of ulcers.
This illness called ulcers is nothing but putrefaction which settles in the wound resembling running water and is not the other.
The method of treating it is to place the ulcer on a clean, straight surface, and then hold its edges with your fingers in two parts, and move those parts where you see the putrefaction reach the parts left, and then dry it so that it does not descend, and keep the light, allowing the ulcer to see the causes as one sees.
And if it does not come down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent to the wound is not prepared as we have said, then make the patient lie on their back and proceed with suctioning a fine tube over the conjunctiva onto the cornea into the place vacant, so that the water is expelled.
And since the water is expelled, then you administer the distilled water into which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then cure the other causes once it is healed.
Capitol.xxii.
On the cure for water descending into the wound.
We have already mentioned the species of water in the division and which one is to be used for perforation as we declared, according to its nature.
And you must make the patient lie on their back on a couch and keep their wound clean with it, using astringent material.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye; if the lid is on the left side, use your left hand; or with your right hand, if the lid is on the right side.
And then with your right hand take the flannel, if the lid is on the left side; or with your left hand, if the lid is on the right side.
And then place the tip of the flannel near the cornea for the swelling of the vein in the white of the eye on the side of the lower eyelid, and then apply the flannel with virtue and rotate your hand around it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the flannel is already saturated with fluid.
And measure the length of the flannel when removed, comparing it to the size of the space which is between the pupil and the edge of the dark part, which is the cornea; for you will see the pupil through the eye with the clarity of the corneal membrane.
And then place your hand in the location where there is water, and then you lower it down one time or another. Therefore, if the water descends quickly, then see the patient below where his sight can reach quickly, and your hand confirms this.
And then rest for a moment; therefore, if the water has descended, then you lower it again one more time before your hand is slipped out.
And when it is drawn out and does not descend, then you withdraw your hand with ease, and slowly rotate your hand around, and then dissolve a little of clear gemstone salt in the water and with that wash inside; then place outside the solution a clot or stop or infused wool in olive oil and egg white and tie this with it the solution inside.
More importantly, those of our times tie it with olive oil.
And if your hand does not fit into the solution due to its hardness — which is often the case with some men whose hands are thick — then you must take the spume which is called albergid, and this is its form:
And therefore perforate at that joint, and do not withdraw your hand from the tract, but rather make a small way to a nearby location.
And then introduce the needle as we have said.
And you should allow the patient a comfortable recovery in a bed made for him, on his back in a dark house, and all movements should be prohibited.
And place the patient in their natural position so that their nature is corrected, and do not tilt their head to the right or left side too much.
And apply the ointment according to its disposition on the third day.
And then remove the patient from that dark room and expose them to fresh air, and make them walk for some causes, and then return the ointment on the seventh day.
And do not perform this at the time of curations or very close to the infusion. Having a cavity that you open through which water may pass more easily by great and violent regard.
But if an abscess occurs, having a cavity that you incise on the seventh day, and corrects that amount which yields the abscess.
When you close the wound and place your hand over the face of the patient's mouth so that it may heal, let the patient rest in the darkest part for a few days.
And gradually let it recover and return to its original state.
And know that in an apprentice's case vision is not excused for some days, and then you should watch over the operation.
And we have been informed of some who have already recovered from those cases, which are called Artach, and some said to make fire on the Ayrac magnam perforated with which water is discharged.
But I have not seen such a case in our land where it was performed perfectly, nor is it mentioned in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is a new method.
And these are the forms of the species of maagdhaan so that it may be upon those who ignore them:
And they are made of iron or brass properly, and their extremities from them to this subtlety triangular, the acute end thus as that is the form.
Capitol.xxiv.
For the healing of flesh in the nose.
When in the nose there arise various hidden flesh masses, from which arises some cause that is associated with the scorpion of heavy burdens, or with a polyp of this kind; and this illness is called polypus, which is in resemblance to that kind of burden represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, dark in color; and from it is that flesh lion-like not of dark color.
Therefore, in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, make the illness disappear between your hands and place it in the sun, and inhale its smell, and prick the thigh in those flesh. And then extract it from the parts forward, and then divide what you have grasped with a sharp thin knife between which you know all the flesh has been separated; if some remains due to any cause for which the sectioning is possible, then quickly use one of the sharp instruments to facilitate its separation for any reason. If it festers or an evil abscess occurs, then pause at that which is covered; or if it is from malignant abscesses, then incise and cauterize there where the sectioning must be done and all the cavities should be exposed.
And then insert something in the nose after the incision, either a piece of cloth or wool. And if the nose is already opened and moisture proceeds to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
And if the moisture does not penetrate as expected, then you know that inside there is no flesh but only pus, and it will be bones of the nose to which incision has not reached.
When you find an obstruction in the vein of which there is any lump, use needles on it and place between each needle the size of a finger or less, and probe the malady and insert one end of the thread into the naris along the ray or for another cause which is possible to him.
And when this has been done, let it emit its odor into the nostrils' canals until it reaches the brain, and sit over his pillow, for tropic views of this action make children at schools laugh, and it is a light cause for those who wish to do so.
Then return the two ends of the thread, one that itches near the nose and the other that tingles in the nose, and then administer a stitch of flesh around the needles that are in the thread, and do this before you know that the flesh has reached the needles of the thread.
Then extract the thread, and place a blister near the opening of the vein with a blistering herb, and do this for three days or more until the salve corrodes all that is necrotic from the flesh.
And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead cannula for several days until it is healed.
If you desire a cure that is dry, use of that.
And this is the form of the instrument for making purgatives, at which are distilled oils and medicines in the nose:
And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, like a small basin, and the mouth similar.
And if you want, make a closed cannula like a reed, and the mouth of the instrument for making purgatives flat and open; to which you can insert it at the rear end, with which you will have it when you heat in it oil or what you want from the secretions and causible substances.
Chapter XXV.
From the teeth to the extremities of the nose.
Pores visible are seen in the teeth at the extremities of the nose, and they become enlarged and palpable within a few days as the swelling becomes apparent upon examination.
And for this reason, you should examine that person at the beginning of the appearance of the swelling, and treat them entirely. And place your hand over the area or the cautery or burning medicine which is at that location.
But if the examination is delayed until after it has become enlarged, consider whether it is hardened, dark in color, and with little sensation. In this case, do not touch that with a probe as it may be an abscess; for visible pores should only be examined where you have found this abscess due to its great malignity towards the person.
And if the abscess is due to a blow and not dark in color, and examination is possible throughout that area, then evacuate the poison and incise there without fear, and treat the area with what dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter 26.
For the缝合鼻子、嘴唇和耳垂，当连续性因创伤或相似原因被破坏时。
Know that when there is a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much trust in that operation but rather in skilled individuals.
Therefore, when you need to treat any of these cases, consider whether it is fresh trauma with its own healing, and then adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures, and properly cure it until it is healed.
And if the edges of the disruption are already separated, and any part is made healthy, then you should excise each part from its apparent wound until it has formed a scab. Then adjust the two edges with sutures and strengthen them. Over these, sprinkle healing dragon's blood powder and apply three layers of diaphonic plaster or another consolidative plaster. Let this paste remain for two to three days, then remove it and change the plaster, leaving it until the wounds heal on their own. Properly cure it until it is healed.
The manner of suturing is that you add the solution of continuity or use needles as we have recommended in the belly suture, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you are made to know.
Capitol.xxvii.
For the extraction of those causes that wind in the two lips in the internal parts.
Spots observed in the internal parts of their lips lead to abscesses hard and resembling fat, some are smaller and others are larger.
Thoroughly incise the lips and all parts of each hardness, then fill the wound with three layers of cloth to keep the wound constricted, and subsequently wash it with vinegar and treat the area with a solution that is astringent until it heals.
Capitol.xxviii.
For the incision of the flesh lodged in the gums.
Great care must be taken over the gums, the flesh紧贴的牙龈，古人称之为albulus，然后你必须提起那块肉或将它固定住，使那部分可以分开并拉开，让健康的部分流出或排出。
Then place a ligature or another styptic or excitatory powder over the area.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, for after the cauterization it will not return.
Capitol.xxix.
On the reason for teeth with cavities.
When on the surface of the inner and outer teeth and between the gums there are sharp, jagged edges, some of which are blackened and are caused by yellow or green substances that penetrate to the gum causing corruption, leading to blackened teeth.
And therefore you must make the patient open their mouth with your hand and hold the head in a basin of water, brush the teeth where these edges and similar causes appear so that no cause is broken from them, and do this for the blackness and the yellowing as well as other changes they may have undergone.
Therefore, if what remains of the matter at the beginning of the reasoning is clear, that is good; otherwise, then you iterate the reasoning on those matters the next day and the second and the third until it reaches the final statement in what you want.
And know that the teeth have required mortars for various forms and figures according to how they are prepared in your operation. And so, the razors with which the tooth is shaved from the inside part are different from those razors with which it is shaved between the teeth according to other forms. These forms of razors you should prepare, which you will often see.
Capitol.xxx.
For the extraction of teeth.
Cave that when you cure the tooth of its pain with great skill and take much time in the entire extraction, for no cause can replace the moment when it is extracted, for substance is refined during the process of extraction.
When the patient is forced to open that tooth, you must be certain which tooth is painful, for many times the pain deceives the patient and shows as in a healthy tooth, and you extract that one and soon the pain ceases once the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have seen this through the operations of barbers.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and knowing this well, when you incise along the circuit of the tooth where any virtue lies, until it dissolves from the root of the tooth within the gum, then insert those tweezers or fine scissors gradually little by little, so that the fragments are removed.
And then wash it well to ensure good speech or strong fracture, and place the head of the patient between your tweezers so that they do not move, and then extract the tooth according to the right method so as not to break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
And if it is not forcibly extracted, then take one of those instruments, and place it on the tooth from all sides with ease and effort to facilitate its removal, as is done at the beginning.
If the tooth is broken or腐蚀的，那么你应当用布包住那个地方，并在末端系上一根细线以防你在操作时将其进一步损坏。
And you should incise meticulously in the circuit of all parts of the gum and preserve its strength so as not to break that torn part, and return over the pain because it is worse than the first pain.
And make sure you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their incisions and audacity in the eradication of boils; for they do not administer what we have advised. For false impressions often bring great illnesses to men, which are harder to treat than boils, and the causes of their failures, all or some of them, or that you extract from certain bones of the mandible, as false impressions have testified.
And after the eradication of the boil, wash the mouth with warm water or wine mixed with salt.
And if there are fluxes of pus for this reason, as false impressions often cause, then take some saffron and sprinkle it over the wound. If this saffron does not work, cauterize.
The shape of the forceps and the fine tongs used to grasp the tooth at the beginning of its emergence is long and thin with some thickness, so that they do not bend when those you use them.
And they should be thus wide enough to prevent them from bending when you make them narrower.
And they should be made of Indian iron, straight and long. At the ends of these, there should be teeth that interlock with each other and are firmly fixed by a strong construction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of a bird's bill which is called a ciconia, and they are well-made.
Capitol.xxxxi.
For the removal of teeth and extraction of broken jaw bones.
When you need to remove a tooth that is broken due to some cause, you should first ensure that you pause over the location carefully to allow it to heal for one or two days until the area becomes less swollen; then insert forceps or tongs with teeth resembling the bill of a ciconia or guanta, the shape of which is similar to the forceps.
The extremities of their pain are felt inside as if by hammer or blow.
And if it does not obey to your attempt with these forceps or tenacula, then cut over the ridge and strip all the flesh away and insert the instrument which is named attalect, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
And let it be briefly an extremity with a small base, and do not bend it so that it is not twisted.
So if by this the ridge is pierced, good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular in extremity, in which there is some base:
The form of the second instrument is triangular and with a finer extremity.
And now help yourself with this instrument having two ramps, of which this is the form in the following: And with other instruments which are used for rasuring teeth; for youth is made with this instrument which resembles a large spoon, and this is the form:
From the triangular extremity twisted or curved, which is some kind of swelling, and not completely engorged so that it is not tense.
And another note that the tooth extraction tools resemble other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle craftsmen find suitable tools for themselves according to what the operation signifies and the various ailments; which are the ailments to which the ancients would neither refer nor pause with a specific instrument due to their different forms.
But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are tense, or if you need to extract them, then place weight on that area at its location and use what is convenient from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and the gesture of which this is the form:
And let it be some small swelling little by little, and tightened or held in the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone is completely drilled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
If in the bone there is a small suppuration, first drain that of the pus and its blackness, and cure it when it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
Of the treatment of prominent teeth above the others.
When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural shape and size, especially when they grow towards women, particularly venerable old women; therefore, consider this: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is impossible to root or extract it by lineament, then extract that one. However, if it is not attached to another tooth, use an instrument with a sharply pointed tip, resembling a pig's tusk, made of Indian steel.
And let your incision be with the instrument with which you extract that tooth over several days due to its hardness, and ensure it is not too close to another tooth.
And if the tooth is prominent and worn out, then file that with a file of Indian steel, which has this shape:
And it should be made of iron from India and the margin smoothed; and it should have small pointed points like a file, on which the tooth is filed little by little over several days for ease, so that there is not another sharp tooth to cause harm. And draw that one at the end, and cut that one with a few razors.
And if a tooth is broken and the tongue gets in the way, then you should file that area where the sharpness of that fragment is obstructed and smoothed, so that the tongue does not get hurt and the word does not become corrupted.
Capitol.xxxiii.
For the restoration of rotten teeth with an auric or silver foil.
When the front teeth are damaged by concussion or removal through impact or extraction, and the patient cannot strengthen over what remains, and you have treated it with styptic medicines, but your treatment has not been effective, then for those that can be strengthened use an auric foil and not a silver one, because silver turns green and will likely do so in a few days, whereas gold does not change at all.
And let the honey be in such fineness and graininess according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the form of the dose is that you take the honey and put twice its volume between two healthy teeth, and almost as many wrinkles of the honey between two molar teeth, or if one or spots, until the tissue reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then insert the thread into the part where you started, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill so that it is not molar.
And let your tightening be such that it strengthens the honey, ensuring that the roots of the teeth are not displaced.
And then divide the excess threads with the forceps or scissors, and add them to any location with your hand, and cover those and the hidden ones between the healthy tooth and the molar tooth, so as not to injure the tongue. And then let it stay thus tight as a Roman.
If it is slipped or broken, strengthen her or them in such a manner throughout its time.
This is the form of the teeth and the figure of the extraction of two healthy teeth and two molars, as you see these tied:
When one returns a tooth or two to their proper places in the jaw, and they have grown back as we have described, then they should remain.
And it is not done by anything other than good artisans and wise people.
And sometimes it is fit for some cause of the bones of cattle, and it is made from them as the form of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth failed, and it is strengthened as we have said, and remains and serves for a long time.
Capitol.xxxiv.
Of the incision of the ligament which is in the tongue and prohibiting speech.
This ligament which leaves the tongue in some cases is natural as one is born with it, or accidental and due to a wound which has already healed.
And the operation is that one opens the mouth of the patient, who lies on his back; elevates the tongue, and then incises that ligament nerve according to the width between which the tongue can be freed from its recession.
But if there is any hardness or induration in that area, and this is due to the healing of a wound, then you cut once and incise that ligament according to the width at which you have already incised the ligament and dissolved the induration.
And make sure that no crack is made in the subcutaneous layer, and incise here to avoid a flow of blood.
And then wash the incision tracts with warm water or with wine or with vinegar; and place the tongue to dry. So that it may not become hardened again at another time.
If a flow of blood occurs, place a vitriolic salve over the area; if the blood flows, then cauterize the area with a pointed cautery suitable for this. And then proceed with the other treatments once it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
For the extraction of a ranula, use the tongue.
At times, an abscess forms in the tongue, resembling a small boil, and it is forbidden to perform any operation on the tongue; yet, as it fills the mouth, it becomes more prominent.
And the operation for this is to open the patient's mouth wide and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of a dark brown or black color, hard, and the patient does not feel any pain in it, then do not touch that area.
And if it is turning white, which indicates moisture, then you apply the ointment to it, and incise that with a sharp blade, dividing it into all its parts; and if blood flows during your operation, then place a vitriol compress over it, restricting the flow of blood.
And then return to your work as soon as you have treated him completely, as he is washed with oil and salt; and care for that with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that are deep in the flesh, and other abscesses.
When I come upon the deep layer, they are glands which are arranged like cotton, which accidenously occur on the surface and are named the two ears, which when you cure them as we have said in the division and do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; first let that mature, and then either you will cut away that part or it will rupture by itself.
And if it is of white color, soft, and the root is fine, then that should be cut away.
And in the operation for this, you must consider before your operation whether the abscess has already been rested and is completely drained or if it has decreased somewhat; then perform the incision before the sun, with the head of the patient under your care, and hold its mouth open, and a servant holding between his hands the tongue of the patient using the noblest instrument of which this is the form:
And let it be made of silver or steel, and let it be thin like a knife.
So when you press on that tongue and show it to the patient, and place your hand firmly over that area, then take an oncix and insert it into the abscess, and pull it outwards as far as you can. Another thing you pull out from the tunics, and then cut that area with the instrument of which this is the form:
Another thing you pull out from the tunics, and then cut that area with the instrument of which this is the form: and it is similar to forceps, although the ends are curved, so that the opening of each of those is in the straight part of the other, sharp points, which should be made of iron and bent.
If this instrument is not present, then incise that space from which this form issues: it should be sharp on one side, but not on the other.
And since you have incised one wound, incise the other according to this manner of incision, and nearby the incision the abscess will drain with water.
If there is a flow of blood, drain it with a decoction of rhubarb or of hollyhock leaves, similar in effect to those styptic causes where the flow of blood is restrained, and cure that where it is healed.
And sometimes sores appear in the cheek or other abscesses besides those of the two ears, and incise those according to what I say and have said in the incision of two wounds equally.
And I had already treated a woman with an abscess which was located in the cheek, which abscess tended to have a brown color, with little sensation, which had already closed the cheek of her, and the woman breathed freely, and had already been forbidden to eat and drink water, and she was close to death if more water were to pass just one or two days.
And the abscess had already been pressed so much that there were two fingerbreadths between where it would exit through two cuts.
Then I cut the fistula gently and placed my finger in one of its ends, then pulled it out, and the larger part came with it, and then I incised that part from where another tract originated, and then stretched the opening of the other tract, and grasped its tongue, and then placed my finger in that abscess.
Then I incised a large part of it, and there was not much blood flowing from it. Then the swelling of that woman disappeared, and she began to drink water shortly, and then eat food. Therefore, I continued incising that abscess for a long time without stopping, and an abscess would form in its place, which kept recurring as long as that one was prolonged.
Then I shaved and cauterized the swelling of the abscess, according to the method; and then I wandered around and did not know what God had done for that nearby me.
Capitol.xxxvii.
Of the incision of gout when it is acute.
When the catarr affects the uvula, and it is swollen and long, then it is named perpendicular; if it is in the part with a large and round swelling, then it is called a bubo.
When it is cured as we have said in the division, and you do not find your cure working, and as you often see that the abscess has already subsided and become subtle, then cut where the swelling is aggregated round; if it is of length, and is bloody, with a dark or black color, and is not about an inch, then you should fear the incision of it, for there is fear concerning gout.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, then cut the gout and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape defines its form, and place the incision in the new one, and pull that down and incise that with one of the two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two joints.
And ensure that you do not exceed this limit but only what is adjusted over the natural term of addition, for if you exceed it, you will disturb its proper function.
And near the incision, use that which we have described in the incision of two fingers, and ensure that it is healed within.
And if the patient was scared by the incision, ensure that you use something to calm him during the cautery, and the way of applying the cautery is simply with sharp water. You should hold the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the patient's tongue against the instrument as described. Additionally, take the water we mentioned in the section on cautery, and apply it moderately but not too thinly to the surface, filling the concavity of the instrument whose shape this describes:
Let the external part of the cavity in which the medicine is applied be as wide as the bottom of a ray fish, and place the instrument on the medicine over the vagina, and the patient should press her side to allow saliva or mucus from her mouth to enter through the internal medicine, so that it does not leave for any cause on the skin of the patient and adhere there.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and express it over the uvula for half an hour between each time you let it darken due to the bite of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then immerse the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube such that the cloth adheres to the tube. Do this as many times as necessary to achieve the desired cauterization of the uvula, then let it dry and fall off over three or four days.
And if you need to apply the medicine again, reapply it, and after cauterization, clean the circuit of the uvula with a soaked cloth, modify that which is in the circuit of the uvula with the medicine, let it be washed with water, and be externally treated with ointment, and internally with medicines until it is healed.
And this method of treatment is both safe and lasts long without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured by what is finer than cautery and incision, which is treated by subfumigation in this manner: take reed, hyssop, origanum, rue, scikatós árabes, camomile, powder of these herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a pot, and be submerged in water, and boil; and the pot let be well covered with good pitch, and in the middle of the pot a stick, over which is placed an instrument concave of iron according to this manner; let it be made of silver or iron.
And place the extremity in the mouth of the patient between where the vapor rises to the uvula over the gullet, so that the uvula becomes obscured.
And then repeat over those spots several times while they are dry, and guard that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of the appearance of carbuncles, for it would too strongly affect the carbuncle. You should not do this, but rather declare the condition of the carbuncle with a cautery.
But if you do not have this instrument at hand, then take a cane and place on its end a hazelwood stopper, so that the opening of the patient's anus is blocked, for the hazelwood stopper prevents the vapor from burning the opening.
And this cure is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and what adheres in the wound and other causes.
Spots or thorns adhered in the wound or from a thorn or some other cause.
Then carefully extract what is obvious from those, by which you can see it. Afterwards, press the tongue with an instrument in front of the light, so that you may be able to determine what is in the throat.
And what is not obvious and hidden in the wound, carefully make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because if the cause attached to the wound is strong, it will be expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of napkin or rags soaked in milk or a bite of dry bread; or use a piece of sponge well saturated with honey and tightly bound, and let that pass through the throat, for it reaches the location where the thorns are and is extracted. And take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside the meal and secretly extract it; or take a plaster and secretly apply it and secretly insert it.
And if none of these causes apply to the cases we have said, then use a lead instrument in this form:
And let it be as thick as a little finger, and at the end of it have a cavity which you insert into his throat with ease.
And lift his head up, and guard that the touch of his bone in the throat reaches his body or that which covers the bone or spine, or that which the doctor places with his hand.
And instead, when the patient himself inserts honey, by his knowledge of the place of the cause and covers it below, and pulls his hand towards the instrument, do all this according to the quantity prepared before it is forgotten.
Capitol.xxxix.
From the extraction of gouty blood associated with gout.
When gouty blood is treated according to what we said in the division of the cure with medicines and you do not agree, consider at the gout of the patient in the sunlight, after you have understood the language of the disease with the instrument which we have recommended.
Therefore, if you see the gouty blood, extract it either through a small needle or through fine, subtle means.
And if it is not possible to extract it through that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gout of the patient, and place a burning iron in the concavity of the cannula, doing this as many times (until the gouty blood is dead and comes out of the gout) and keep the patient from water for the whole day.
And then take a cloth full of water, wring it out, and apply the mouth of the cloth to that area, and wash the area with it; and do not swallow any of it, but let the water remain on the area for about an hour with your hand, because the gouty blood will soon come upon contact with the water.
If it is not already fumigated, then fumigate the patient with cyme or asafetida through the instrument we have recommended in the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, so that it may fall into place.
And another method of fumigation is this: you take an olla containing burning charcoal and cover the olla with a cloth in the middle of which there is a hole, and place the end of the instrument in that hole; then proceed with the subfumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the cannula, and plug his mouth so that the subfumigation is not forgotten until you are sure that the subfumigation has reached the uvula, for the uvula will soon fall.
And if it does not catz, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and forbid the patient to drink, eat salty foods and others, and do not let him take water. Thus, it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten.
And this is the form of the instrument used to treat gout when seen; and it resembles forceps as you see, except that there is some curvature in it: And the instrument is placed over the gout, and the extremity of it is similar to a stork's bill, which is curved, and it is filed with lime, so that when any cause is grasped, it does not slip.
Capitol.xl.
In which the main discourse on abscesses and their treatment is presented.
Abscesses are special kinds of boils, treated in various ways according to their characteristics, and those of each one described in this treatise.
And they are treated in various ways through perforation and treatment of the abscesses themselves, using two methods: one method is for the specific treatment of abscesses; and this involves grasping the humors.
And the second method is near the places where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshly location is different from an abscess in a joint; and each one of them has its own judgment through operation.
And for abscesses, some of which cover areas that should not be perforated but rather allowed to mature until the healing is complete.
And for other abscesses, some of which must be incised when they are ripe and not allowed to mature further as in the case of abscesses near joints. When an abscess is close to a joint, its nature extends into what is within the circuit of that joint, and strongly corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of that limb; or it is near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is fully matured, it will affect the main member; or it is near the anus, therefore incise the unripe one; and it should not be incised raw, but only those near the anus, so that the preon of it does not spread inward to the parts inside the anus, causing a fistula, or something that occurs in its term before it is healed. And you must know the time for perforating the abscess, and this is when it is ripe.
And note that it is cured when there is an end to the pain and a cessation of fever, and nearly a decrease in redness and pulse, and the sharpness of the apex of the abscess, and other signs.
And note that you should probe the perforation well and leave it at the apex of the abscess and where pus is coming from the cure.
And the probing should be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in the upper parts or the feet, and at the location of the lacertae, the cords of the nerves, the arches; and finally, in all locations where there is no reflection; for in those that are reflective, use probing according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy location, it is better to delay the probing until the digestion of the pus is confirmed according to our previous statement; for if you probe it prematurely, it will prolong the course of the pus and increase the hardness and depth of the lesion.
More abscesses should be punctured according to the width of the flesh or body as the need dictates, or according to that from which the limb derives.
And ensure that you administer a small puncture in large abscesses, and a large puncture or multiple sections according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And in other abscesses, ensure that the string is closed and tied when it is done, so that it stays in place, just as you would do with a tourniquet or in cases of tumors and buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and in which it is incised as the shape of a mirtle leaf, as in abscesses of anthrax.
And of these, those in which a circular incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, resembling those.
More so for those in which none is done thus, as for superficial abscesses, you should puncture them with a superficial puncture or incision only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected some healthy pus, you should puncture it but do not hesitate to drain all the foul matter at that time; having extracted one part, then on another day push the abscess into another part, and extract a larger portion, and continue doing this in stages until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of a green virtue, or a woman in labor, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, because the animal spirit resolves into the exit of the healthy fluid, and thus greatly alleviates the disease, and you should openly relieve it.
Take great care with this chapter, and when you puncture these abscesses, ensure that you cleanse the wounds and consider whether the wound from the abscess is small or a flat section. Then administer either hot or cold remedies accordingly; if the abscess is large and the punctures are painful, then place your hand in each to ensure they heal together.
And if in the abscess you have separated a part of the cord or have concaved it in the circuit, then you should close it with cold lint or a thread made of linen, as when you have packed wounds or roots, to maintain their humidity; strengthen it on the third day; and proceed with it and cure it according to what is appropriate from ointments until it is healed.
But if a flow of blood occurs during the time of your operation, then administer water mixed with wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the location of the blood flow for many minutes.
But if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure, and use the powders which I have recommended in appropriate places of this our libel and division.
But if it is in the time of winter, and the location of the abscess is near major nerves, then you must apply powders mixed with wine and oil, and place those over the locations.
And if it is in the summer, and the locations are fleshy, then you must place powders soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, all of which should be applied on the third day, as we have said, and then you must incise the abscess, cleanse it, and administer to it what is appropriate for its cure until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary concerning the knowledge of the cure of abscesses in general, but according to the division I have already said about all abscesses, by which method the cure of each one is conducted individually.
Chapter XL.
Of the section on abscesses that occur in the vein of the head.
In the vein of the head, small abscesses occur, and they contain nodes which are formed by their own tissues; the nodes have spots.
And they are lumps, and among them are those that contain humidity resembling lime. And among them are those that contain humidity resembling dust, similar to it; and among them are those that are hard.
And in the section of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, just as you should not fear the extraction of those without causing arterial contraction.
And the operation for the section of these is that you express them with an instrument in the form of which you will see nearby, which is called an entremes, until you know it contains.
If what it contains is humidity, then divide it with an instrument along its length for a superficial section in this manner:
And begin in the section of the line B. between the line G. When the humidity is evacuated, then scratch that skin which contains that humidity, and leave no cause of all, for if many times returns, if it remains from any cause.
And then immerse it in Egyptian ointment, if present, and otherwise in water and salt; then fill it with this and leave it for another day, for with this you will corrode all that is rotten of that skin.
And then repeatedly apply to that part with Egyptian ointment gently if you need it, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment once it is healed.
And if there is an abscess containing fatty nodes, then incise that according to this form: In the section having a cross-like form, make an incision between the two halves of the section and draw out all parts of it, and exert your virtue in extracting the tunica which contains it.
But if your artery resists, then do as I recounted to you first.
And similarly perform for the abscess lanced and in treatment according to what we have said; the lancing of an abscess is lighter, because it involves little bleeding and little humidity.
And sometimes some of these abscesses, which are in the head, have no humidity at all; the cause of which is that I cannot describe about an abscess on a elderly woman's head as if it were a hard, rough, white stone, which could not be cut, and if any were struck with it, it would hurt.
But in other abscesses on the head, this is not covered in this chapter. As with abscesses that come to the heads of children, you should lance the auricular regions; but the lancing of all these should be superficial lancing.
And place the lancing of those in the lower part below so that it helps the body to expel the corruption to the lower parts.
And then attend to those things that pertain to the care of that which needs it.
Chapter 42.
Of the section on scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Bluish spots often cause abscesses in the neck, under the chin, and in the armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck, and the spots that are generated within them, and all scrofula of these is found in its own lining; just as with nodules and abscesses in the head, as we have recounted.
The species of these scrofulas are spots. Some are mottled, some contain moisture, and some are malignant, which do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touchement, where the color of what is manifest is similar to the color of the skin, and is diffused throughout the body, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not swollen, cut that one with a superficial dry incision from above the part down to the opposite side of the body along the line of G. to the line of B., and scrape it thoroughly from all parts, extending the edges of the skin around the neck with oil or with small strips if you need those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more careful that the vein or nerve not be injured.
And let the incision not be too deep, so that your hand does not touch the vein or nerve during the incision, or to alleviate the patient's pain, and make sure not to incise what is not necessary to incise; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply a glass of treacle or other powders which are fluxes of blood, strengthen the wound, and leave it so that the abscess is at rest and the wound becomes softened and begins to suppurate. When the blood is incised.
Then return to your operation until it is completed.
And then inquire again as you have been taught to determine if there are any other small scrofulous swellings. Then incise those and clean them.
And if it is near the root of the scrofulous swelling and there is a large vein, avoid incising that scrofulous swelling from its root. Before you fold that piece of cloth strongly in half and let it fall so that it may collect.
And then fill the wound with old cloth which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then dress it.
And if you insert the scrofulous lump entirely, then you should adjust the two edges of the wound and sew them up so that no superfluous part remains.
But if you see that there is a superfluous part due to the size of the scrofulous lump, then you should understand to insert the edge of it, remove that part, and perform suturing as described.
And for the scrofulous tumors containing moisture, make a superficial perforation at the place where it appears to you as the site of maturation, and stop the perforation below the dry part at the base of the body, as we have said.
And then perform the perforation, apply ointment and similar substances to it, so that it腐蚀的地方防止腐烂。 And when you see that the wound has already been washed, then you apply the cream of flesh-generating ointment until it is healed.
Chapter XXXIII.
Section of the ulcer due to an accident in the thigh.
The ancients described this section in the epilhot, and no one in our land has ever seen it done.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those.
More in men with curvature, a cavity should be avoided during the excision of the epilhot, for if not done properly, all the veins and major ones in the thigh may be affected.
More in those who have abscesses on the mouth or thigh or ears, when the illness is not in the brain, it is advisable to use the section of the epilhot to avoid the loss which is caused by perforation.
When we want to do this, incise the epilhom with three or four small circles between two circles in quantity, so that the section is across the flesh, not the cartilage, and this place is suitable for a section, which is deprived of flesh and its blood vessels are lacking.
And if the doctor fears this, do so when he extends the thread of the scalpel, and then cut the thread where it reaches the channel, but more avoid the blood vessels if you see any cause.
And then incise the ciplach as we have instructed; and it is significant on the section of the channel by the flame which is from that ignited to what is of its disruption and by the disappearance of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
And when the time is prolonged in which perforation is feared, add two loops of the thread of the wound, and sew that one to the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it is missing.
Albucasis says that the main point of the discourse we have recounted is simply that you may see some of those abscesses already drained by incision, and the patient has come out of death, with his artery severed, and some have cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound through a single respiration, and thus is saved from death.
And for this, I command to keep the wound open until the malignity of the illness is consumed; and the malignity of the illness lasts for three days; and then, when it is time, I command thus the wound, and heal that which remains until it is cured.
And what I have seen with my own eyes is that a servant took a knife and placed it in her throat and incised at one part of the windpipe, and I was called to treat her, and I cut the voice box as it is cut for the dead, and uncovered the wound and stopped the bleeding which was coming from the small wound of the wound.
Then I have been convinced that there was neither a vein nor an artery cut, and the wind from the wound, and healed her with a remedy.
And she did not suffer any accident, nor even hoarseness in her voice, and soon recovered from her ailments.
And now I say that in the case of the heel, there is no fear.
Capitol. xliv.
On the section about an apostema that occurs on the forehead, and is called a forehead hernia.
This apostema, known as a forehead hernia, is called a large apostema according to the color of the body, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either natural or accidental.
And naturally, it is not something that can be cured.
And the accidental occurs in two ways: one resembles fatty nodes, and the other resembles an apostema caused by the obstruction of an artery, and in that case, there is fear. And do not make the patient think this is done with iron only in the small one. And touch that area and investigate the one he points out. If you find a semblance of a fatty node, and it is not suspended from any of the veins, then you should incise that area as you would for nodes, extracting what is inside the skin and subcutaneous tissue; otherwise, you must thoroughly examine his entire body, and place care on the area to be cured until it is healed.
Capitol. xlv.
Of the sections on the species of nodes.
Of the various kinds of nodes, and I have already described all kinds of them in the division.
And make sure that I recount such that the difference between a node and an exitura does not cause doubt.
Therefore, I say that in an exitura there is a quality of heat and fever and vehement pains until the boiling of the superfluity is sedated; and when the putrefaction is complete, then the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But if there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and concerning that leach-lemon which is at or of the sea.
And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a stain and is made thus, whether greater or smaller, and they are according to two species, namely those that are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I said in the division.
Therefore, when you come to the treatment of a node, express it and inquire about it at its beginning in the tissue which is called intumescent, according to how its form will appear in the capitulum which is nearby.
And this is the method of inquiring about abscesses and all nodes, and it is that you take this tissue and insert it into the location most humid which you find in the abscess, and you will mix the tissues little by little until you know that the tissue has penetrated the core.
Then place your hand near the extent of the size of the abscess, and then extract the intumescent tissue and consider what is situated in the recess of it.
And if the running moisture of any color is overlooked, then you incise according to a superficial section as I said in the other abscesses.
And if there is no moisture from the intrusion, then you know it is fatty.
And if it is dry on the surface and has the form of a cross according to this form: Thus as I have taught you, suspend it with a thread, and strip the cord from all parts with ease, and keep the skin or sack above it, if you can, and extract the healthy part at the node.
But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to extract that healthy part, and you should tie it several times, and then extract it in pieces so that it does not break for any reason.
But if it breaks for any reason, whether little or too much, the node should return as best as possible.
And if you see that it breaks any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp and strong powder, strengthen the wound, place your hand over the area where the abscess is located, and cure the rest of the patient during its healing.
And if it is not large, then you close the two lips of it and cure that which it contains.
And if the vein is pulsatile on the opposite side, or non-pulsatile, then incise and fill the area with one-third zegi (a type of glass) that is vitriol and let it stay for two days or three until the swelling subsides and the boiling of the blood calms; and then return to cutting what is ruptured from the node.
Capitol. XLVI.
Of the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those are the forms of the inserted instruments, and they are of three species: some are large, and others are medium, and others are small.
The form of the large inserted instrument is this:
The form of the small inserted instrument is this:
They should be made of iron, of silver, of fallen extremities properly, so that the instrument speeds in the abscesses.
These are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are named Albed and Berid.
These are of three spices, of which one is great, the other half and little.
The form of the experienced one, great, is as follows:
The form of the experienced one, half, is as follows:
The form of the experienced one, little, is as follows:
It is proper that they be for those abscesses, fistulas, and buboes, so that they are in those of the bones and from other causes.
And they are made round, large, like lions, as well as large needles to which the threads are sewn. They are made of citron wax, or of lead, or of iron, or of silver. The best are those made of citron wax.
And black feather experiences are made, which they agree should be performed when the fistulas in whose reflections they are located are opened, that those reflections be reflected by their light to those reflections.
And of three species, some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the amplitude of the fistula and its stricture.
Form of the great lead experience:
Form of the medium lead experience:
Form of the small lead experience:
The forms of the tumors are of three species. Some of them are simple long ones, which have only a single curvature, and they are of three species: long, few, and medium.
And they have tumors masses, and they are of three species.
And those having two curvatures, they are of three species.
And from them there are three curvatures, and of three species.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a single slight curve, form of it:
Form of a single great curve having two curvatures: Form of a single moderate curve having two curvatures: Form of a single slight curve having two curvatures:
Form of a single great curve having three curvatures:
Forma of a woman having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels which are incised and scored with nodes and apostumas, and they are of three species, one of which is large, womanish, and small.
Forma of the large scalpel:
Forma of the womanish scalpel:
Forma of the small scalpel:
The extremities of those which are incised are sharp, while the others are blunt. They are not made in such a manner as to prevent cutting into veins or nerves, but rather to ensure that during the excoriation of nodes, there is no fear of incision into a vein or nerve, and for this reason, the wound heals well and the patient finds some relief from the burning caused by the excoriation of the apostema.
And these are the forms of the curved ones, and they are of three species: large, womanish, and small, as you will see.
If they are made of wool and have the appearance of red dye in which alcohol is used.
And if there is an external mark punctuated with spurted blood and in that area it flows to the inner and outer parts, when you want, thus as you see.
The forms of spurted blood, which are hidden between the fingers, you should perforate the abscesses and do not perceive the patients, and they are of three species: great, woman, and weak. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of hemorrhages, where the flow of blood is divided, are of three species: great, woman, and weak; the forms of it:
If they are made of wool, circular in some length, and very fine.
And these should be these types of suction cups large, medium, and few, so that through those incisions the flow of blood is rapid in necessity, and when you first did not have medicine.
But do not use those to stop the bleeding in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshly areas, such as on the sides of the legs and thighs, and on the sides of the breasts, and on the belly, and on the armpits, and similar fleshly areas.
And some small instruments are made of those tools, resembling scissors according to this form; through which the blood is stopped when done by venesection, or an incision into a vein or artery.
And some small instruments are made round according to this form:
Capitol. xlvi.
Of the treatment of the breasts of men which are similar to those of women.
Some times the breasts of certain men swell when they begin to feel cold, and at such times the breasts swell, and the breasts of women gather together, as do Roman nipples.
And for those who have this, cut the affected lunar section according to this form, from the line of B to the line of G, then excise all the tumor, and fill the wound with red medicine, then suture the two edges of the wound together, and cure it until it is healed.
Moreover, if the breast droops towards the sides and is softened due to its size, as happens in women, then cut it into two parts so that each part contains a section similar to the lunar shape. Each section should be contained within the other such that the larger line contains the smaller one according to this form from the line of B to the line of G. Then excise the tumor which is between the two edges of the wound, remove the swelling, and proceed with suturing as well as administering the powders as previously described until it is healed.
And if you do not complete the incision that needs to be made due to the discomfort of the patient and the flow of pus, then you must fill the wound with cotton submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it there until what corrodes are the remains of the fat. And then cure that which is left until it is healed.
Capitol. xlviii.
Of the perforation of abscesses where pus flows out.
These abscesses where pus flows out are of the species of scrofulous, hard tumors, which contain a lump that is extracted.
And of those that contain humidity, they must be incised on the lunar phase segment according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all that is in the abscess of pus is evacuated, then you fill it with cotton and leave it for another day.
And then let the cotton remain and be treated with suitable ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess of the nodes and scrofula is, then you incise thereupon thus as we have said in the section on scrofula equally.
And if the plague is extended to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery to it according to what we have previously said.
Capitol. XLIX.
Of the section on abscesses that occur due to an arrow or vein.
When an arrow is broken and the string is consolidated on it, dark spots often develop into abscesses. And there are signs by which one can recognize that inflammation or abscess is due to the artery or vein: for when you press the abscess with hot objects, you feel a stridor in it.
And that which is due to the vein is round in appearance on the surface of the body.
And this section on this abscess is dangerous, and especially in those that affect the axillae, the groin, the neck, and other parts of the body; and it is large, so that its cure should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should be particularly avoided.
More about that which is due to the swelling of the opening of the artery, cut in the arterial section along its length; then open the section with clips near the artery, and detach the tunics so that it is uncovered.
Then place a needle there and make it penetrate into the other vessel, and reinforce the artery with a double stitch in two places, — which causes you to suture in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then puncture the area between the threads with a needle while it is still bleeding, and dissolve the abscess by allowing it to be fully discharged.
Then administer treatment in which powder is applied while the sutures are being removed; and cure that with suitable ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to the section of a vein, then take what you can grasp with your hand from the abscess and cut that area. Then insert the needle where you have grasped with your hand, and make it penetrate; and remove it in a double stitch between the two parts of the thread at its two ends, and tie the abscess with good sutures as I said in the grape stitch from two parts at the ends of the thread.
But if you fear that the thread will slip out, then insert the needle at that spot and keep all the abscess from the first incision of the needle, and strengthen your four threads at four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle location where when seated upon it, you incise the excess of the cord, and leave what is on it tied.
Then place the powder you have soaked in wine and oil over it, and administer the cure which is made with cloths and ointments until it is healed.
Cap off the abscess which occurs due to nerve compression.
Similarly, when an abscess occurs in an artery or a vein, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is percussion or excessive work on them.
And it is most frequent in the areas of the helpers or the thigh, or in any area where the joints are loose.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it is located in the major portions of his body. When pressed with force, the patient shows signs of distress.
And it is not an abscess located in the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left off, and he is able to move freely without going forward or backward.
Therefore, what affects the joints should not be considered caused by iron, for strong metal can cause contraction.
But what affects the head or the forehead causes the chain to be fastened with spasm. But if it is a small abscess, then apply heat and cut out the affected area.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a pin, excise the affected area, and stitch it up; and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol.lix.
Of the section of boil that occurs on the cheek that affects the abdomen.
Some men have been observed with swellings in their abdomens and in other parts of their bodies. These swellings are called fungals due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is subtle, and the head of that which is affected is large; and the lips of those are convulsed, some being small, and some being greatly swollen.
And I have seen one case where in the abdomen there were two swellings that resembled fungi, and there was no difference between those white ones, due to their subtle root.
And the lips of those were inverted and split, and moisture flowed from them continuously.
Then I incised those and opened one on the foot that was eighteen inches long, and the other that was six inches long.
And in the operation of their incision, consider whether the swelling is humid, and the color of the swelling is white, humid, with a subtle root; then you incise it with great spatum (sharpness), and have it cauterized in the fire, for convulsions should be expelled by thoroughly drying them out. If you find the sanc (pus), cauterize that area.
And if the patient is afraid and fearful, guard yourself from inserting a needle; rather when you take lead filings of recent making, strengthen that part, the manner of which we have said; and leave it for two days.
And adjust closely to the constriction of the lead wire; therefore, do not cease strengthening the lead gradually in that part, until it is cut and falls by itself.
But if the part is of great thickness, then in its insertion there is some cause for fear and horror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you cut the majority of it, and then cauterize that area so that it does not return.
And then cure that once the wound is healed.
And beware that you do not presume to insert any part which is of dusky color, with little sensation, or looks suspicious, for such is often cancer.
And I will come back in mind to the sick nearby.
Capitol. lii.
For the cure of hernia around the navel.
Hernia around the navel is caused by various causes; or by fissures in the diaphragm which is above the belly, and the lining or intestine protrudes according to where it ends in other ruptures; or by an abscess which flows from a vein or artery as mentioned, or by congestion narrowed within it.
More specifically, if it is due to a diaphragm fissure and the lining's swelling, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body; and the pain is severe, often appearing in various locations. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the location of that area differs from what we have described, with greater diversity in severity. When you press on that area with your fingers, the pain diminishes and soon returns. The area feels hard and you should use warm baths and vigorous work to introduce them.
If by humidity, when you press with your hand it is apparent and not concealed, neither compressed nor cracked.
And if by scorching, when these signs appear the abscess turns blackish in color.
If by no flesh, when the abscess is severe, large, and hard, and is filled according to a quantity.
If by dampness, when you touch it, it is soft.
And the operation in it is that you consider when the prominence of the navel is by scorching from an artery, or a vein, or by dampness; and then you must be forbidden from treating it, for there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the Capitol where I said about abscesses from arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is by the intestine or the hernia, then you must command the patient to have his own urine, and stand extended. Then carefully examine around the entire navel, and command him to stand with his hands on his hips. Then circumscribe with liquid soap around the area you examined with the tent. Extend the size of the abscess upward by about an inch or two. Finally, apply a strong adhesive or bandage in the manner of binding properly.
And then extend the middle of the abscess over the membrane and insert your finger in that space to find the intestine; and if you have touched it or handled it with the membrane, then extract it quickly and push the intestine into the internal parts of the abdomen.
And if you have touched the membrane, then take an oath; and cut away the superfluous parts of it.
But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circumvent that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put them into those two strong threads and insert two needles in the circuit you have made around the abscess in the manner of a cross, making them penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want, hold the needles and let the area extend and drop by itself; or cut that part when it becomes thin and can fall off, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to flesh or moisture, then drain the abscess as we have said and remove the pus or moisture, which you find there, and then treat the wound with ointments until it heals and consolidates the area.
Capitol liiii.
Of the cure of cough.
We have already said, in the division, of kinds of cough and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is advisable in them to treat without causing an ulcer; and we have said about a cough generated by the manner and care of its treatment.
And the ancients said that some kinds of cough are in places where the eradication of it is possible, thus from the chest which is in the breasts or in the thighs and similar members, one should extract all of it, especially when it begins small.
But when it is old and is great, I cannot say that it has proper qualities, for I cannot heal from such an illness nor have I seen another, nor one that is cured by this method.
And the operation for it is as follows: when it is located as we have said, you should first remove the illness and purge of black bile several times, then drain it, if an obvious full collection is found.
And then prepare the patient for operation, placing him in a position where the surgery can be performed, and ensure that you secure his limbs so they reach the area; and properly curve all sides of the couch to allow a thorough excision without damaging any vital parts of his body. Let the blood flow, and do not stop it too quickly, and press the areas, and wipe away the gross blood with your hand or an instrument at your disposal.
But if you encounter a large flow of blood from a vein or artery, then cauterize that area once the flow of blood has ceased, and treat it with another method until it is healed.
Capitol. liv.
Of the cure for dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division the species of dropsy caused by water, and the signs of each species, as well as the cure for them using medicines.
And that which is cured by iron is nothing but the specialty of lithiasis alone, and it is not approximated to the specialty of tympanists nor to the specialty of hypochondriacs, for this is mortal.
And when you have medicated this specialty of tympanist hypochondriac with medicines and your treatment does not succeed, consider that if the patient has already achieved debility in the limbs or another illness like hypochondria, as if it is in their lungs or abdominal organs and similar to those, then do not medicate them with iron, for there is fear of this.
But if you see the patient in good health with no other illness than hypochondria only, and neither young nor old, then the manner of the operation for them is that you elevate the limb between your hands, and apply pressure to the abdomen with your hand, pushing the water out through the opening of the urethra, and then take a thorn spasm according to this form:
it should be of two sharp parts long, with a sharp end like a thorn; but it should have some small thickness to prevent you from entering the intestine during the operation and damaging it.
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the bowels, for when you touch the section it is away from the navel by the quantity of three digits to the lateral parts left of it on its upper part.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to disease of the liver, then your section is left of the navel by three digits.
And if the generation of it is due to the liver, then your section is on the right side.
And you must not place your section on the side where the pain is felt, for then the superfluities will flow to that area.
And then puncture the entire length of the canal with your instrument, and insert it into that section, elevate your hand above the spout between the canal and the sponge, and you draw off that fluid; if it is the quantity of an egg or more.
And then puncture the sponge so that the fluid reaches the desired location, which is where the water is. And then extract it and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver catheter. It is made of silver or gold or copper, on the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and the end is incised in the manner of a feather, as you can see:
And at the end of the instrument there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the water, it often lets some of the water pass through the hole in a small quantity; for if you evacuate more than can fit in the hourglass, the patient may quickly die from resolution of his animal spirit, or it might bring about his death within five days.
But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue and according to how you interpret the signs of the patient's condition from his pulse and the quality of his urine.
And then extract the instrument, and retain the fluid which causes it, for it is often retained by the string that holds it above the cyst where you have perforated it according to this manner.
And then repeatedly apply the instrument to the patient if they tolerate this, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days out of fear, and be careful not to immerse them in water but only slightly.
If you fear for the patient, and allow a great quantity of water, then cure that with burial in sandy soil, and sprinkling with wet sponges in bath, and under the sun wait for a long time; and cure that with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the mesentery and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Capitol lv.
For the treatment of children whose urine outlets are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are born with the belly of their mother closed, and the opening of their mixture is not perforated (or is strictly closed or not in its proper place).
Then cover the opening in the flank as soon as it appears with a thin moist sponge according to this form:
Then place a thin lead peg in the wound and tie it up, and let it be for three days or for four.
And when he wants to urinate let him do so; then return it up.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on the area will not let this close.
But the one from which you have withdrawn should be treated with a lead peg, as we have said, for several days before it is enlarged.
But those in which you have withdrawn it not from its place, are said to be caused by stones. The stone that is native and the wound should be placed at the end of the tail of the penis so that urine cannot pass through the inside parts; while raising the penis with your hand above the outside parts; and this is not a generation, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus according to its right course, and it is an illness that remains.
And the manner of the operation on him is that the patient is placed face down, and then extend the head of the penis towards your left hand with strong extraction, and incise the head of the head of the penis at the place of perpucium with a sharp blade, thus as if it were an incision of a feather, or any part you do not cut at all, so that the middle of him comes seeming like the head of the penis and that I pull it down into the middle location according to what is convenient.
And beware in your operation on the flux of urine, if you notice any motes accidently arise; and pause for him at that which you are about to incise, and cure the wound within until it is healed.
Capitol LXVI.
Of the white substance that occurs in the prepuce, at the head of the penis, with corruption and blackening, and adhesion of the prepuce to the head of the penis.
Motes visible occur in this white substance on the penis and form a raised fleshly prominence.
And of these two, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
Non-malignant, take a thin cord and cut through that in which that whole mass is contained; then place your hand over it to immerse it in Egyptian ointment; then apply fine-willow-leaf ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is malignant, of a white color, then you should apply a cautery near its incision and around it.
If the abscess is in the foreskin of the head of the penis in an uncircumcised individual, and one part of the abscess is inside the foreskin and another part outside, then you should remove the abscess that is inside at the beginning before it becomes consolidated; then cure the part outside. For when you cure this part along with the foreskin, it is not assured that it will not be torn.
And examine the conditions in the groins and in the foreskin for blackening and corruption. Then you should evacuate all that which is already darkened and which is about to腐烂或已经腐烂；然后在其上画线，使用蜂蜜，它由陈紫罗兰粉、经过筛过的琥珀屑和穿孔的珍珠粉混合而成。
And then attend to that while the other treatment heals.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
A lunar cautery is used in two positions together, either for a flow of blood or during the plague when it has broken out.
And if the head of the ulcer is corroded and is completely destroyed within an hour, then you must insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the prepuce so that the disease excretes through it.
In the adhesion of the prepuce (with this adhesion not occurring in those from whom the prepuce is absent, and upon which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to the plague or an abscess), you must excoriate with a blunt instrument while the glue is dissolved and the head of the ulcer is released from all parts.
And if it is difficult to excoriate them thoroughly, then you must excoriate with a blunt instrument some part of the head of the ulcer and the prepuce, and this is because when the prepuce is thin and light, it is perforated slightly by its thinness.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis a piece of the thin skin, which is already softened by the hot cautery so that it does not adhere again.
And then let it be cauterized with a cautery when it is consolidated.
Capitol. lvii.
On the purification of children and the treatment of what occurs to those who have been circumcised.
Circumcision is not a solution for continuity in the same way as other wounds: nevertheless, since it is of our operation and our will, and those of others are properly in children, it is necessary that we assign to that the best operation and the lightest possible way, losing ourselves in health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not use circumcision in any of their free men, for they do not use it in their laws, and this is only because we have acquired knowledge through experience. The reason is that I have examined the majority of artisans and barbers who use circumcision and purification with a knife and with cautery; and they use ointment with honey and incision with ungual matter.
And I have already tried all these methods and cannot find a better modification using scissors, or gum Arabica instead of wax, which in modification like this, the wax escapes from above, for the string of the foreskin is in two tunics, and I loosen the outer tunic and strengthen the light one, so as to avoid another incision and certain pain. And in the circumcision performed by clippers, it is digital, which shoemakers use, but the incision at the end of the male member is not secured, for it strongly enters into the tissue.
But in the operation with wax, you must use iron and corrupt your own operation. And the string of the child is short by nature, and in such a manner that it does not need circumcision, and I have seen this.
But concerning the circumcision done with scissors and gum Arabica, its quality is good, as I have experienced. For the scissors cause a proportional incision, so that the sharpness above is as sharp as the sharpness below; therefore, when you press your hand proportionally on two points of sharpness, and cut according to one comparison in one time; and it is made a compression of gum Arabica in a figure containing the string of the foreskin from all sides, by which no error can be committed.
And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie mostly if it is among those who understand a little, that you do not do so except that you tie the faeces in its anus only, and let it out the next day.
And then comfort it in every way that is possible for what receives its intelligence. And then place it among your legs properly prepared, and do not be more than a hundred; and hide the scissors in your hand or hold them behind your back so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the anus and blow into the rectum, and pull that out so that it expands the head of the anus, and then modify that which is added to it by deafness.
The shape of the forceps after modification, this is the form:
If the fingers are not trimmed at the tips and the others are trimmed, let the stem of the key form the handle, and let the length of the two cutting edges be as long as the length of two equal-sized handles.
More importantly, the error in modification is that if you accidentally remove the intrinsic ligament entirely or partially, you must redo the incision.
Therefore, ensure that you extend that one in your hand before the incision site and make the incision with equality.
And if you cannot hold it in your hand, then extend it with an uncus and make the incision.
But if more than three days have passed, and it remains swollen with an abscess, then you let the abscess be incised with a cautery, and excise that for ease of treatment, and section it according to how you are prepared.
And guard the head of the abscess, for if not done properly, it might lead to complications.
And therefore treat that part where the wound consolidates with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised beyond measure, and you obey the rules above, this will not cause harm.
And therefore treat that part as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol. lviii.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction due to a stone or a hot infection, or by pus or flesh, and resembles those we have mentioned in our section on the methods of treatment.
And if what we have said is not dissolved, then strongly make the cause known to the patient, and know that you should administer extraction with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and should be thin and hollow, like a quill in subtlety as long as half a palm, at the end of which should be a thin canula.
And the method of urination extraction through this is that you take the syringe folded and tie it at the end with good thread or fine twine; then insert the ends of the syringe into the part left by the incision, and cut any excess from the thread with scissors if needed. Then firmly push the syringe in with vigor, and quickly withdraw the syringe with your hand and the thumb.
And make a cut in the patient's side, and pour urine from his bladder and groin with mixed oils, olive oil, and vinegar.
And then introduce the probe to facilitate its passage to the urethra; and then fold the foreskin upwards at the point of incision; and then push the probe inside to reach the bladder; and then push it further until it reaches the cause below, ensuring it is correctly positioned. If this order is not followed, the meat in which it is placed will become tortuous.
And then gradually insert the thread into the wool, for urine will harden the wool.
Then remove it and use urine for treatment, and apply the probe continuously until the bladder and patient are adequately relieved.
Capitol.lix.
Of the quality of bladder cleansing, use clamps and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When an ulcer or abscess occurs in the bladder, or there is a burning sore there, or it is constricted by edema, and you want to distill waters and medicines into that area, then make an instrument which is called clampcedra, and this is its form:
so that at the extremity of it is closed, so it is clausa. And in that there are three cuts: two from one side, thuswise.
At the beginning it is concave, in which that which is pushed enters, and according to the quantity that fills it, its addition, within which when any cause is pulled by the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, then it is drawn again, and when it is expelled long, according to how it acts on the clampcedra, in which naphta is placed in the battlefields of mar.
So, when you want to prevent humidities in the bladder, insert the extremity of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw from it what is pushed to the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the cavity of the clampcedra.
And then insert the distal end of the cedar stick into the vagina as we instructed in the surgery; and then push the moisture away as you push, for that moisture will quickly reach the bladder, and the illness will center there.
The form of the subtle catheter through which the bladder is catheterized, and that is the form:
And it should be made of silver or copper, with its head resembling a small feather, and insert the thread inside the lint.
And then take a bladder and place the moisture that you want to catheterize in the bladder. Then tie it tightly with a double thread of silk, and heat that moisture over the fire.
And then insert the distal end of the catheter into the vagina.
And then strengthen your hand over the bladder as the moisture is drawn down, ensuring that the illness centers where that moisture has reached the bladder.
If you do not have a bladder present, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; perforate that circle completely round; then insert strong thread through all those holes as they are turned around; then return the circle as it is fastened alsofatur, placing your hand in the part where you wish to locate the humidity, and smell and wash it.
Then you tie that with the instrument and do so with it as you have done with the bladder, and place your hand there so that the humidity reaches the bladder.
Capitol.lx.
Of the extraction of gravel.
We have already mentioned in the division the species of gravel and its treatment with medicines, and the difference between gravel generated in the kidneys and gravel generated in the bladder, as well as the signs of the latter.
And we have mentioned the gravel for which major surgery is performed, and excision.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is inserted in the bladder.
And I am now narrating that amendment, manifestation, and abbreviation.
Therefore, I say that the stone generated in the bladder most often affects children; and the signs of it are that urine expelled from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears with that sand; and gout rubs its thigh, motes appear greenish, and soon becomes dressed; and for this the buttocks are shaved instead of those.
And this is the recovery of children within which they have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in old age. More in the young, it occurs through that which is between them.
And of that which is greater in the stone and the cure is easier; And if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we arrive at the cure of that, begin with the treatment that modifies gout by using a cristerry which excretes through all the opening which is in their intestines; for that opening sometimes prohibits the formation of the stone and leads to its inquiry.
And then place the patient's feet and ensure they are stretched out straight so that the sole descends to the neck of the bladder, or that it touches the locus or a few inches from it.
And then place those you have prepared under your hands, while the others remain with the patient, so that the bladder is made to hang down toward the parts left.
And then apply that and the whole region.
And if you feel the sole in the space, then immediately apply heat to it.
And if you do not feel the sole with your touch, then ensure that you anoint it with oil from your little finger of your left hand, if the patient is a child, or from your thumb if the patient is an adult, and insert this into its anus. And apply heat to the sole while you touch it with your finger. And gradually insert that into the neck of the bladder.
And then press upon that area as you have said, and expel that to the outer parts. Look for the place from which it came.
And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand; and command another minister to extend the genitals to the upper parts, and with his other hand retract the penis which is below, at the location where the incision is made.
And then insert a speculum; this is the form of it: And cut in it what is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle location, ahead of the left thigh; and let the incision be on that bone which you said is at the anus, and make a transverse incision, so that the incision outward is wide and inward narrow according to the quantity that flowed from the bone is possible, and not larger, for we can barely contain the incision which is at the anus. The bone should have the incision, and it is fashioned as a hole with a certain capability.
And be aware that there is sometimes an angle or edge in the stone, which makes extraction difficult for this reason.
And of that which resembles a lion's gallbladder, and is round, and through it a light extraction is made.
And if there is one that has angles and edges, adjust it in the crack.
And if it is not thus removed, then you must probe it carefully, or strengthen it properly with a gesture decently performed. The end of which should be like a file on which you strengthen the stone, and do not evade from it; or insert a thin instrument under its curved end into it.
But if you cannot do this, then enlarge it a little, and if you wish to have a flow of blood, incise it strongly with vitriolic acid.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you push your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it slightly; and then push a little in that place; and similarly do if its spots are more than two.
And if the stone is very large, it is ignorance on your part to cut such a large section, for you will either cause the patient to die or lead them to continuous difficulty in urination, which is why the area is not fully consolidated.
Administer the expulsion of the stone when it is inside so that it may be expelled, or use forceps in the fracture of the bone to extract it from the wound.
Then, after you have completed your operation, fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place it over the soaked cloth in oil and wine, or in infused oil and water, so that the abscess may yield.
Then lift the patient's head on their pillow, and do not remove the bandage on the seventh day.
And when you have removed it, moisten the area with water and some oil, and then apply that part with diafinicon ointment and balsam ointment until it is healed.
If in the wound you encounter an abscess that is hard and corrosive, and appears as if the blood is frozen in the bladder, and through it urine flow is prohibited (this is known as the discharge of blood through urine), then insert your said instrument into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains it will cause corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And then wash the wound with warm water and salt, and oppose all spices, using what you find suitable for the cure until it is healed.
And note the hours throughout the entire cure that you have done between the thighs and applied the medicines which are placed over the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, and urine flow is prohibited, then cure it by doing what I have recommended before reaching the section; for too many operations for this treatment are accused of causing dryness; and now I will explain this, that you take a metal auger, of which this is the form:
of triangular shape, sharp, inserted in the fist.
And then take honey, and tie it around the vein, letting the pear rest so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the iron into the vein, piercing with ease where the puncturer will go to that pear. And you rotate the puncturer with your hand in that pear little by little, and you complete the puncture where you have made the one on the other part; for the urine is quickly released.
And then press your hand on what is damaged from the pear of the part beyond the vein, for that is cracked, and the hole is filled with urine, and the patient is cured.
But if this cure is not possible due to some cause that prevents it, then tie honey around the pear, and another piece of honey above the pear. And then bind over the pear on that vein between two bandages. And then extract it there. And then remove the string and modify the abscess, which is made in the wound.
And you do not need to use thread of silk for the kidney, but only to prevent it from returning to the bladder. The other thread above this, for when the bile is removed near the disease of the kidney, the stone returns to its place and heals the wound.
And for this, you must raise the stone to the parts above when you remove the bile, or it will return and take its place, and the wound will heal as we have said.
Capitol. lxix.
On the extraction of kidney stones in women.
Stone in women is less commonly generated.
Yet if a stone does occur in any of them, the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by too many methods.
One of them is that a woman who is very light is a virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is well educated who will tell the doctor whether she is a virgin, or has been married.
The third is that you do not find a woman who is well versed in this art, especially the operation more so.
And the fourth is that the location of the section above the pubis in women is far from the location of the pubis, so you need a prolonged section, and there is fear in that area.
But if necessity prompts you to do this, then ensure that you use an old woman who is well educated, and one is rarely found.
But if you are lacking in that, then seek an old and subtle woman, or present an experienced matron well versed in the affairs of women, or a woman who is part of this art.
Then have that woman present, and command her to do everything you tell her, from the inquiry about the pubis to the beginning; the reason for this is to check if the woman is a virgin, so she must put her finger in the woman's anus and feel for the pubis.
Then if you find it, cut it out and leave his said part, and then command him to rest over it.
May be if it is not a vein, then command the midwife to insert his said part into the wound of the patient and inquire about the stone, while placing his left hand on the bladder, and ensure that she maintains a good grip.
Then if you find it, gradually moisten that area from the opening of the bladder to the parts, leaving some of its virtue so that it reaches the depth of the thigh.
And then command him to insert the application of strength into the wound. Place the depth of the thigh in any part where he is stopped and center the stone in that part, so that his said part is not damaged by the stone, cut it out.
And the section should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that section, and if the stone is felt, then adjust the section according to the quantity he knows the stone will be removed from there.
And know that the grains of pepper are spots: some are small and large, lion and pungent, long and round, and having ridges.
And you know what grains of pepper are so that you may signify about what you want.
And if you want a flow of blood, apply vitriol trioxide to the area for one hour until the blood is absorbed, and then return to your operation after the pepper has been removed.
And make sure to prepare the instruments you mentioned for the extraction of pepper in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you want a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then apply powder to the area, strengthen it with powders, and strictly do not repeat this; leave the pepper and do not extract it, for strong pain will ensue. And then cure the wound.
When the heat of the blood has passed after several days, and the place is healed, then you return to your operation when the swelling has subsided.
Chapter LXII.
On the section about inguinal hernia.
Hernia aquaosa is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white chyle, which is left by the chain of the genital juices containing the humor, and is named chyle.
And sometimes it is in the own chylific tissue, which nature prepares in the part of the humor before it is cooked and becomes another humor; and this is the chain of the genital juice among the white chyle, which we have said, and it is not this but tart.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the genitals, because this material infiltrates into them. Sometimes it occurs due to percussion made on the genitals.
And this humidity, having streaks of color, may be yellowish or bloody or red, or black and floury, or white watery, and this is the most common.
And the signs by which one knows where this addition of water is located are these: if it is in the white cell (bladder) as we have said, then the abscess is round, slightly tapering in length like a fig, and shows the root, for the moisture contains that from all parts.
And if the moisture is in the proper parenchyma, then the abscess is round, departing from the fig, and for this reason one estimates that it is another fig.
And if the moisture is between the root and the white cell (bladder), then cut open the bladder.
And to know the color of the moisture, you should draw out the color of the moisture in the abscess through an incision where the form is preceded; and according to what happens in the trace of the incision, judge what is inside it.
Then when we come to the treatment of it, you should command the patient to have a bloodletting if this is within your capability, and press his body well.
And then he is laid supine on his back on some cause a little rug or cloth, and places the head on the pillow.
And then set yourself on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand on his right side, who extends his spear from one side to the other, reaching from the iliac crest to the ribcage.
And then take a spatula and split the iliac crest at the midpoint along its length, close to the pelvis.
And the section should be made according to right proportion, equally distant from the line where you shall split the skin of the iliac area, until it reaches the white muscle beneath.
And excise that, and observe, and guard it for this: you must not invade that; your excision from which you are excising should be suspended over the highest and most subtle part, and carefully examine the excision according to the quantity within your reach.
And then puncture the muscle full of fluid with a wide hole, and extract all the fluid.
And then separate between the two labias of the section with pins, and extend the cut upwards; and do not touch the chain of the genitalia, and incise the cut in that manner which is possible to you. And incise that completely or in parts, especially its fine underside; for if you do not carefully examine the incision, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
Mais if the humour proceeds from within his genitalia during your operation, when you have completed the incision of the cut, return inside that, and carefully suture the two labias of the genitalia, and carefully treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the humour corrupted by another illness, then ligate the vessels which are over the suspensory, extract the humour, and carefully treat that as we have said.
But if the water is aggregated in two parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part as you have done in the other equally; and if it appears to you to be a simple operation, then do so.
And then you clean the blood, and interpose in the sections wool soaked in oil or rubbed oil; and place another wool over it which you have soaked in vinegar and oil, and extend that over two genii et miraculum ventri; and place above cloths folded and powders, and lay those above bran according to this form:
And then place two cloths and fill them with finely shredded wool according to this likeness; and make the ends which are pressed with a clot or wet wool, and attach them to the structure in the waistband of the trousers, one end grasping the buttocks inside the other, and the second end grasping the back of the thigh, and two ends leave over the thighs, and two other ends over the hips, and all the structure be fitted into the waistband of the trousers.
And sometimes this hernia is artificially treated with a cautery at the section instead of iron; and you grasp a fine surgical cautery and incise there at the cord of the genii, and it is ignited as we have recommended until the white chaf is uncovered containing the water, and then you take the cautery in this form: and it resembles Greek letters.
And then puncture that blister, and ignite within it to expel all the moisture.
And then lance the blister with needles, and incise it with needles, and cauterize it with a fine, ignited cautery; and cut away that portion as much as is possible in order to eradicate it entirely; and guard against the smoke so that the fire does not reach it.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from the danger of infection, and better than an operation with incision.
But if you encounter a contrary condition and need to apply a cautery during the incision time or during the cautery time, or in case of infection, then treat that contrary condition as you would any other, applying the appropriate cure as described.
But if the patient is fearful and does not expect the second operation due to its horror, then administer a puncture as I advise; and when you are certified by what we have said about the signs, that hernia is dangerous.
When you need to cut the abscess on some elevated part, then puncture the boil at the lower part of it with a lancet, and place the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let the view be wide enough to contain all the water.
And place yourself properly over the area, touch that part and leave the other, so that the water may flow smoothly. And place it properly so that the wound may be healed.
But if contrary to the flow of water at that time you puncture it: this is not done except because the white linen in the orifices of the wound causes a contrary effect and prohibits the efflux of water. Then you must place in the wound a pledget or instrument from which water is extracted from the dropsy, the form of which is precedented; or apply a small sponge to the swelling of the wound.
And know that the water returns, and is gradually expelled over about six months or until it is fully discharged; and when it is gathered, then puncture it according to that method, so that the abscess may pass its days.
Capitol LXIII.
On the section about fleshly hernia and its cure.
Know that in the section about this hernia, there is a danger of losing important bodily functions; for I have seen cases where the release of the hernia led to saving the patient's life.
And I recall the operation in that case and the types of abscesses involved.
Therefore, I say that abscesses naturally occur in the tissues where the glands are located, and this happens for various causes: either due to acute excessive heat, which is infused into the glands, or due to a blow.
And the color of the abscess depends on the color of the tissue, and pain does not affect it; it is a severe abscess.
And the abscess is firm and blackened, of which the color is dark, and there is no tremor in it.
And sometimes abscesses form due to the congelation of the arteries, and due to inflammation of those vessels, as you can recall, or due to inflammation of the veins.
More than this, that which is due to the inflammation of arteries is known as the dispersion of the abscess when one comes upon it at those places said; and not to touch it.
More than this, that which is caused by the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause; you must apply compression to those places.
And it is possible that section be made on this species and on other tissues; for you incise the cord of the testicles, then place the probe above the parts above, and extract that from the white chord, and deliver the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them, and incise the suspensory ligament after you deliver that from all parts of the abdominal parts.
Then if the abdomen is already consolidated with those tissues, you must extract the probe and incise it.
And if there is an adhesion due to any cause in the abdomen, or between what is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it with a round incision.
If the natural flesh is in the place of adhesion which is behind, then delve into everything that belongs to it, and extract the humor as we have said.
Then when your operation is complete, fill the wound with wool soaked in rubbed oil and wine; and place it over the other dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV.
Of the cure of hernia that is external.
It is an apostema enveloped by some envelope similar to a blister, and it makes physical exercise, movement, and walking on the affected side difficult.
And in the cure of this illness, there is a fear of what precedes it, which is remembered.
However, proceed with the operation according to how we have described the first steps.
And I say that you should suspend the affected side on an elevated cushion; then attach the scrotal suspensory to the parts below; and place the inguinal ligament on your thumbs, which are tested against the thigh; and have another minister assist you, extending those with a strong extension.
And then incise with a sharp blade transversely through the middle of the vessels among which the vessels are uncovered.
And then excise from all parts thus as we have said in the extraction of arteries which are in the temples.
And then place a needle in which there is double thread, and tie that at the beginning of the places where you cut, and tie the other end at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle place with a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is added from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then cure the wound by the treatment of other wounds in which you wish healing to be generated so that it causes the vessels which do not nourish one of two essences, for this is not harmful.
But if you cut all the vessels, then ensure that the testicles are extracted or that they wither due to the cutting of the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nutrition due to the incision of the vessels, and that they become established, or that they wither by themselves and do not have vigor.
Capitol lxv.
Of the cure for intestinal hernia.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a rupture that extends from the ciphac (pubis) over the abdomen, through the muscles of the abdomen. Because of this rupture in the intestines, some of the intestines protrude.
And this rupture is either from the pubis or from the inguinal region. These two species occur due to various causes: from a blow, from jumping, from shouting, from lifting something heavy, or from similar actions.
And the sign of this, when it is due to extension from the pubis, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time and does not happen suddenly. It is an abscess that develops within the tissue, causing the pubis to compress the intestine.
And the sign of this is when it is due to a rupture from the pubis; at the beginning, it causes sudden and intense pain; it is an abscess that appears differently from the visible wound nearby. This is due to the pressure on the intestine, and the body's reaction in the regions surrounding the pubis.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the skin, and this hernia is called intestinal bubal.
And sometimes it is caused by distension, and sometimes a hole forms in the intestine, where it is stopped up, and this causes great discomfort to the patient, and sometimes it becomes painful, especially when pressed.
And in the treatment of the symptoms of this illness there is fear, because it is feared that the examination should be avoided.
And the method of the operation is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with his hand at the internal parts of his cavity if he obeys in his return, and then tie it over his collarbone between your hands, and lift the patient's chest.
And then stretch the cord which supports the cord of the testicles upwards, and incise the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then place two fingers at the cut section according to where you need to open the section.
And if the section according to the quantity that it is possible for you to be perforated from there, let it be.
And then excise that swelling which they leave of the cord of the testicles, while the white hard swelling of each part is uncovered.
And then you insert the tip of your knife into what is seceded from the testicle, in between the white swelling, which is left of the cord of the stone, and between the swelling behind, and release any adhesion that is in the rear part of the stone.
And then place your hand on the parts in front of the testicles, and with this extend the white swelling with your left hand, and elevate the stone between the swelling and the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the stone upwards while you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a solution.
And near the tips said that there is no cause for the intestine enveloped in the white hard swelling. If you find any cause in him, then you remove that to the abdomen.
And then incise in the part left of the cord of the testicles by section of which flows pus and healing as we have recommended in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil, and place it on the wound; apply the plaster which we have recommended (and after several applications the white cloth is cauterized, which we have mentioned near the incision of the fear of pus flow, for several days this occurs). Leave the plaster until it falls off by itself.
But if the dressing is delayed, then apply warm water and place it on that area until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method for treating wounds until it is healed.
Capitol. lxvi.
On hernia ventosa.
In this hernia, nothing has been seen that has been burned during the treatment of it.
And the first ones said that it is done this way as we have described in the hernia case; which is to tie the vessels near the section at that facilitation of his; and dry out in the middle place around the apostema with what I operate there, before the vessels fall.
And cure the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disorder that occurs in the ankles.
In some cases, there is a rupture in the ankles as we have said, and you must treat the area.
And the geniuses do not attribute any cause of the intestines to the genius; and if they do attribute one, it is rare; and return them to their normal position in all cases.
But if the time is prolonged at this, there is an adjusted fissure in the chiasm where descend the intestine into the chiasm; and this happens due to the extension of the chiasm, which is in the ankles as we have said, the cause being that the chiasm is extended, and nearby it becomes softened and the area becomes an apostema and exudes.
And the cure for it is with a cautery as it is preceded by the narration of it.
Sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and the patient lies on his side between your hands, and then the area of the rupture of the abscesses dries out by exsanguination according to the width as much as three fingers.
And then strengthen the white cloth that is under as it is uncovered.
And then take the wick and place it over the prominent area of the cloth, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then stitch the two prominent areas over the ends of the wick of the cloth, and adjust them with the stitches one to another.
And then extract the end of the wick, and do not go through the entire cloth, nor extend the hole, nor any other cause as I have faith in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure that in the treatment of wounds, and as you incise the flanks, clean it and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the cloth contracts and does not adjust the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this place, for it is more closely related to health.
Chapter LXXVIII.
On the mollification of the scrotal skin.
When the scrotal skin becomes discolored in some men, it is softened because the flesh between there is softened, and care must be taken of it.
Then it is necessary for the one who cares for the treatment to let the patient lie according to their condition, and entirely over the part that is softened above the natural scrotal skin; and then he should bring together the two edges at the suture.
And if you wish, sew in the beginning the excess of the softened scrotal skin with three or four stitches and a firm suture.
And then incise between the sutures; and afterwards care for the treatment of the other wounds until it is healed and the stitches fall out.
Capitol lxix.
Of castration.
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for cause it is permitted to me to remember it in this treatise; and the remembering of it is necessary for two reasons, of which one is that when asked about it as a physician, one knows the treatment for those who suffer from it; and the other reason is that we may have occasion to castrate other beasts for our young ones, such as boars, goats, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore say that castration is performed in two ways: either by incision or by making a cut with forceps.
But in that which is performed by incision, the way of the operation is to kill the beast in cold water so that its genitals are softened and limp while hanging. And then take those organs in your hand so that they are relaxed and do not show marks upon touch.
In case of castration caused by fissure and secution, make sure you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles with your left hand.
Then suspend the ligament, and incise over each groove between two processes.
Then incise those wounds that you have made with each incision. And do not leave any on the flap for any cause, but use the fine thread which is on the needles.
And this method of castration is better which is done by traction, for traction firmly leaves no cause of the testicles because the beast desires copulation.
Then cure the wound while it is healing.
Chapter 70.
On the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men is according to two methods: one where a female characteristic appears between the testicle cord, specifically between two testicles, with features resembling those of a woman.
And sometimes a flow of urine comes from that channel in the scrotum.
In women, it is special: and the channel of the woman around the pentelnil (vagina) is such that it has two parts somewhat like the testicles of a man, slightly different in that they extend outward like the scrotum of a man.
And the treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women. And you must incise those tight muscles where the pain is felt, and then properly treat those areas with the treatment for other wounds.
And in the second kind for men from which urine flows from the channel of the testicles, neither treatment nor operation is performed.
Chapter 21.
On the labia and flesh protruding due to causes in women.
Labia majora are usually adjusted over natural causes where it is stretched and is seen in appearance; sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads like in men and distends during intercourse.
Then you should have the excess mucus in your hand or a vessel and discard it.
And do not leave it in a vessel, especially in the presence of the patient, to prevent a flow of sweat.
And then care for the wounds until they are healed.
More hidden flesh is flesh that arises in the horror of the mother until it fills that space; and a large cyst is situated outside the parts according to the likeness of a string (and for this some first called it "caudata malitia"); therefore, we should cut it as we cut mucus, and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter 72.
On the care of alopecia.
Alopecia is when the hair of the woman is not perforated, or is lost in small amounts. And it can be natural or accidental.
Accidental pain is due to an illness that has preceded, and that is caused by flesh not fitting well or by a subtle or thick chafe.
It is felt in the knee, or in the sides of the leg, or in the upper part of the leg, or in the lower part of the leg, and you prohibit coughing and intercourse and childbirth, and strongly you prohibit menstruation.
The knowledge of that is made by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is obvious, carefully; more so if it is not obvious, then you seek that area with your fingers or by touch.
More so if the obstruction is due to a subtle chafe, and is close to the two lips, then you probe and dislodge that.
And you place powder on the two lips, and then place your fingers, indicating with both hands around the area.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs extended, and then spread the two lips with force until that subtle chafe is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place it over the area, and keep a man there to prevent the incised location from becoming consolidated.
If the abscess is large and thick, then incise it with a spatula or a leaf of mint.
If the ulcer is superficial, then suspend it with a pin, and incise it.
And use those medicines that stop the flow of venom from a bite, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and enemas, mixed with alum.
And then administer a wide leaden cannula to prevent the wound from becoming slightly consolidated.
And keep it there for several days and administer cooled water.
And then use the other consolidation treatment before it heals.
And sometimes accidents occur in the natural abundance of other tissues, then you should incise according to this manner. If this is due to an abscessed boil, for the abscessed boil that is in the greater part do not make any counter-irritation by applying a metal in any manner.
Chapter seventy-three.
For the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red boil that occurs in the groin of women.
Hemorrhoids are appreciated as the result of small veins between which there is a constant flow of pus; and as for old hemorrhoids, they are formed by ulcers.
And I have already said in the division the species of those and the signs of those, and to say likewise which receive cure and which do not receive cure.
Therefore, it is said that hemorrhoids and ulcers when in the region of the greater pelvis and do not appear to the sense, then for those do not make any cure.
But those that are in the openings of the greater pelvis on which there is sensation, are those that can be cured.
And ensure that you insert the female into many hot folds and then spread the scissors or a coarse cloth over them, and incise those areas with razors.
And then sprinkle over those wounds the flux of the juice from one of the incisive powders with seven bites, thus and seeming to those.
And then foment the soles of their feet for an hour, and then rinse that with cold water.
And if the bleeding persists, then make that incision in a decoction of sumac and of scurf peas and of walnuts and of resembling herbs.
And then take flour of wheat and apply it with honey and wine, making a plaster with this over their back.
And if the bleeding has stopped, that is good; otherwise, apply it with two vinegar compresses, and to the breasts make seven incisions.
And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of cumin or in the juice of pennyroyal or in the juice of hyssop with seasoned wine, and apply it to the area; and then dress the area with ointment until it heals.
And cure that which is within and make it healthy.
Capitol.lix.
On the perforation of the eye in the center.
Various special cases of abscesses occurring in the center, such as carbuncle, abscess, ulcer, adenitis, erythromela, fistula hemorrhoids, and lymphadenitis, and other abscesses. And I have already mentioned these illnesses and the types of those, as well as the signs of those, and their treatments in the division.
And let it be known that I will discuss in this treatise on abscesses how to treat those that occur in the center when they are among the abscesses that heal, and if you want to know how the operation is performed for it.
Then consider if the pain in the abscess at its beginning is sharp upon percussion and flux and fever, and sometimes that reddening and if it catches over that the sensation, when noting corners of it, then treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuity of the accidents ceases.
Then you should place the woman on a couch with two couches; recline her on her sides and adjust her feet at the lower part of the abdomen, and spread her thighs, and position her arms below her hips, and have cushions of lint applied as necessary.
Then the midwife should follow the rectum straight and administer the instrument through the major orifice, the shape of which will be described in the cases that will be given below.
When you want to administer this instrument, place it along the edge of the major orifice of the woman, and what part of the instrument enters the major orifice should not be more than the edge of the orifice, and thereby treat the illness. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the artery, then cover it with powder on the wall of the artery's opening so that the instrument cannot enter the artery's opening.
And cover the vein that runs in the artery with a cloth, and let the minister hold the instrument and rotate the vein within until the openings of the artery are open.
And when the excitement appears, and it is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then cover that part by cooling the head of the patient with spiced wine.
And when the phlegm is evacuated, then cover the wound with a sponge submerged in olive oil or green olive oil in which there is some astringency; and place the wick in the opening of the artery.
And place the artery and over the ankle a clean woolen cloth submerged in water in which mallows are boiled.
And it is usually cured in about two days by applying an ointment that you mix with what is appropriate until it heals.
And sometimes the liver and wound are washed and tried with chrismated water and honey, then with water in which is boiled lily or of arum long tongue, and then returned to ointment.
And if the wound is deep within the liver, then beware that you are forbidden from treating it with iron, taking care to do as we have said in the division.
Capitol.lix.
To teach midwives how to properly treat miscarriages according to an unnatural occurrence.
A necessary cause is that the midwife know at the beginning of the labor the signs of a natural delivery. And when you see the female begin to push at the opening and desire to smell the air, and this is made wet by what comes from her, and the expulsion is quick, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and the expulsion is over her head, and the second one is either above or hanging from the navel.
Then when you see those signs, immediately compress his abdomen so that the embryo descends gently; when it is on its head, turn it to the second position, and this is cleaned of those superfluities with good purification.
That which is another to this part is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is situated on its feet and the body of the child is situated in front of the head of the child and its feet, or one of its hands, or on its side, or its head, and strongly it is converted over its neck, resembling the figures that are not praiseworthy.
It is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes, and to guard against error and deception.
And I show all the figures of these, and which engine is in them so that it may be signified by this and be placed upon this.
When the pain is situated on its head by natural means, and it is vehement for the woman and made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already weakened, then apply that sezer, or what women have for it, and evaporate the congealed menses with fenugreek and olive oil.
And then insert the needle between his so-called narrow spaces a little and open the second one, or dry out that one with its nail through which flows what is in it of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
But if it does not descend, then the woman should be rubbed with a mixture of mustard and fenugreek.
And then command her to inhale the mixture, holding it in her nostrils and mouth for about an hour, until the fetus is expelled quickly.
And if both parts of the fetus are already expelled at the beginning, then you should gradually reduce the dosage to facilitate further expulsion. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet off it, and shake the cushion over the ground; and hold the woman so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the hands are not turned inside and the wound is fatal, then incise there and extract the entrail or lay the body on your lap with a cloth and extract it equally, for that will be forth-guessed.
When the body yeys over its feet, then make sure you push those parts inwards, and gradually reduce the body size, equalizing that, and taking one foot and extending those parts gradually.
More when it is situated between the thighs, then command him to express it, and make that turn outward in a proper condition, for that will be forth-guessed if God wills.
And if it is not forth-guessed as we have recommended, then you return the body gradually back into place according to its natural figure, for that will be lightly forth-guessed.
And if all that we have recommended is prohibited, then take fine alum and dissolved gum, grind them together in the mortar for good pounding, and apply this to the back of the woman, just below the waist. And then perform that cauterization in clear water, while he manages to locate the hypochondria.
And when you see that the parts of his soul are softened, then apply a fumigation with myrtle and place it over him. And when the fumigation lasts for an hour, then perform the cauterization over a charcoal, and then make him sneeze by touching his mouth, and remove it, and apply a gentle compression to the lower part of his abdomen, which will soon cause him to urinate.
Suture the wound longitudinally with one of their hands. Gently reduce the hand back into place, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and attempt to remove it.
And if it cannot be removed, then apply pressure to the site, and shake the patient's thighs with vigorous shaking, and then administer liniments which you prepare from mucilages.
And if labor has come, then apply pressure to the abdomen, and then study the reduction of the hand, and enlarge the wound according to its natural figure, and make the woman cough and command her to breathe deeply as she expels it.
Lift the leg and spread its hands while the foot's skin is held by the mother's side. Let the midwife hold the foot and then gently rotate that part little by little, so that it becomes easier to handle.
And when it is equalized and settled, then place something over the wound that we have advised to use of oil and ointments.
And then command that it be cooled little by little. When you have done this, place the sponge on a cloth and command that it be inclined over the right side, and then command that it be wrung out thoroughly; and make it moisten the area with the mixture. The fetus's exit is prepared on the side.
When the mother experiences horrid symptoms in this manner, consider it, and then incise the second layer with your knife so that it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the foot is suspended over the face and neck of the mother, then incise the skin there, so that it is not retained and causes harm.
And then you push the child inside between the parts inward where you have placed the other, and command the woman to compress herself several times, and let it out-gently moved slightly, if God wills.
The exit of two infants or many fetuses. Know that twin spots appear several times, and sometimes three or four appear, but this is strange and hard to determine; more often they are caused by natural factors, not from within.
And count those, whether they be multiple, a second one, and are separated by clefts, distinguishing them within the ligament at the umbilicus of each. Sometimes they appear singly as if a fetus were gently moved by natural compression, and some times they appear indistinctly as if they were unmovable, as we have recounted.
And if they are difficult to distinguish, you should induce labor and proceed to what we have said about unnatural figures, then treat them as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is subtle and performs this with subtlety and delay, and is ingenious according to all form as prepared by her bringing to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and are aborted.
Sometimes embryos are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten, and you must verify that a woman who aborts has produced one, another with two altogether formed, which cause is made by the measurement of the glorious sages.
And all this covers what is in the science of the midwife who knows well that part seeming to her with so much confidence.
Capitol.lxxvi.
Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat the dead fetus where we have spoken in the division of medicine and it is not yet outside, then you must resort to surgery more. You must consider whether the woman is in good health and not among those accidents for which her danger is feared.
When the woman is laid on her back with her head inclined sideways and her thighs elevated.
And the minister should hold that [part] with two hands or tie it to the surface so that the body does not extend during the extraction.
And then moisten the mouth of the patient with olive oil and mucus from almond and fenugreek and honey.
And then the midwife should apply her hand with those oils and mucus, and place her hand with facilitation in the patient, and seek with her hand the location where the fingers are in the fetus.
Place the fingers accordingly: then consider if the fetus is ready to be born through its head, and then place your fingers in the folds of its neck, or on its collarbone, or in its mouth, or on its palate, or leave the beard area, or on the furrow of its throat, or on the proper locations of its ribs, or leave the hypochondria.
And if the discharge is from his feet, at the ankle, or in the middle of the back.
And hold the thumb with your right hand, curve it at that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, insert your hand easily and place the thumb in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the cause below.
And then place and hold another thumb, or the third if necessary, so that there is equal pressure, and not extension according to its straightness solely.
And grip it completely, so that the tension of the thumb is alleviated as is done in drawing out a tooth.
And hold it there so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then have the midwife apply some of her fingers with oil and insert them expertly and rotate them where the part is retained.
Then if the part of the bowels is forgotten, let the fingers be plunged into the place which seems full; and do so until all the bowels are forgotten.
But if the hand is inserted before the other, and it is not possible to reduce that part due to its constriction, then cover that part with a cloth; and extract it until all of it is forgotten, and incise it at the insertion of the hand or in the wrist.
And do so also with the other hand and in both feet.
But if the head of the bowels is large, or it undergoes constriction during insertion, or there is adjusted water in its head, then you must insert spiny sponge between the fingers and cut open the head to drain the water, or that you puncture it with an instrument called "alundat," the shape of which will come in the forms of other instruments in the chapter which follows this.
And do so if the bowels have a large head by nature: then you must incise that with a ringed knife, or puncture it with an alundat as we have said; and extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head is swollen and constricted, you should open the furcula, then split where the humidity which is in the feet has infiltrated.
And if it is not complicated, nor resists incision, then you cut the head as soon as possible according to what will be possible.
And if the part below the abdomen is suppurated or is in hydrops, then make a puncture where the humidity that is in it flows out.
And if the wound is on his feet, then the traction of it is light and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
And if it is constricted, you should incise the abdomen and foot, then make a puncture where you will draw out with a piece of cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut the abdomen and foot to allow what is within them to flow out.
And if the other limbs are swollen and return to normal, then the midwife should insert her left hand; and if the mouth of the vein is opened, then insert her hand into the prepuce of the vein, and search for the head, and throw it into the fingers into the mouth of the vein, and then insert one or two needles, and throw them there.
And if the mouth of the main artery is constricted by an abscess, cut which occurs to him; ensure that it is not tightly bandaged; rather, first administer effusion of fatty humid causes. And administer poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten.
And if the wound is on the side of the body, whenever possible, lance it: and administer what we have said about the live wound.
And if that is not possible, then incise in pieces, and extract.
And ensure that you do not leave any cause inside the cavity.
And when you have completed your operation, then administer what we have said about the cure for abscesses caused by which occur from the main artery.
And if there is a flux of blood, then apply cold waters and administer the other cure.
And I have already seen a woman in her womb where one child was dead, and nearby another pregnancy began, and the dead fetus is now the other. It happens that after a long time an abscess in his swelling; and inflammation develops inside what was open, and begins to spread.
And I was called to treat it, and medicated it for a long time, and the wound did not heal.
Then I placed my hand on it using some causes with strong attraction, and drew out one bone, and after several days, drew out another bone; and I was too marvelled, for in the womb there is no bone.
And then I realized that they were the bones of the dead fetus.
Then I dressed the wound, and extracted bones from it, the woman existing in her swollen condition, and had seen such a manner for a long time, corrected it with a small incision.
And I do not object to this being strange, since in this there is science and aid for what the physician administers through his hand for healing.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the stone.
Form for vertigo at which the liver is opened:
This is the form of strengthener in which you ligature the veins, at which ligature two vertigos are placed at the two extremities of two threads. However, let this vertigo cover be more delicate in texture, and made of either hemp or thread from flax.
And let the width of each thread be as wide as two fingers, and the margin on both sides as wide as one finger. The length of each is one palm and a half; in the middle location of two threads are two ligatures of that same thread which are already secured, of which the length is about one palm and a little more, and the width of each is as wide as two fingers, or a little more.
And these two additional things should be inserted in the mouth of the uterus so that they are open when you reverse the two prescribed vigiles.
Form another shape similar to that one, fine and very light:
Make it from silk thread or fine linen thread according to the shape of forceps. But at the extremity of each, there are two additional pieces as you see, and the length of these additional pieces is about one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the uterus, then place the woman on her side with her feet hanging down, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument as you would with scissors equally according to the quantity you want of the size of the mouth of the uterus until the metron (forceps) does what you want.
The shape of the vigil which the ancients described:
Form of pressing which is used to push the stone:
Form of supporting in which the large head is contained
And it is assembled to forceps which have teeth at the extremity, as you see. Sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, as you see, with teeth like fish teeth, upon which it is incised and contained. Form of supporting light:
Form of a hook having one spine:
Form of a hook having two spines:
Form of a spatula having two extremities upon which the head is incised:
Form of two flat spatulas:
All these instruments are exercised, and when more species of them are multiplied, the artisan should prepare them, making their operation as light as possible and providing enough for their quantity.
And do not delay in preparing those instruments, for the need is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second child.
When the second child is retained, you should induce labor. Then, command the patient to hold her breath, and immediately apply a cold cloth to her, strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this she delivers, that is good.
And if not, then take a rod and perforate in the cover a hole and place it over the herbs burning at the mouth of the uterus, as with calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, scizacanthus arabicus, and cassia lignea. All these herbs or some of them may be submerged in water in the rod, and place that over the fire.
And place a cane tube in the mouth of the uterus, and hold it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the uterus.
And then perform that hawking as we have said before, and the second one should be done with greater speed.
If this method of treatment does not succeed, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or almond extract, and then insert it into the wound and seek out the second one, as you have found. If it is attached in the palm of the hand, then insert your hand according to what we have recommended, and when you have found the second one, extract it little by little so that the hand does not fall due to the pull. Place the hand on both sides of the back easily.
And if the mouth of the hand is narrowed, we have already recommended the treatment with hawking and medicating the throat with herbs.
If, however, you do not exhaust all the causes which we have recounted, then guard that you do not fatigue it in an iteration of abstraction, but rather cover what is thus issued from it to the mouth of the large intestine in the female groin, and apply a plaster and tetrafarmakon; for that will cause it to pass away within about a few days and be dissolved and exhausted.
When it passes, raise the bad humor to the head, and to the stomach, and this leads to the illness; and then you should have ready sub-fumigations and appropriate remedies for it.
However, some of the Ancients recommended sub-fumigations with nutmeg and dry figs.
Form of the instrument with which the woman is sub-fumigated, you should retain her menses and the afterbirth:
It should be made of iron or copper.
And place the subtle end inside the cone and the wide end over the fire, and position the sub-fumigation above the flames.
And hold that place where the subfumigation should be consumed and repeat another.
For the treatment of an unperforated child's anal condition.
When the child cries and the anal area is not perforated, treat them with a subtle ointment. Then have the midwife perforate with her said ointment; otherwise, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and ensure that she does not touch the wound.
Then place it over the area soaked in wine and oil; next, apply the ointment until it is absorbed.
If you fear it has formed a scab, then place a catheter for several days to keep the area moist, and wait until the child wants to heal.
And if a scab forms on the buttock due to the consolidation of a boil or abscess; then have that consolidation incised, and next treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the lead.
Of the treatment of fistulas that leave openings.
The fistulas that leave openings on the outer part are often large and swollen, those close to the anus or in the region of one side.
And it is either a fistula or a carbuncle.
And when that swelling is old and flows with watery white or thin suppuration, sometimes these fistulas penetrate.
And those that penetrate are known by what they are caused by their outflow and by wind; sometimes the patient experiences difficulty in outflow, and a strong discharge is characteristic of those caused by worms.
And of these fistulas, sometimes in the space they penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the groin; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the notch of the buttock.
And to distinguish between a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula, you should insert your finger into the anus. If there is no pus, then the fistula does not penetrate.
But if there is hardness, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair between which you feel the probe or hair in your hand.
And if you do not feel that at all, nor any cause of obstruction due to feces or worms or hardness, as we have said, then know that it is non-penetrating, and now apply to the cure.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the flesh of the groin, then the sign of this is dysuria from that side and prohibition thereof until the area with medicine is consolidated.
But if it is penetrating into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the circulation, then the sign of this is that the probe passes through here if there is no hardness in the bone, and pain in the course of the region; and that pus continually flows from it; and that it does not respond to any medical treatment, nor is it consolidated with ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas, complete cure is not always achieved, and the cure of these requires the hard work and skill of the surgeon over which they preside.
In those that are not penetrating and not ancient, heal them with iron as I will recount to you later, and what is already healed and progressing.
And it is that the patient lies on his back with his legs elevated between his thighs, the buttocks inclined towards the abdomen of the patient, and approximately insert a lead or eram tube if it is in the tortuous fistula, where you can feel the location through which the tenta passes.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert the needle there in the neck.
And if you feel in the needle itself that the tenta is already by itself discovered and penetrates, or if you feel something between the needle and the siphac or flesh, then you can certainly determine that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for healing is not there, as we have said.
But however, some say that it is healed in some men after an attack.
And for the treatment in which hope is placed for relief, you shall use a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula as described before, and insert that heated cautery into the fistula until it approaches the center; then repeatedly insert it two or three times until you know that all those tissues around the fistula have been sufficiently cauterized and are tightly sealed, resembling goose quill feathers.
And carefully cure that which is with cold humors wrapped around it until all those tissues that are cauterized are healed, and then cure that which needs medicines to generate and consolidate the flesh, and if it is cured, well; and if not, then it will not be cured in some time through another treatment.
And if the tent passes inside but does not penetrate further, you have said that which is in the anus, and between that and the tent which is often of flesh or leather, sear the fistula in what dries the surface of the cleft. Then dry the cleft from the beginning of the fistula, and you should sear the tent, and it should be in the fistula where the drying reaches the place where the end of the tent passes through, and through the tent it is released and cauterized.
And then clean those fistulated tissues which are similar to a penile canal and do not damage any of these by this cause.
And if there is a flow of blood greater than usual between you and your operation when inside those tissues, then as much as it takes and for the lighter of these pus-exuding instruments, cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine. For the cautery with fire makes two good adjustments: it adjusts those tissues tightly and causes the abscess by the elimination of moisture.
And then cure that with salt wrapped in cloth or in a triangular bandage around the area that gets swollen, and then cure the wound with a hard flesh ointment that generates and consolidates.
And in these medicines which have stiffness and excision; when restoration occurs, it is cured, and you need not fear recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated to the depth of the buttock and is long from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the buttock and inquire with it.
And thus if the tent is set up and between you and her it is of cloth or flesh, and close to the penetration, then this is not an operation in itself but rather according to a way of faith and hope.
That cause is to treat it in one of three ways: either by cauterizing it as we have said; or by seeping it such that you achieve the cavity of it so that it may be possible for you to insert something and the cure, being close to penetration; and do not proceed with complete sectioning so that you do not penetrate the sac containing the cord, and thereby cause damage against the patient's will; and then cure it as we have said since the wound will certainly heal; or by lengthening that veil and cleaning that pus which seeps therefrom near the anus, as we have said, either with a tent or another sharp instrument, and then modify those fistulated tissues which are in the section between what you can percutaneously; and then strive to perform the restoration of the entire wound through sectioning, and if the opening above is not consolidated and ruptures the open fistula in the part of the anus, it will be easier for the patient. And sometimes the fistula is closed according to this manner: when you introduce the probe into the fistula, and place it in the cavity around the surface of the body near the anus and at the edge of the buttocks, then take hold of the perforated extremity, which is like a needle preparing the veins according to this form:
and introduce it into that channel wrapped in several threads or around them; then introduce the probe with thread into the fistula until you achieve its cavity.
But if it penetrates into the margin of the anus more inward, then you extract the thread from that, taking it out as you introduced your hand into the anus; then extract the end of the thread and adjust the two ends to tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two. When more of the tissue can be cut away, tightly sew those areas where the tissues are cut between the two ends of the thread.
Then cure the wound once it is consolidated and healed.
If the openings of the fistula are not penetrable, make them penetrable in any way you prepare, but ensure it is moist on the outside, for it is not your task to do this so as not to injure the skin; and then apply something to promote its healing.
The shape of the spine of the needle used where the fistula is divided: the curvature of which is sharp and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is unnecessary, thus you see.
For the suturing of hemorrhoids where there is pain in the insertion area of those hemorrhoids.
Hemorrhoids can be described in two ways: one where they resemble charcoal, or those that are like the fat of an olive. And of these, they can be small and large, with the pain coming from them at times and being constant, with marks, and outside the anus, in the extremities thereof.
However, those that affect the anus are according to those with less humidity, from which yellowish water or a bit of constant bloody discharge comes, and are according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the womb is to command the patient to lie down and to be pressed between the thighs as the womb retracts and the hemorrhoids appear. Then you lie down and place your hands under the patient's knees, and quickly make an incision with those you have in your hand.
But if your hands do not have them because of the moisture and softness of those instruments, then take others made of rough cloth or fine or flaxen thread, and use those you call ties, and quickly make an incision and sprinkle some powdered caustics over them near the incision, so that they act like a cautery; or cauterize those as described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with the other treatment as they heal.
And if the anus does not respond to evacuation, then incise the patient with a small bite of a cautery, and wash it with the urine in the bladder that will evacuate slightly when the patient is pressed.
If the hemorrhoids are outside the anus and the cause is slight, then you grasp them with your finger or pinch them with forceps, incise them, and apply the remedy as we have said until they are healed.
And if you have incised them, you must sew them according to this manner: take thread wrapped around a needle and then draw the hemorrhoids up from the parts above, and make that thread penetrate through the side of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around the part past the needle, laterally; and strengthen the hemorrhoid with firm structure, and then secure the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, leaving one unsewn, so that the excess blood flows from that one.
And place a warm poultice on the anus in olive oil or ointment; place this over the anus and command the patient to rest. And then let that which is inside remain; when it is cured, treat those with ointment or other cure until it is healed.
And since they are old and do not heal well with that medicine, it is customary to cauterize them with the tip of a spatula or your finger when they are moist, and to cover those with a plaster; which prevents their consolidation. Then treat those that have consolidated.
And when you cauterize them with a stronger heat than the first time when they are moist and scraped; then treat those that have healed.
Know that an abscess, this is crucial, and it appears as a round swelling similar to a quill head, and it occurs throughout the body but especially in the areas around the feet and fingers, and due to these pains you should treat them.
And then ensure that what is within the circumference of the key is cut out, and held with tongs or forceps, and eradicated from its root; and place care for it.
And if you wish, cauterize what follows as preceded in the said chapter.
More commonly, a veruca is a small, rough, rounded tubercle突出在体表上，通常出现在孩子的身上，血管斑点常遍布其中。
And the treatment for it is to extend and cut out that part, or tighten it with a string or with a pledget inside. And if you wish, cauterize it as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
More commonly, a formica is a small, fibrous or fistulated swelling on the surface of the body, and when you press against it, it resembles the bite of an ant, and is formed around the body.
And the treatment is that you take a needle of hawthorn or of hawthorn thorn, and it must be sharp, and place it over the wart between which you contain the ring of the needle from the divisions of its parts; then return your hand around the needle as you enter what is in the circuit of the wart, and place it in the prominence of the flesh, and that you eradicate the wart from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle of elm or of iron according to this form:
Let the upper part of the needle be fine, blunt (i.e., non-perforated), wrapped so that over the digit the learning of it may be blunted and the revolution of that [needle] may be reversed.
And if you wish, cauterize the wart as previously mentioned in the cauterization of athylos at the top of the cautery.
In the manner of the instruments that you administer with the christeri (cautery).
Sometimes the cautery is made of silver or tin or elm that has been melted or hammered; sometimes it is made of those instruments small and large according to those you use, for that which is used in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose buttocks are swollen or painful, the cauteries for them should also be small.
The form of striking great and few:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be broad according to this manner; and there should be a place where the bag is tied as you see.
And the lower end of it, which is inserted into the anus, should be closed (not open) like a lion's mouth, narrowing to a fine point; and on one side of the tube there should be two holes, and on the other side one hole, with the width of the hole according to the size of the rays, and the larger ones slightly smaller.
And the bag in which the medicines for the beast's bladder or sheepskin are placed should be about a palm's length.
And it should be pierced with holes as if wound up; and the space which is between the holes the thickness of a finger.
Then insert strong raw honey into those holes, using ten pieces of honeycomb or around that amount. Adjust the bag to that; and when the bag is placed in it, stretch the head of the cannula between two distinct points with firm constriction, then cannulate each hole: More specifically, the quality of cannulating each hole is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity of tolerance of the patient; and make sure it is not too thick nor too cold.
And the patient is laid on their back, elevates their legs and places them there. Then place a cushion under him or a pillow; and then apply oil or honey wax or fenugreek or similar at the tip of the cautery; and insert it into the anus with ease, and then the minister takes the bag and expresses it through two more times with force so that all that is in the rectum is evacuated into the cushion completely. Then remove the rectum and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to evacuation, have it as much as it can; and if one sleeps all through the night, it is better for recovery.
And if you evacuate the stomach in stomach solution illnesses and its evacuation causes pain, then repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if in the anus there are hemorrhoids or abscesses, then use a fine cautery, among those cauteries which children are accustomed to.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
And I have already said in the division of the treatment of the plagues what is suitable for the free and for medicines according to need.
Therefore, it is said that plagues are diverse according to what they are caused by and according to the place on which the plaques fall.
And the causes why plagues are produced are thus: by a stone in the bladder, or incision of a sword or dagger, or strike with a lance, or with a rod, or with an arrow, or resemble those of similar causes.
More specifically, the plagues that affect parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the chest, or resemble those of other members.
And I am now recommending the treatment of some plagues by applying that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the memory of the compounded ones will come at the beginning of the third capitol.
So say that when an injury to the head is simple and not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow by a stone or similar object, and has already cracked the scalp so much that it is a large wound and you fear the imminent development of an abscess there, then you should incise and perform bloodletting on the cephalic vein as soon as possible, and do not delay this; and extract from it as much blood as the quantity of its virtue requires, unless some reason prohibiting bloodletting exists, especially if the blood from the wound is scarce.
And the bloodletting is from the opposite side of the injured part; and care must be taken to prevent the wound from filling with pus, and with food and large beverages.
But if some reason prohibits the incision, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or drink.
And place your hand over the wound, if it develops an abscess, apply heat in oil rubbed with a cloth or in a drink that contains astringents.
If it is certain that an abscess has formed, then place yourself over the wound, if it is fresh with its own exudate and the air has not changed there, apply the powder which I will describe shortly.
If the air has already changed there, then place yourself over some ointments until it is healed.
If the wound is large or due to a rupture and disfigurement, and the edges do not close with pins, then adjust those with sutures as I will describe in suturing them.
If the wound is already exposed to bone and sinew, and it is not a retention but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and cure the wound with medicines, restoring the flesh nearby in its proper place. Command the patient to eat foods in which he is accustomed: bread and forms similar to them, until he recovers.
If you find putrefaction in the flesh and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all of that tissue and drain it, and cure it accordingly.
If in these ulcers an artery or vein through which blood flows can occur, and it cannot be cut by medicines, then you inquire about the artery. If you find that uncut one, you cut it with a scalpel or ligate it; if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not apply, then you cauterize where the blood is cut off.
If these ulcers are simple and small, the cause is light; try to sprinkle this powder over them, which will harden before the air changes those.
The manner of the powder is this: take one part olive oil, two parts dragon's blood, and three parts vermilion; mix them all well, sift them, fill the ulcer with this, bind it properly in place, and let it coagulate with the blood.
Then strengthen that above with powder and leave it, and do not remove it while it is thus not applied, for the medicine will not be effective until it is healed.
And sometimes one makes this cautery alone, when it is not in your presence the sign of dragon.
And this operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to have them paused and straightened, and on recent wounds whose blood has not yet been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in the summer season, then I do not place this plaster in its position. But then cure those as we have said, try to pause over those applied bandages that are digestible, or pause over those of flour paste from wheat mixed with water and honey that prevent suppuration; and place the other cure over them while they heal.
But if a fracture occurs in the bone of the wound, and it is small, then you extract this with forceps.
And I will speak of the treatment of fractures of the head in what is venomous.
Of the wounds of the neck.
If the wound occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and between wounds of the head when they are simple.
But if the nerve of the neck is incised or an artery, then if it is a nerve, there is no need for any other treatment but to avoid any curative procedure that causes strong constriction, as some say it is vitriol and resembles it in its effects on nerves and opposes those. And do not place any cause of cold on the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuity is in the brain, which is the root of all members.
And if it is to be treated with light medicines, such as a wash with cold water twice, or some times infused in olive oil (roasted or unroasted), and thyme when washed with cold water and the other herbs minorant according to this manner, and apply a moist ointment.
But if the wound is large, then perform缝合，或收紧其边缘，然后在其愈合时用粉末进行治疗。
If there is depth to the wound or accidents in the lower part near the buttocks, then perforate that area at the most compressed spot.
If in the wound a vein is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that area, or tie it with a ligature if necessity prompts you to do so.
If the vertebrae of the shoulder are already incised or entirely, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the wound and suture over the bone of the shoulder without touching that; go ahead with that and return it to its natural figure, and strengthen that with proper structure for a few days; and later cure that with ointments in which there is astringency and stimulation until it is healed.
If the wound has already infected the bone, then probe that area, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those you can; what appears unextractable, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and is separated and the inflammation around it is alleviated.
And if the wound is recent then powder it with the powder which you have been advised. And if in the wound a fistula is made, then cure that as well, the details of which will be recalled in its own chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or a sword, and the depth of the injury is significant, then consider more if the wound has air in it when the patient faints; then you know that the wound is fatal.
And if there is no depth to the wound and it is recent with its own blood, then you should sprinkle powder on it for the first hour, and do not press it so that the blood does not remain in the depth of the wound and return to the heart, which could cause further harm to the patient; instead, apply an attractive ointment, and remove it after two days.
And if the ointment is not present, then pause at the openings of the wound like an old woman so that what comes from the humidity may flow; and make the patient lie over the wound so that what is within him flows out.
And if from the wound more than three days have passed and no spasms or tremors of the heart evil nor constriction of the bile occur, and you use other good dispositions for it, then you may know that the wound is healed; and then treat the one with calaws and the other with another cure until it is cured.
And if the healing of it is impossible, and all the time has been opened, then you may know that a fistula is formed; treat it accordingly according to its own chapter.
And if the wound is due to a slash or a knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or the hand, then treat it with what is preceded by suturing, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
And if it has already calcified in the bone, and you incise deep, then you should twist the wound and pull to extract those pieces, if they are separable. But if they are not separated, leave them in place until the swelling subsides, as their removal is alleviated.
And for other accidents of pain in other members, the cure is similar to what we have said.
Of the pains in the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
And a minor disruption is made difficult by another method. I believe that the reduction of them is more difficult if you do not prevent their intervention in their place promptly, as they open up and become swollen, making it difficult for the instrument to proceed.
And therefore, the best disruption is moderate, for in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, unlike in the two cases mentioned before.
And know that the stitch of the belly is according to four manners, but two stitches are common and suit the stitches of the other parts of the body.
And two other stitches specific to the belly communicate with the other parts of the body, but more so are they specifically used in the stitch of the belly.
And I advise you for each exposure and declaration.
Therefore, say that when the part is small and the intestine is displaced by some cause through it, making it difficult to reduce it back, then this occurs in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the disruption, as we have said, or when the intestine is inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And when this is so, then know that you should moisten the attempt that you submerge a sponge or cloth in pure wine, or that you soak it in squinancy, cyperus, and spicery, and place the intestine within it until the inflammation is resolved.
And in some instances, I have seen this done where there is hardness, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
And so, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which aloes and mallows are immersed, for by this it is alleviated with little cause.
And if the intestine is damaged near this cure, then cut the disruption with a small instrument on which veins are incised.
And the primary cure is better when it is properly made without sectioning, and not occupation to dry up unnecessarily and cause deficiency.
Of the instrument, note its shape:
One part of the blade is sharp, and the other part not acute, with the tip subtle, but not too fine like a spatula; it should be slightly blunt.
And so, when the wound is enlarged and the intestine protrudes, ensure that its reduction follows the natural form, in its proper place. If possible, do it over the original site, for this is better.
When the disruption is large, and it is in the lower part of the abdomen, then you must place the patient on their back, and position their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you must place the head and feet higher than the other parts left.
And if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then you must pause your understanding and consideration for some time so that the part where the injury is higher than the other.
And you must apply this to the large injuries and to the medium-sized injuries.
And for small injuries, pause what you have prepared and then ensure that the minister is among your most skilled assistants, who holds the disruption with his hand and adjusts the lips of the wound, and then uncover it to see if there is any cause for concern nearby.
And this is the common method of suturing: take the needle, or a counting needle according to the amount of the wound's width; then leave the extremity of the disruption at the tip of the ring finger, and secure the needle once, or ensure that you do not place thread in both extremities of the codena, but rather the extremities where the thread from the other parts is left inside, before making it penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the thread and two extremities of the codena, and so four orders are made.
And then strengthen the double thread in the circuit of the needle, and several times on both parts together, and then join the two lips and the wound by decent joining; and then leave the thickness of the digit and put another needle there, and then that one with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if necessary among the needles until all the contraction of the wound is completed.
And the needles should be medium in thickness and subtlety, for the thin ones cut the flesh lightly; and the thick ones are difficult to handle, so it is best that they be medium in both subtlety and thickness.
And it should not be that the needle is placed at two ends of the wound closely together, for fear that the flesh be cut lightly and that the wound open up before its healing.
And do not make the sutures too long so that the wound is not prohibited from healing.
And then cut the ends of the needles so that they do not led into the wound and harm the sleeper; place your hand over the sutures with powder expanded from all parts, which cover the ends of the needles; leave them there until you can tell that the wound is already healed.
And these types of suture with needles is more convenient in small wounds, for only one or two needles are needed for their suturing.
And the second suture is as follows: for you to perform the suturing of the four extremities, from the thread and two ends of the needle, in one go, with a needle wrapped evenly in thinness and thickness.
And then, when you have pierced the four extremities with the needle, return the needle from that thread end where you started, so that the thread retracts and rises to the wound, thus making the suture as if it were a stitch in fabric where the threads are tight.
And place the distance between each suture equal to the thickness of the little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with this suture, I healed the wound that had occurred in a man's abdomen which had been cut by a knife, and it was the disruption of the major wound about two palms from the middle of the intestine, and it was the disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned that part after the intestine had been left open for twenty-four hours.
The wound is consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and cure that and it is healed; then that viscera is moved back to its positions.
And other doctors had judged that it was not healed; by miracle fire, for I did not cure that without ointment, for it was in a place where neither ointment nor any medicine could reach, but I placed my hand over the wound as an old woman would do twice a day and applied frequent moistening with honey water until the fire healed.
And I will speak of two specific types of suturing according to the narrative of Paracelsus.
And you should start with the chain stitch, and insert the needle from one side through to the inside part.
And thus, as the needle penetrates through the chain and along that course straightly according to the right line and length of the entire body, you leave the end of the thread on which you have inserted the needle; then insert the needle from inside to outside in the other end of the stitch.
And when you have made that penetration, then make another penetration in the other extremity of the joint from the outer part to the inner part; leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and penetrate the needle in the other inner part from the outer part.
And make the needle penetrate in such a way that it penetrates through the joint at the extremity of the limb where it is on the inner side until all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this metal side and thread it at the extremity that is on the joint on the other side, and withdraw the needle from which it penetrates, and place it in the codena with the extremity of the joint that is on the other side; and withdraw that from the codena which is on its part.
And do this one time and again, and do it another time or two more as you sew all of this from the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin needle on which you sew the skins, endeavoring that you sew the edge once from the end part of the wound, and leave the other half inside until it heals completely.
And the second species of suture which Gualia teaches is that you sew it with a silk thread on which skilled surgeons sew it, endeavoring that every part is joined to its corresponding part by nature; and apply one end of another to the other end of it, and this is done as I have instructed you.
Place the needle at the end of the wound on your own side of the external part, and make it penetrate into that part from within with two ends of the silk thread; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside with the other two ends.
Then turn those threads, and make each end from within penetrate into the external part at two ends of the wound on the opposite side.
This method of suturing is better than the common light suturing, and it is the suturing about which we have previously spoken.
This is the speech of Gualia
And some would say that the suturing of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of these, starting with the insertion of the needle from where you should begin, and make that one penetrate through the other layer according to the suturing method in which I equalize the layers.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle part of the belly, the suturing there is more difficult than in other parts of the belly.
The judgment of treatment for boils is the judgment of other diseases.
This cause is when you succeed in getting the boil while it is hot from its own pus before the air alters that, and reduce the swelling and缝合它，然后用那种粉末覆盖。
And if the air has already affected the wound, then place over it certain ointments which are present among you so that they harden and plug the veins, and be consolidated by chafing and inspected; and proceed to treat it as one would treat other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines present, then place on it frequently, until it begins to granulate and scab over, and change it twice a day as you have been shown, until it is healed, for you would not need other medications in minor disposals when wounds are simple.
And if you fear that the wound might communicate infection to the main limbs, then soak a lion's wool in well-refined oil or in olive oil, and place it around the area between the fingers, leaving the joints uncovered.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in their bowels, for several days you must apply it, then crustize that with vinegar or a strong black tincture of tea, especially if the infection has reached the bowel and caused an exitura penetrating into its cavity.
And know that which is from the large intestine is of a milder healing power than that which is in the fine intestines.
And it is of difficult healing that which the intestine called "gorgon" does not receive cure from plague that falls into it; this is because of the great number of veins in it and its large size, and due to the subtlety of that part and its proximity to the nature of nerves.
But if what you are treating from the plague is the skin, and you succeed in obtaining the fresh wound, treat that according to your skill with which you reduce the intestines equally.
But if it has passed to the muscle and is already red or black, when you strengthen that with a cauterization over the area that is darkened, so that it comes to a flow of pus, for in the skin there are veins and arteries.
And then incise what is another part of the abscess, and place two ends of the cauterization hanging from the cut left by the plague, so that over you it may alleviate the attraction of the plague by closing the opening of the wound and expelling the arm of the plague.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When disruption occurs in the intestine and it is small, sometimes it can be restored in some individuals. This is why I saw that man who had been wounded in his belly by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, old and caused a fistula, which healed through treatment and reduction.
Then I sought the cure for it, although it was not yet consolidated in its healing. I managed to subtly integrate that which was healthy into the location where it had been healed and consolidate the area.
And when I saw the location already consolidated, I examined the patient who had suffered an injury in his belly; and no one was found to have this type of injury due to poor diet and breaking their usual habits of eating and drinking, and frequently bathing and exercising excessively.
And some experienced individuals have said that when a small wound occurs in the intestine, it should be ligated in this manner: you take large beans; then you adjust the two edges of the wound and place one bean with its mouth open over the two edges of the wound; therefore, when it takes hold on those and tightly closes its mouth, you cut off the head of the bean, as it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another cushion near the first one, and do not cease to make cushions one after another according to the size of the entire wound.
And then reduce that and around the wound; and remove those attached heads from the intestine once it is healed; and do not harm the patient in any way.
And it is possible that the intestine has been pierced with fine needles made from the intestine of an animal, which are finer than a needle; and you should take the end of these intestine needles, which are raw, and place the end of it in fine needles wrapped in the same intestine, then insert those needles into the holes and around the area, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this method of suturing with needles is simply done out of trust and hope.
But if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the fine intestines, where there is no visible damage, and does not heal completely.
Of the cure for stone and fistula.
Know that any plague or abscess when wrapped up and allowed to ancient [decay], and becomes a ulcer, and is not consolidated and hangs on for a long time and is not cut out, then in whatever part of the body it is, universally it is named fistula and we call it there a stone.
And fistula according to truth is a hardened, white node, without pain and which has a cavity like the seat of an abscess; therefore named that ulcer rizatz, that is, abscess.
And in an ulcer the humidity is present, which hangs on for a long time; and with strong effort the humidity can be removed within some hours. And at times this humidity is thick, small, large, and subtle.
All those causes have been shown, and the signs of them and the cure for them in medicine are divided.
And thus I will teach you the cure for fistula which is caused by surgical operation with my hand.
And know that fistula can occur in all parts of the body; some of which lead to the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the liver, or to the intestine, or to the bladder, or to some of the ribs, or to one of the vertebrae, or to some joint composed thus of the hand and foot; these are those that are near the main part of the body and similar.
And thus of these fistulas that proceed in this manner they are among the diseases difficult to cure, and do not receive a cure or occupation. Such is work and ignorance.
And if some fistula is so deep that it does not reach these locations as mentioned, and you hope for its cure and wish to gain knowledge of it, then take a probe or a needle, and if the fistula follows a straight course, inquire about it.
If the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a fine lead probe, for lead being light of its body is relieved and curved to alleviate the tortuosity.
If the fistula has horrible movements, it is not possible for you to signify about it with a probe.
Then cleanse the openings with their own openings, for the moisture that you cleanse there should be relieved of the other openings and flow from them.
And then inquire very precisely, according to whatever manner it is possible for you to know if here are veins or nerves, and whether the cavity of the fistula is distant or nearby, or if it is a fistula with only opening movements and this is over all with the sum of your strength, with your inquiry, with which you question the patient, and with your compression on the area with your hand, and the appearance of the significations and the causes of the swelling.
And when you have stood over all those causes in true station, then go to the cure according to confidence: for you consider then if it is a nearby apparent fistula or in a local place, distant from joints, or from nerves, or from arteries, or from veins, or from one of the places which I and you call.
When you dry the fistula as previously described in its narration, and stop what is within that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what is born in the orifice of the flesh, or vein and similar, cure that within until it is healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then probe that you enter it in the preon until it is as deep as possible, and then modify it with all its corrupted flesh; and administer sharp medicines wrapped in cloths, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have understood with a needle.
And do this with the sharp medicine several times until it corrodes everything that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula.
And then restore it by applying ointments that generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
If it is not healed by this, then you cauterize it as we have previously recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and you must certify this, then inquire about that dry and that wet part as we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of main member as we have said.
If the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness, then rush to stop the corruption entirely; and place care for that until the flesh within is healed.
And if it is not yet healthy and you graft on a piece of flesh as you do, then know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; then expose again thoroughly and explain its nature and the worldification of it with your final fortification, and restore that area.
And so if it is healthy, that is good; and if not, then know that the corruption is deep within the body, which you have not reached, and then in that case, do nothing but leave it as it is.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or if it is possible to extract it with forceps, then use fine forceps suitable for this.
And if it is bone pain, then you must thoroughly extract all of them, and do not leave any due to a lack of your strength.
And if it is caused by some cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear or error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
And if you are not prepared to expose the bones at this time, then pause over the wound that allows the area to heal, and leave it in a position near those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound that is not yet consolidated, and ensure that the section you have incised remains constricted in your operation.
Having said that, if you fear infection, pause over the wound submerged in a triple wash of oil, or in Egyptian balm, or in some green ointment, for when these can heal, and the bones are separated from them, then the swelling will be alleviated.
And if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone or similar to those, and what is corrupt in it affects only its surface, then drain that part only behind where the corruption and darkness are stopped, and place the wound again.
But if what is of him is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely excise it from the place where the corruption has reached, and then cure that until it is consolidated.
And I advise you when examining a patient in the thigh to place that as an example and helper for your operation.
Let there be a young man around xxx years of age, to whom pain occurs in his thigh, and within the parts inside there is corruption about the matter inside the body that has reached the thigh, and the matter is of an abscess, a great abscess, and it is not due to an extrinsic cause.
And then the abscess is allowed to come to head over a long period due to the error of the doctors, and the matter becomes mature. The cure for it is nearly paused when the leg becomes fistulaed, and you make openings in the sore where all discharge pus and the humidities of the body.
And then the doctor cures for about two years, and not fire in those who excel in the art, among which I was called.
And there is the leg, and the fluids that flowed from it through those openings into the body; and already the condition of that man was entirely swollen, and the color of his skin was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those openings and guided the probe to the bone.
And then I examined all the openings closely and found which ones lead from there to the leg.
And then I opened and incised over one of the openings, exposing a part of the bone, and found the corrupted tissue, which was terrible, rotten, and discolored; and a part of the leg had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
And then I clamped what was revealed to me and prepared the exposed bone.
And I deduced that it is not in the bone but in that corruption which obliterates and constricts, and I already had deduced this.
And then proceed to restore the wound with medicinal materials for a long time, and it is not yet consolidated.
And then you iterate and discover over the bone according to the first discovery, and find continuous corruption in the bone.
And constrict what appears to be that corruption, and then you must perform the cure and restoration, but it is not restored.
And then you discover over the other side and do not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perform the restoration of it, but it is not restored until you incise around a palm's breadth of it, and he extracts its marrow, and then restore that with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And no iteration is necessary in the operation of the sectioning of it, but rather for the disposition of the patient's fear and the scarcity of their tolerance and fear of death, for he suffers continuously in all hours due to excessive evacuation leading to bad fainting.
And thus health is through complete healing, and nothing replaces healthy flesh; it is done well by placing him in the right position in his body and returning his virtue; and he is accustomed to his positions and not subjected to contrary movements or injury for any cause.
If the bone is prominent in the affected area, then you should proceed as follows: You must tightly and strongly bind that part of the bone at its extremity, commanding someone to extend it. Place a thicker woolen bandage over the flesh where the bone is left, and extend the end of this bandage so that it draws the flesh towards the left side. You should uncover the flesh in the area you wish to cut for the blade not to pierce the flesh.
Place a stick or board properly under the bone, for when you do this, the cut should not pierce the damaged flesh.
Ensure that the cut is small and gradual over the damaged area, for if the damage is inside the bone's cavity and does not appear in its manifestation, you may need to make another incision.
And if the bone is corrupted and non-protruding, there is one continuous part attached to the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts; and place fusts there, and make sure that the cut for the first part where the corruption is is continuous with the closure of the other part.
And the closure should be small according to the location of the corruption, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and set the bone where it is continuous with the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not in its proper place but displaced.
And if the corruption is in the armpit of the arm or the side of the foot, it is very difficult; however, you must inquire how the corruption appears to you, and incise and dress that area according to any disposition which is within your ability, and all displacement should be corrected by you, provided it does not contravene veins or nerves.
And consider what are incisors and the saws to cut these bones are made of according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and their size, and their subtlety and greatness and smallness, and their hardness and their rarity; so that you prepare for each species of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
And consider that operation means to you regarding the species of instrument of which you stand in need; when you have great study and long knowledge of the ways of this art, and experience of the ways of illnesses, then when you have them by you, apply what is convenient for it from the instruments for all illness.
And you shall list at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use, some of which you will prepare according to your prohibition, which you will experiment with on the others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma of another will be great:
Forma of the ray: Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star key, and its points be according to the shape of the prongs of an astilbe.
And do not grind them, but use only those to friction the heads of the joints when they are broken, or the large mouth open.
Forma of the smaller razor:
Forma of the flat razor:
Forma of another well-made saw: let it be made with an arc above and the sharpness of its edge of iron, and its member of a downward-pointing blade well made. Forma of it:
Forma of the razor which has a concavity:
Form of a razor or other fine:
Form of another razor with a curved end:
Form of a small razor resembling a needle:
Form of another smaller incisor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a beam, and its end is like a point, and it is placed in certain locations in the ratio of the bones:
Form of a beam which you place according to the ratio of that which is pierced in the bones:
And its end is triangular and sharply pointed.
And it is made of Indian iron, and resembles a hollow that contains all the causes we have said about razors, incisors, and saws.
For the cutting edge and the jointing of the bones.
The extremities may be affected either by an intrinsic cause or by an extrinsic one, or as you have medicated that corruption through the treatment of those medicines and the cure does not please you, or sometimes the corruption goes away from the member which you did not perceive any cause for, then you must enter that member into this to uncover the corruption, so that the illness may be expelled through death or malice which is a greater misfortune for the member.
The sign of him upon whom this happens is that the member becomes black before it turns red, as if it were already burned. Or you may notice the blackness within that burning turning into that member which affects it and takes hold of the whole body; therefore, consider thy incision in that place.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is a blow from some venomous causes such as that of a scorpion, viper, or rattle snake, and its likeness.
And if the corruption or blow is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it spreads into the hand.
And when you approach the hand, then incise that of the little finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter within where it could take hold in the arm.
And if you incise that one, then incise the arm between the crease at the joint.
And if corruption passes and surrounds the crease, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and another cause must be applied instead for cure, which is an excess of virtue.
And similarly incise the foot when corruption surrounds the toe of the foot, then you incise that between one of the toes.
And if it takes in the sole of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. But if it enters the sole, then you incise the surface between the joint of the sole.
And if corruption has already reached the sole, then there is no remedy, and you must leave the patient to die.
And the way to incise the member or close it is that you hold the thread in one part and let go of which you want to incise, and hold another thread at the location; extend the assistant's hand with a thread to both parts left, and extend the assistant's hand with another thread on their side; you separate the flesh which is between two threads until all the flesh is exposed within that space; then it should be incised or closed.
And ensure that a cloth is placed from all sides so that it does not touch the affected area, and that the wound and abscess are properly aligned and cauterized.
And if blood flows when you work, then cauterize the location frequently, or place some astringent powders over it to stop the bleeding; then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And ensure that the injured member is held with a thread at a convenient place, and treat it until it heals.
And I advise you that if someone finds a spot on their foot, this accident which we and you have advised, is quite common and appears as darkening similar to the combustion of fire.
And that corruption accidently first occurs within the said organ itself, where it tends throughout the foot.
And then that man prepares himself to wait until he sees the cure going to the limb with the intensity of him who feels pain and the heat affecting him, and the infection in that foot enters the joint, and the wound heals.
Long time that corruption accidently affects the hand index.
And then it comes to me, and I perform to reflect that the excess affects the hand of the medicine taker, reflecting the body's purification; and the excess is not reflected but begins to move into the other part where it first began in the hand.
And they call me to infect his hand, and I do not want to do that hoping for the reflection of that excess, more fearing the infection of his hand leading to death, as the virtue of gout was deadly.
And when he wakes from me, he returns to his land and informs me that that man prepared and infected his entire hand, and he has healed.
And I have added this narrative only to serve as an aid regarding what has been said about this illness, and that it be a sign by which it may be recognized and according to which it may be treated.
On the care of colic and the quality of the enema with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in any fleshly member and the space of the abscess is prolonged such that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is expelled, leaving the area void as if it were a vessel, and the cloth over it is thin like a delicate fabric, and no further corruption occurs, and it does not imprint on the bone or nerve nor in muscle, it is called colic, and is not named fistula.
Otherwise, if the space is prolonged such that the corruption imprints on any member, then it is called a fistula.
And the treatment for it is to insert that cloth entirely as if it were rotated, especially when it is thin and made like a cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
But if you hope that the adhesion will adhere and that that corruption has not succeeded by a contrary consequence, and on the cord there has passed of face, then you cure that with a clyster.
And you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the hand that smells has a foul odor, then administer a clyster with that medicine which consists of oil and wine mixed with honey in equal parts, and be sure to adjust them in a vessel, and heat them over fire until the medicine boils and reaches the desired temperature.
And then you take what is necessary and dissolve the medicine in water and honey; administer this clyster to the sinus, strengthen the openings of it, and leave the medicine in it for about two hours.
And then extract that medicine; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the wound healed.
And sometimes a clyster is administered with water from ashes when this medicine is not available; and you take ash from vitex, put it in water; then extract the liquid and administer it as a clyster until you are sure that the sinus is cleansed.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of the ash, then prepare that mixture with water and honey mixed with thirty parts of myrrh, and prepare another mixture with wine and honey mixed, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine causes adhesion in the sinew, especially when there is an excess of stringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you have applied it several times and you are sure that the sinew is already softened, then administer that mixture with water to cause flesh to grow in it.
And you take spikenard ointment and dissolve that mixture with diluted oil and stringy wine; or you administer that mixture with some medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise on ointments.
And if the passages of the sinew are wide in which the catheter cannot be inserted, then you gradually enlarge that opening with a small iron instrument, and place it in it wrapped in Egyptian or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And if the opening is large, then you should suture the edges and leave enough space for the enema to pass.
And if the opening from which the abscess flows is elevated above the lower parts, then dry that area below it so that the abscess can flow out, for when the abscess is compressed in the depth of the sinus, flesh will be generated there.
And if it is not possible to dry the sinus in the area below the abscess as you wish, then you should puncture the member and prepare it for the procedure so that the abscess flows out gently according to your ability and without any obstruction of the abscess.
May he who is over the opening of the sinus, whom you warm at all times so that it does not come out what is inserted in it with the arm. And so that you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, or is digestible, or is non-digestible.
And so you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if there is an abscess.
And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is discharged over the opening of the sinus already adheres, or approaches adherence, then when you remove the dressing, immediately change the cloth and renew the ointment.
May it be that from the sinus there is a subtle virus present, then do not waste time waiting for its adherence, for the healing of it approaches, for some people take longer for flesh generation in their wounds, and in those, the opposite occurs.
And if for several days the sinew is situated near the limb in an indigest position, then you shall perceive that the sinew does not adhere; and if adherence of the sinew is delayed and the cause is prolonged, then you adjust in drying of the medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried thus as ointment liniment when there is an excess of addition of fat.
And the one that is more recently injured, you should take ointment liniment and dissolve it in sweet oil, and apply an old piece of cloth in its substance, and compress it with something soft, and use this.
And make it seem in that action when there is no limb, liniment fat, honey when mixed in that it is thickened, and use this; or what you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and mix all and powderize over the honey which is on the fire, and then line it with something soft, and strengthen it over the sinew; and line it with the honey which you have mixed in that it is thickened, and powderize over cloth and strengthen it.
And sometimes administration is made to him of long pepper and reasons of celestial mallow (and the celestial mallow) and powder of err and centaury, and use those simples or adjusted, squeeze them and sift over the honey which I have recommended; and use it.
And if the sinus is prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the root of it, and investigate in the bones or in the other hard members or ligaments; then you cure it by fistula treatment, as was said above.
For the treatment of tumors, fingernail attrition, and incision of the digit with sectioning.
Panarici is an apostema which leaves the nail of the finger of the hand or foot loose, and is hard in other fingers, and as it is prolonged, its healing is less valued; or it is a chronic apostema from a deep-seated one, or it is corrupted, and a branch enters where you corrode the root of the nail, and thoroughly corrupts that part, and spreads its corruption to the bone within which it gives off an odor; and the extremity of the finger is amputated, and the color of the wound becomes yellowish.
And when you have done that as we said in the division and do not apply your cure, then proceed to insert all the superfluity that is discharged from the joint and nearby, and place a cautery on that area, for a cautery movement is beneficial in this.
If the bone is so and the joint is healthy, and the swellings of the joint have already compressed the flesh to the inner parts, and begin to pierce and lead that, then proceed to pause a thin ray under the angle of the joint that pierces the flesh, and push that up and cut that flesh with ease, and place over what remains of the flesh from the medicines burning corrosively until it be thoroughly resolved; and place a salve over that until it is healed.
If the corruption has already entered the bone, then proceed to cut out the bone there and remove it, for no time will heal what is corrupted in the bone.
And if you see the corrosion and the corruption going into the same area, then proceed to cut there in one of the joints according to where the memory of its location is preserved, and place a salve over it until it is healed.
But if at the joint there is percussion or friction, and the pain is very severe, then you should start by venesection at the site of pain, and immediately dry the joint with an incision using sharp transverse sections of the skin, and be careful that the section does not reach the flesh left by the joint, for you will thereby cause the patient severe pain, which will be due to the natural condition of excessive flesh in excess in that place; and cure that area with what alleviates pain.
But this is adjusted, which is natural in many people, the flesh is very strong and heavy, or the bones are very strong and heavy, or the joint is very strong and heavy.
And in some it is located at the site of the joint, or the natural condition is strong and heavy in certain nodules of the fingers. But that which is natural in certain nodules of the fingers is not painful, and this which is located at the joints is more painful.
And for those that are natural fleshly, the incision is light, and you should cut there with a sharp lancet.
More difficult for those born near the joint, the cure is; therefore, beware of its removal.
More difficult for those born near the kneecap, ensure that you incise the beginning of the flesh around in a round cut into the bone, and nearby will be one of those convenient grooves for this, and cure what is inside until it is healed.
More difficult the consolidation which occurs to the fingers among their joints due to observed swellings or by nature of the man who is born with it, or by consolidation of plague or by burning, then ensure that you heal this consolidation until the fingers return to their natural form.
And place your hand between the cloths where you have infused oil, so that they do not consolidate lightly, and separate between them, or place a thin sheet of lead between them until they are consolidated as needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some fingers at the palm, then dry that consolidation as prepared and shape it to match the figure of the limb.
Of veins, they are varicose.
Veins are varicose, and they are thickened veins filled with melancholic superfluities that move in the parts of the body, and their greatest occurrence is in the groins, especially in the groins of those who travel, work, and carry things.
Then administer a purge of the body with black bile several times until the expulsion is strong, and subsequently bleed the patient from the internal jugular vein.
More importantly, the treatment for them can be done in two ways: one way is to incise and extract that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and remove it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: apply a compress to the groin area with warm water until the thick blood has resolved and become watery. Then strengthen the patient's thigh by binding it above the knee on the inner side using a bandage, leaving the lower part exposed. Next, compress the vein in one, two, or three places with a broad compress. Using your hand, elevate the black blood from below the groin upwards into the abdomen and then downward. Do this until you have removed the quantity of blood you desire, which is sufficient to alleviate the condition's influence.
And then tie her up, and command her to abstain from foods generating black bile.
And continue the cure through phlebotomy when the veins are filled and this is noted by the patient.
Raise the limb in this manner: you lift the thigh of the patient, if there are hair roots on it, then immerse it in warm water and wrap the thigh with wet cloth until it becomes red and the veins swell; or exercise it forcefully if warm water is not available, until the limb is heated.
And then dry the skin along the vein by sectioning it lengthwise or at the rear of the limb you may cut it, or lower down at the base.
And then cut the skin with scissors and scrape out the vein from all parts until you feel it, and you should notice its appearance as that knot declining to black.
And then, after removing the skin, you will see that white thing which is like a cord.
And then place that part of the sheet elevated and folded from the knee, and suspend it on an iron hook or lion's claw.
And then dry another section near that section for three digits, and then scrape the knee from above the vein as it appears.
And then elevate that and incise the rear section of the tendon, and then extract that and elevate it where it enters through the second section, and then extract it from the section that is above that.
And do this where you extract that from the section that is further above or higher than all other sections, once everything is inserted; then incise that.
And if you do not obey to extract and elevate, then insert a strong doubled needle with a thread and tie that, and then extract it. Or insert that part of the sheet and move your hand in all directions where it is folded. And make sure it is not incised; for if it is broken, it will be difficult to elevate that part and has come over the wound through that damage.
And when all of that is done, then place over the site of the wound wool soaked in wine and olive oil, both roasted and unroasted, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the wound is contracted having curvature in which there is an encircling at the parts, and does not follow straightness as we have said, then cut over it entirely at all parts of its curvature and at the places of its encircling, and place it under supports so that you lift it entirely.
And guard yourself in your section so that you do not cut the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult to lift it; use your prudence in this.
Form of the cut where the wound is dry:
It is not as with other supports nor of acute extremity because it does not damage the vein; and it is of great flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein due to its subtlety; having it in its superfluous thickness as we have said.
From the extraction of the leg vein.
This vein is generated in the legs in lands with tails like those described by Avicenna in the lands of Arabia and in the dry lands of India, which have little strength and in which neither grass nor trees grow.
And the vein is generated in other parts of the body besides the legs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that leaves the chain thus like snakes and worms and lice and other worms breeding between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the advent of this is when you encounter in the leg inflammation; nearby the area becomes blisters; nearby the vein starts to swell at the place of that blistering, as if it were a plant sprouting.
And then when the extremity appears, immediately cover that area with a piece of lead weighing as much as one drachm, or two drachms, and press it there, letting the lead hang from the leg.
And as often as any cause affects the parts outside, wrap this in lead and anoint that. And if the wound is prolonged, then you incise a part of it and cover the remainder; and do not incise that which is inside while it is outside inserted, for if you incise it, it will contract and enter into the flesh and cause an abscess and corruption in the area and a bad ulcer.
Because the abscess must be treated vigorously and extracted little by little, until it is completely expelled from the rear of the patient, and no cause should affect the body.
And from this vein, some men have been incised whose length is about five palms and I have been informed that one was incised measuring twenty palms.
And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then insert the probe into the wound and perforate that long tract through the body, until all that is in the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; and then treat it according to the cure of abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has bumps, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and blood flows into it through several openings, each of which is like that.
And therefore treat it thus as we have said in the division and what was said above.
Of the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine sickness.
This sickness is named in some lands as the bovine disease or gout, because it often affects cows and a few worms live in them, which are native between the tendon and the flesh, and go up and down throughout the body, and are shown by their own movement from one member to another, breaking the tendon and coming out.
And its generation is through the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms and snakes and worms (lombrics) and ascarids occur in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it goes into the body and rises to the head, and affects the vein, then greatly inflames it and enters and destroys the vein, and thereby often causes bumps.
And when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not proceed without considering its natural movement and appearance in relation to the sensation, then confirm that you have what is above it and what is left of it with liement and strong constriction, and dry it thoroughly before extracting it.
And if it is found in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a cautery on fire over the area where it resides, and the main fear is corruption of it, which corrupts the area as we have said.
If you find it spreading to the head near the neck, then apply strong constriction over the supraclavicular area, and dry it thoroughly, then extract it; and confirm that the illness uses modification of its body through medicines that evacuate corrupt bad humors, and avoid foods causing putrefaction.
Of the section on the disease of gout.
This illness is called gout in our land, and it is a pain that occurs in some limbs, and often is passed from one limb to another.
And now I will describe that according to which I will treat it. I was summoned to a sick woman at a village, and upon examining her arm, I found a small swelling in the vein network of the arm. After an hour, that swelling moved upward like vermicelli boiling, though less urgently than porridge, appearing as if it were living silver moving from place to place.
And then the pain in that area increased, and a hard lump formed in the muscle. Soon after, it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it also appeared in the other arm, moving to the opposite side of the body.
And then I was advised that she should move her body thoroughly. It was marvelously surprising to see the change and the rapid movement from one limb to another. And I had already seen this before in my hands in that manner, but I have observed movements where the pain is perceived to be permuted from one limb to another. But not all have heels as in women.
And I do not consider this to be the case, but rather because the woman was of an emaciated body with dry organs and veins exposed, and in this appearance there is a sensation of that swelling changed.
And it is necessary that this backward curvature not appear in those who are fleshy and have moist organs with enlarged veins.
And since you want the healing of the foot, and the patient feels that pain, when it does not appear as apparent as we have said regarding the heel, then firmly press on that area and slightly and gently place something over it where the swollen vein has subsided, and cauterize the area.
But if you do not see it at the base of the heels, then cure that by releasing the body and by what you expel the swelling, and purge those with foul-smelling pills and with snake-root pills and similar.
For the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to the species, and according to the locations in the body where they lodge. The diversity of these lies in those that have large points, small ones, concave ones, and silent ones, which are solid; and those that have three angles, and those to which belong tongues; and those to which belong feathers.
And of the signs of apoplexy, when it lodges in the brain, and pierces through the bone, and is situated above the ventricle which is over the brain, for it happens by sudden violence, dizziness, and nausea, and redness and inflammation of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile, and much weakness, the word is cut off and the voice destroyed, and is situated at the site of the wound a white moisture resembling dust, and its appearance similar to the humidity of flesh.
And therefore if you see these signs, then abstain from the cure and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart are that it is close to the left nipple, and one feels a hard lump there which is not visible; and the movement of the arrow seems like the pulse, and the flow of the dark black blood, and the coldness at the extremities, and the shiver, and the syncope; and therefore you would know that death descends upon him wholly.
And the signs when the arrow has pierced the lung are the spitting of foamy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are pulsating, and the color of the patient has changed, and he breathes heavily or gasps for air.
And if the arrow strikes in the periosteum which is in the foot, and the pain then is near the small bones, and causes a great and violent pain along with heavy breathing, and not all the muscles are affected.
And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, then strongly apply a leaf of undigested food.
And if you press on the arrow in the stomach, and it is embedded there, apply a leaf of undigested food to the wound, or the tissue, or intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope for its cure without extracting the arrow.
And if the arrow pierces the bladder and exits through urine, and the process of it causes pain in any part outside, then strongly feel pain in the thigh, know that it is fatal.
Moreover, the other limbs such as the face, neck, shoulder, arm, helper bone, dorsal vertebrae, furcula, and coxa, along with their counterparts of the limbs, are saved according to the major disposals when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand it regarding their cure.
The cause is that in a man an arrow struck the eyelid of his eye at the root of his nose, and I extracted it from one side, left his ear gray, and he recovered, and was not injured in his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which struck him in his eye at the gray of his eyelid, leaving the eyelid but removing the arrow which was partially hidden and could not be retrieved except for a small extremity attached to its shaft, and it was a large arrow among the sharp arrows of the Turks, embedded in iron lion where there were no ears.
And the Jew is intact, and was not injured in his eye at all.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which was embedded in the shoulder, and it was an Arabic arrow, and that is the one with ears; then I incised over it between two bones, and it was submerged in his shoulder; then I touched it delicately, and soon extracted it, and the Christian recovered.
And extracted another arrow from a man which was embedded in his abdomen, and observed that he died from that; therefore, after passing thirty days and no change occurring due to his condition, incised over the arrow and removed it, and he was healed, and no ill happened to him.
And there was a man in whom an arrow had struck his side, and the wound had healed over. After approximately seven years, incise the arrow near the hip.
And there was a woman to whom an arrow had struck her abdomen, and the wound had healed inside her, and no change occurred in her bodily functions, and the woman did not experience any discomfort during her operations.
And there was another man to whom an arrow had struck his face, and the wound had healed, but the arrow remained broken, not causing any additional pain, and he appeared much like this.
And extracted the arrow from the king's prince, who had an arrow wound in the middle of his nose, and it had already shifted slightly to the right nostril, with the entire arrowhead hidden.
And I was called for the cure of him near the arrow wound within three days.
And then you examine the wound of the arrow closely; and then you inquire about the one that feels subtle, and does not feel it; but he felt the puncture and left his right ear, and then you suspect that this puncture was at the tip of the arrow.
And apply the place to be applied where there is an attractive and digestive virtue, trusting that the place we apply it so that the location of the arrow appears to me, to dry up there.
And do not neglect the significant place where the arrow hit; and continue applying the plaster over it for several days without neglecting anything; and meanwhile, the wound consolidates, and you treat the malaise from the extraction for a period of several days until one day I feel the arrow inside its sheath and this happened to me.
And then place a sharp corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it burns; and over the surface, touch it, and examine the tip of the arrow, which adheres to the shaft.
And then you adjust the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine where I visibly see the tip of the arrow appear, and pass to my time through the space of time between four months.
And then, when the wound is sufficiently enlarged, and it is possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I enlarge that area, and without using any other instrument, I do not cease to refine and invent methods for this, until one day I managed to grasp that with descending forceps made according to the form which will be described at the end of this chapter; then I extracted it; and then I restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose is not restored, but I restored that and the wound was consolidated, and the patient recovered completely, and no scar remained in any cause.
And I recount to you the quality of extracting some arrows, so that you pause and consider this rule and meaning of what I have not said, for the parts of this art and the definitions of those are not understood in the narrative nor do they comprehend those freely.
And the wise craftsmen compare a little on motion; and from what is present to what is absent; and find new operation and new instrument for the descent of foreign causes when they occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the members in which they are embedded but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place into which they entered; or by the opposite part.
And that which is removed by the place into which it entered, or the arrow proceeding into a fleshly place and being shot out.
And if it does not obey the guess of the hour at which it entered, then you must leave it for a few days until the flesh around it can heal, and the attraction and its exit can be alleviated.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and does not obey your guess, then leave that for a few days and apply attraction and movement to it each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not obey your attempt for several days, then you must puncture in the circuit of the arrow at that site of any part traveling subtly where the location is enlarged by the arrow.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the place of the body and hidden from sensation, then you inquire about that area with your hand, and if you feel it, then remove it with some instruments which are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot reach it due to the depth of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are neither nerves nor veins, then you cut into the wound when it is enlarged and it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is in the ears where it is lodged, then you incise the flesh in which it is embedded as much as possible with all the skill you can muster; and use your ingenuity, if you cannot extract the flesh from the fracture of the ears or in torsion of those parts.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then you use your hand in a twisting motion with forceps at all parts where it complies; and with great subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it be made easy for its extraction and for this procedure.
And if you cannot operate on that side of your turn, then you let it be for some days until the parts that are in the circuit of him heal, and then again operate on that which is alleviated. And if it causes you contrary condition of pain, then you administer what we have said about treatment in its chapter.
And preserve your virtue in the incision of veins or nerves, or cords, and administer ease in every manner for the avoidance of the arrow; and do this with facility, tranquility, and slowness as I have recommended.
And therefore make the arrow contract by itself that the patient be according to the figure according to which you fix the end of the arrow in him, for this is more advantageous. And if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
And for the arrows that are forced in contrary to the other part, or that you have already treated some part of them externally, or increase the swelling at the end of the arrow by the sensation of the part more above the thigh; then you extract from there; and the extraction is according to the quantity in which the forceps take hold; and then remove it, for it should be made light with evisceration.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the bone according to the contrary direction where the arrow presses on the bone, and expand it by inserting, and then extract it.
But if not, leave it for a few days, and then reinsert it where it pierced.
But if the shaft of the arrow is there, then push it into place.
But if the shaft is embedded and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it there. If it resists, stir it around with a curved instrument so that the concavity of the instrument enters the groove of the arrow, and then push it in.
But if the arrow is curved, then push it with strong stirring into it, so that the arrow straightens out from it.
And if the arrow is poisoned, then make sure you draw out all the flesh in which it is located, as much as possible, and then treat it with what is appropriate.
If the arrow hits the foot, or the belly, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, then dry it over that area where you touched it, and guard yourself from cutting a vein or nerve, extract it, and later apply a dressing to the wound while it heals.
The form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
If the ends are like the beak of a bird and are made such that they grip the arrow when placed over it, so as not to let go.
And these forceps are made of special types, large, few, and medium-sized, according to the size of the arrow and its smallness, and the width of the wound, and the shape of it.
Thus, in order that the instrument may be eased into the concave arrow and be pressed thereagainst.
From phlebotomy of the veins.
The veins for phlebotomy from which it is customary to bleed, located in the sixteenth chapter, are two pulsating veins near the ears, called by Alhasisain; two herbs that are prominently visible on the temple regions; and two veins near the tear ducts of the eyes, called aspirants; one vein in the middle of the forehead, and one vein at the extremity of the nose; two guidegus (or jugular) veins at the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip; — these are the veins called algelic;— and two veins behind the tongue. But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are five; of which one is cephalic and is of the wild ivy; the people call it “the vein of the head,” sorda (deaf), and it is a median vein, composed of one branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic; they call this public one “the vein of all the body,” while the basilica is the vein that is located in the domestic ivy and is called “citillar,” and the vulgar ones call it “the vein of the belly”; the funis (or superficial) branch, which is located on the brachial artery and is applied over the elbow, is the one in which phlebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the wrist through a clear manifestation. The salvatella (or transverse vein), which is the vein between the aforementioned auricular and the smaller one, is located on two branches.
In the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of them is that which gives curvature to the curve of the wild vine; and the second is sophena, and its place is in the groin of the domestic animal; and the sciatic vein, and its place is in the curve of the wild vine; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The condition of the veins near the ears is catarrhs, migraines, headaches, and old ulcers of the head.
And the quality of sowing those is as I will recount to you: it should be rubbed on the head of the patient, and the head of the patient should be rubbed at the back of the skull in the place of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then firmly press the patient's side with a band where the two places of their veins are close to the ears in two pressed areas of the head; and you want that on your right hand, and if you feel the pulse of those on your right hand, here sow it by test.
Then take the surgical lancet, which is the one that will be inserted, and place it near the vein between where the bloodletting will reach the mouth. And then raise your hand to the vein and its parts above, incise the vein with an oblique incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers adjusted or near to that; and let the blood flow out as much as you wish.
And then strengthen with powders and leave that there until it is healed.
And this has already been described at the beginning of the book regarding the incision and their cautery.
More of the two arteries that are adjacent to the temple for the youth of bloodletting, it is an ancient and wicked headache, as well as chronic conjunctivitis and a body full of acute effusions in the veins.
And the quality of bloodletting there is as I will recount to you: tighten the patient's neck with your hand between which the two veins appear by clear perception, and let the pulse of their wrist be felt by your thumb; and then you can proceed.
And then you elevate the codena above the vein at the parts superior to what you have just indicated, and insert the flebotomy incidentially leaving it there, elevate the vein in them; and cut that as you have done in the two other veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity of your necessity.
And then release the constriction of the patient's abdomen, and place your hand over the vein for an hour, and then place a cloth and powder there with a strong compression, and leave it until it is healed.
And after the recollection of their symptoms, and following that, the incision, and the puncture at the beginning of the limb.
And the procedure for bleeding from the vein of the forehead is similar to the cephalic venous bleed in ancient maladies of the face, including headaches, inflammation, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the bleeding from the forehead is as I will recount to you; it is that the patient strengthens his neck with a bandage under which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is named a fossor, this is its form:
Pause the puncture at the point where it is at the top of the cavity above that vein and strike over it either upright or for another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you wish; then remove the perforation in the patient and strengthen it so that it may heal.
Sometimes the space is opened by venesection on the side, but I do not know if the venesection should be of acute extremity as with other venesections, or of lateral extremity, and perform the venesection across the bone, for it is close by and strong; breaking the bone with the venesection when it is too delicate.
More importantly, the youth of the two veins that are at the corners of the eyes through the eyebrow due to redness and swelling in the eyes, and for facial ailments.
The quality of the venesection is that the patient's pulse strengthens with a cloth bandage, and then perform the venesection on those veins, and you stand over the head of the patient.
And perform the femoral incision along the transverse direction for a short length, just a little, as in that place there is no flesh; and if the incision is fine, strengthen the extremity of it to be broken.
And then let the blood run until it is necessary, place your hand over those points, strengthen them for one night, and then remove them.
More importantly, the femoral incision of the vein in the nose is appropriate for acute fever and intense thirst, as well as facial illnesses, migraines, and rash that occurs on the face, especially when it is chronic.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient strains his neck, and then places his nose to your left hand, takes the fine long incision tool, and places it in the middle location of the nasal tip according to the correct direction, for the vein does not appear here, and thus the blood begins to flow quickly.
Gently close the incision with your hand and let the blood flow as necessary; then remove it after one night, for it is restored somewhat quickly.
May the youth of the femoral incision lead to constriction of veins and to the beginning of leprosy and various ill health conditions and bad corrosive ulcers similarly as with phthisis.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient feels each cut in his side with flax; and the surgeons are over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a bench.
And gradually make the femoral incision along the length with a femoral incision that is initially ample but becomes smaller and smaller; and extract blood according to the season, a certain quantity, or according to what is necessary; and make it similar to the other vein.
And gradually remove the flax and firm up the two veins with a mid-string tension so that the patient is not overheated, and leave enough space in the wound for the plague to heal.
And the benefit of the femoral incision for the Algeric veins, it brings relief from small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers, and fissures, as well as bad ulcers that occur in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that you make a cut in front of the malae, and strengthen its neck with a bandage, then rotate the labia and look for two veins, one on the right side of the labia and the second on the left; the demonstration of each is by the blackness of each of both, and this more so is in the circuit of those small black veins; then incise each by an incisive cut.
And if doubt remains to you, and you do not know which is which of those, then understand the incision of the larger one of those, and that which is more evident among them.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are in the labia above.
And of the two veins that are left, the treatment for the tongue is close to the femoral incision at points that are in the groin, for the illness of the uvula, and for illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of performing a femoral puncture is to follow the patient's thighs in front of their groin, elevate the vein from below, and observe the vein, noting one side of it turning black and the other side turning black, noting the color change of each.
And then perform a femoral puncture on each side; and beware that you do not end the procedure by mistakenly puncturing arteries, for they are close to the surface.
And your veins that are punctured in the crotch are those in which blood usually flows in all men, and the femoral puncture is performed according to two methods: either place a thorn or olive needle of fine thickness; or use a surgical knife for the puncture, and call it a nessel. This is the form of it:
Let the wound be as you see, and it is necessary to open the concave veins full of large apparent flowing vessels, and at those that contain thick turbid blood.
And this phlebotomy is of lesser breadth and finer extremity, and it is suitable for the phlebotomy of fine veins containing thin yellow blood.
More so, the youth of the phlebotomy from the basilic vein, which is one of three veins: from which we extract the blood of the maladies that are left to the gualayro and the col, and from what affects the foot, the belly.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing this phlebotomy, to handle it well and be overly cautious with it, for if he leaves an artery there, and if he err and adjust the puncture of the phlebotomy improperly, he will cut that artery and cause flows of blood. Therefore, you must not perform a strong phlebotomy before cutting as with a lancet.
And if the basilica does not appear by clear manifestation, then change to the other one, or seek some branch there; or perform a flebotomy in that place at the end of the arm, for that is manifest; and dry that with a flebotomy as we have said.
And if you wish the flebotomy of the metysse, then before the stricture of the arm, touch the place between where you know the location of the pulse, and then place your hand over it; then raise the arm and dry the vein with a concave section of the flebotomy as we have said; and guard that the percussion does not occur in any space of the location of the artery.
And when you observe, as you strengthen the ligament, inflammation occurs in the place you marked with your hand; that inflammation is due to the artery, so avoid that area.
And if you observe the blood flow in the flebotomy as red as a child's urine, and the blood is thin and rosy, then you know it is the blood of the artery; then lift and place your hand for a long space over that area; and approach that hand, and if the blood stops, for several moments are stopped, then strengthen the arm and leave that.
And keep the patient warm, and afraid of it, and do not wet that part for a few days until it is healed.
And if the blood does not stop, and sometimes you must not apply medicine to it, when you incise the artery, see if its extremity is constricted, and by stopping the blood; or that which comes from a fistula, and do that, and take half of it and strengthen that over the location of the vein with strictura descente using lime and powder on the other day.
And if the blood is stopped, that is good; otherwise, cure that with what preceded in the memory of the location of the powder-stopping blood flow.
And the stopping of the blood in such small areas due to the location and the possibility of the arm closing up is difficult.
And for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial that extracts the blood from the part above the head and from the part below the body; for this reason, it is composed of a branch of the basilica vein and a branch of the cephalic vein, as we have said.
And cover the femoral region during the phlebotomy when it is over-tender in the phlebotomy of the leg; for leaving it would be a nerve; and then if adjusted in the puncture of the phlebotomy and finds the nerve, it will happen to him stupor, and recovery is difficult, and it is rare that he is fully cured. This nerve appears with vibrations in sensation; and if hidden to some men and is subtle and not shown, then cover the phlebotomy where you puncture with a section of alnessil, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then puncture the vein along its length.
The purpose of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is to draw blood from the head and relieve ailments of the eyes.
And do this properly, if you want to puncture for an olive phlebotomy or a myrtle phlebotomy; for it is pure blood from all the veins, for neither the artery nor the nerve is left.
Moreover, however, an abscess is often found in some people, when it is not venefleced in the first percussion, then do not notice it again in that abscess.
The first of these is that you should know that veneflecing should be administered only for the conservation of health and with hope for it and caution regarding the occurrence of diseases, and that the veneflecing should be performed on one of the veins in the groin: cephalic, basilic, and femoral; and that the veneflecing should be performed at the beginning of spring, fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals, when signs of engorgement appear.
And a fistulotomy should be made, and on the third day or at the first hour of the day after three hours have passed.
The more urgent the fistulotomy is administered, the more it should be done when it provokes convenience and necessity, whether at night or during the day, at any hour, and at all times.
And let the child not be fistulotomized before it has four years, and a woman who is pregnant should not be fistulotomized until the fourth month of pregnancy, and old women who have passed their sixtieth year should not be fistulotomized.
And when anyone wants to be fistulotomized in any manner, let their intestines be modified before the fistulotomy by using a leech clister, if there is any retained wound or tear, so that the veins do not discharge superfluous fluids during the fistulotomy of the intestines, which are purged, and do not affect the principal members.
And let patients who are nauseous, intoxicated, or recovering from illness or drunkenness not be fistulotomized until they have recovered from these conditions. Similarly, let fistulotomy be performed more frequently when there is a passing colic, vomiting, abdominal distress, frequent intercourse and work, and fasting or vigil, as well as any cause that dissolves virtue, either bodily or spiritual.
And then consider in subtlety of humors before this if the scab is large, with foods and beverages, and with medicines if this is possible for it.
And then immerse in bath if any cause does not prohibit, or exercise for the sake that the scab be subtletied.
And place the phlebotomy on the feet of the patient, so at about the hour of three, as we have said.
And I assure you that the feet of that patient should be protected on that day from all bad animal accidents, as when there is anxiety, anger, fear, and all bodily accidents, as when there is labor and superfluous pain or copulation and things similar to them.
And at her service, have the causes be present for the use of which custom among men is based on aromaticity and odor, and with balsams and things similar according to the quantity and possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is purer than the cushion of the one who is to be phlebotomized.
And then extract his arm, rub that area with your hand using the flap knife two or three times; and tightly bind the wound with a bandage and wrap it twice.
And if the stricture is tempered, or when the stricture is not equal, or when the stricture is due to excess, then prohibit the flow of blood; or if it is due to softening, then prohibit the body from flowing blood accordingly.
And when the stricture is near, have that which is to be incised rubbed with his hands between them while the veins are swollen and made evident by sensation.
And when making the incision, apply a little antiseptic oil to the incision properly; and place your finger of the left hand on the vein, leaving the location where the incision is to be made, so that the vein slightly protrudes and the percussion is clear, for it is the vein which you find as if a string escaping. From those veins, choose one that is full of venosity; when you pause the incision over this area, it contracts, revealing the correct location; and the incision does not open the vein, and if it does open, it is because the vein is narrowed.
And thus, for this know that the phlebotomist should be fixed and solicited in all these causes.
And then pause the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one go, that is good. Otherwise, you repeat this for another round, leaving that place a little, or apply more pressure if the area has not become inflamed.
And if the area has become inflamed, or the sore has suppured, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not apply too much pressure, for it would force the abscess to burst forcefully, nor should you put it in hot water.
And then repeat the phlebotomy if necessary.
And if the wound is small and the vein is slightly closed, and you fear that it might not bleed enough, then repeat the phlebotomy in that area according to correctness and adjust based on the appearance. Do so with more pressure before the area becomes inflamed, for when the area does become inflamed, you should use less pressure.
But if you find that it has already suppurated, then do not operate on it, for it is not necessary for any reason; instead, place your hand over some part of the wound's edge, for it alleviates the body's pain. And it is better in this place than oil and other oils.
And similarly, administer the wound of oil in all lymphotomies where they cut the veins; they should prohibit the use of wounds for stopping bleeding, and do this by tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when placed over one of those areas, for the blood is clarified and circulated when it is thick.
And if a large abscess is generated in the lymphotomia site, where many boils occur, especially in those that have not been bled but only that one time, or during the indication of the small vein, then you should apply, and place your hand over the area a sponge infused in water and salt, slightly heated, and keep it there for an hour, for it dissolves.
And ensure that he does this near the confluence of the blood from that vein with another vein.
And if there is any darkness or greenishness in the area for some days, do not note this; and if you wish, place over that a cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of hellebore juice or vinegar or its resemblance.
And when blisters and boils occur, you should perform bloodletting from the basilica vein.
And place your hand over it. If at that time you find it soft, apply a compress to that area; when that boil is bad and evil. Then be sure to use something as we have said, for strong pus will flow from the artery.
And apply a plaster where there is stiffness, to make the area tougher, and then treat it with the other treatment until it heals.
And ensure that you extract from the abscess all fluid according to the quantity of its virtue and according to the dominant color over the pus as it appears.
For if the pus is black, let it stand until it resolves; similarly, if you see it thick, let it stand until it becomes more subtle; similarly, if it is sharp, let it stand until its acuity is lessened.
And when the swelling is hard and there is a need for one-time extraction of the abscess, enlarge the incision in the vein and let the abscess drain.
And when it is soft, do the opposite, make multiple incisions and drain it gradually.
And the best that is administered in venous phlebotomy is a transverse section, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy avoids the flow of pus and the injury to nerves, and is more commendable and safer than venous phlebotomy based on length.
And in which syncope is accustomed to occur after phlebotomy, make sure you cure it before the phlebotomy with a small dose of wine infused with milgrana or simple oxymel; and then extract from the wound in three or four incisions.
And if it is a massage with essarop of myrrh or essarop of aromatic honey mixed with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and saffron, or an aromatic and fragrant essarop.
And if you encounter syncope, perform a femoral incision, as it is caused by the cessation of vital blood flow. Then have him drink water from meat and sip a subtle fragrant broth; use aromatic substances like aleo, and apply them to his feet with this.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syncope by evacuation.
And to cool his arm and dissolve his blood for the second time, apply a fomentation from which the femoral incision is for principal evacuation, and the virtue of which is cold, gradually evacuating the blood, so it depends on the quantity of the virtue over consecutive days.
And if you want to cool his arm, and gitar his blood for the second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours after the first femoral incision.
And if you want to draw the blood from his body in the opposite direction of where it is declining, do this after it has cooled on the second or third day.
When that body in which there is a wound has been cauterized and is acute and causes fever, ensure that the blood is let all at once and in great quantity, and amplify the sensation so that it might cause syncope; but you must have preserved all conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on the pulse to keep the body from dying instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
And do not when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as if those of the vein are closed and it is difficult to expel the blood, that you press upon that area with great urgency and slightly extend it, for this is too bad.
Let it remain until the second phlebotomy is performed; or wait for the effect of the first phlebotomy to subside as the blood coagulates in the veins; or place your hand on the typhus arnica or sage, and apply a light compression until the blood has settled.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity compels you to evacuate the sore according to the method, and there is no excuse, then you let it flow to that same place or to the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called "funis del bras" is incised in place of the superficial or basilic vein, when they are not visible or hidden, for it is composed of those.
And the quality of the incision is that the patient inserts his hand into cold water while the vein becomes noticeable by its reddening.
And then press firmly with the litharge paste at the midpoint; and then incise according to the transverse small vein, neither longitudinally nor along its length.
And make the incision wide, and your incision for the vein there at the joint of the hand small.
And if you are forbidden the flow of the blood, then you immerse your hand in the trailing water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your necessity.
And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from immersing your hand in the trailing water, and instead suspend the flow of blood in cold water during winter.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for it has no pulsating vein or nerve.
And the phlebotomy of the savatella of the right hand is related to the ailments of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy from this vein is that you press the hand with flax or with your own hand, rather than keep it in trailing water, until the vein is swollen and clearly demonstrated; then quickly perform the phlebotomy at the transverse point; and if you incise this completely, it will not harm you.
And ensure that you do not place your hand too close to the flebotomi, for then you leave it with the nerves of the fingers naked and exposed.
And then immerse the hand in the water basin and let the blood flow into it. For if you do not immerse it in the water basin, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, which is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is extracted in the quantity needed, then pause over the vein with oil and salt to prevent it from being completely consolidated; similarly, ensure that you do this for all related areas.
Moreover, for the youth of the flebotomy from the left hand, it is that you consult on the illnesses of the liver.
And do similarly in the flebotomy of the leg as you have done in the other.
And the youth of the saphenous vein in the flebotomy is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as liver diseases, and menstrual retention, and illnesses of veins and old ulcers of thighs and chests, and their similar ailments.
And the quality of the femoral incision is that the patient's foot enters into cauda lago and makes friction on that area where the veins appear; a cord is tied around the joint of the foot; in that place, the vein which is apparent must be cut off, and from there its branches spread out in the face of the foot.
And therefore perform the femoral incision more widely or place the leg so that the vein is cut off and the connection of the leg is better and cleaner.
And if you perform the femoral incision in the face of the foot, then you must guard against the nerves that are left over on the face of the foot, and place your incision parallel to the one you make across, as if you were going to divide it.
And let the femoral incisions be vertical.
But if the letting of the blood is prohibited; then you wet the foot in cauda lago and let the blood flow in that area where it is to be evacuated.
And if the bloodletter err in the first cut, then iterate at the femoral region a little, where the location is salt; and fear not its malignity, but rather guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
And similarly make the incision on the other foot equally.
And for the sciatic vein, the location as we have said you should leave the bone of the leg with the parting of the wild hair.
And the danger of bloodletting is pain in the hip when it is due to a cut wound.
And the quality of bloodletting is that the patient enters the bath, exercises and strengthens his thigh with a bandage of linen placed above the bone above four fingers, so that it does not appear externally.
And when it appears, then bloodlet at that site according to whatever means are at your disposal and according to the transversal, which is better; or incise there by incision or extract there by extraction, for the location is salt.
And it is especially in men that this is observed; and if you find it, and it does not appear by the sense of touch, then incise a branch of it, and that one appears on the back of the foot opposite the little toe and the ring finger.
And guard the nerves, and let the fluid flow from the vein in the quantity you desire.
And then release the tension and place your hand over the incision site to strengthen it, so that it heals slightly.
Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using those.
Ventilations are of the heart, or the lungs, or the eyes.
And ventilation is performed in two ways: one way involves incision and extraction of blood, and the other involves ventilation without incision.
And this ventilation that involves incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And at the points where incisions are made for bleeding and draining abscesses, there are four locations of the body, of which one where points are placed is on the occiput, and is the last part of the head; and the better location of the two parts of the neck in half; and points of the chin leave the jaw behind and then the mouth; and points of two spatulas; and points of alohoster, and it is above the end of the coccyx; and points of two forks, and are of two brasses; and points of two tibias; and points of two thighs.
And for the points, do not drain the abscess but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by this do not lose its virtue as with bloodletting; nor should a point be made with fire or several fires in any illness caused by repletion until the body is completely evacuated.
But if necessity causes us to make points for an illness or during its continuance, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end, in the middle of the month, and at any time.
And when times occur for any of those causes, and especially if it is in the third or fourth day, then command ventilation to be performed more than two or three hours have passed.
And the purpose of neck ventilation is that when you apply gravity to the head and what is embedded in the eyes; more important is that this be close to the complete evacuation of the entire body.
And this ventosa is in the place of craniotomy.
And it is not advisable to use that which is inflamed or in which there is a cold, as it would cause great harm.
And for this reason, you should not use those that are inflamed, and in which there are gouty affections.
More so for those that are continuously inflamed over them, causing forgetfulness; and for this reason, you should command the cupper to place his hand slightly on the cup at the affected parts,以防造成记忆丧失。
More so, the cupping of alkehel is in the place of craniotomy for the jugular and basilic veins: and for this reason, it helps with asthma, and with the constriction and scission of the vein, as well as coughs and swelling.
And you should slightly warm the alkehel cup, for if it is left cold on the skin, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And the application of alhagdahan affords relief to headaches and ophthalmia, migraines, pre-focal pain, and toothaches; it is in place of basilica phlebotomy.
And make sure you command the attendant not to press too hard at the scarification point so as not to injure the artery and disrupt the flow of blood.
And the application of heat allows the mentum to provide relief for alcohol in the mouth, for gum decay, and for appearances associated with illnesses in the mouth, which are in place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is found in the two lips.
And the application of heat on both spatulas provides relief for caphatan, which is performed by restoring temperature.
And the application of heat to both internal divisions of the femoral regions provides relief equivalent to phlebotomy of three veins, which are the basilica, fusca, and cephalic. For that releases blood from all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those smaller veins from the larger ones through which the release reaches the three veins.
And command the fan to blow not too strongly during incision, for the area is naked of flesh, and leave only the nerves and arteries.
And it is a fan with which air is blown and you apply it to the hemorrhoids of the buttocks and to the ulcers, but leave them.
And make sure to command the fan to be a large fan, made of reed, for the area needs strong dryness; and use strong light reed fans for incision.
More fans on the legs reduce swelling by manifest diminution, for they drain the fluid from all parts of the body, and relieve ancient pains in the thighs and the liver, and of the bladder; and provoke menstruation, and relieve boils and sores; and are in place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and hanged, and of two calves.
But they also thicken the whole body and cause syncope in many people.
And from the fans used for hanged patients, the youthfulness is considered appropriate to the fans of two thighs.
And the quality of the position of the vesicles is that you place the blister at its beginning very well and let it drain by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the vesicles, but pause them lightly, and remain in those positions for a while, so that the humors come to the place through equal advent. And do not cease to repeat this until the place is already reddening and swelling, and the signs of inflammation appear.
And then you incise and continue the suction little by little, and consider the disposition of the body further.
If the person has tender flesh due to cold, ensure that you incise only once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the blister maker to increase the incision slightly and then reduce the suction by facilitating it.
And if the blister is large, then you must incise twice, with the first incision opening the way for the subtlety of the blister and its moisture. More in the second regarding the inspection after the extraction of the large abscess.
And if the pus is thick, then let a scarification be done on the fourth day so that it may drain.
And finally, when we want to extract the pus little by little or only a little, suffice it for us to make a scarification.
And if we want the extraction of thick pus, make a deep scarification; and if we know that the pus is large, then we must perform it with a scalpel.
And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only.
And if the person whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and their pores are wide, we must apply the sites of the cups gently, openly, and fully resolved; if it is in summer, then use olive oil from aloes or olive oil from violets, or two-part olive oil, or olive oil from honeycomb; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or pus oil, and to those similar.
And if the excess is large, wipe it, then apply olive oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or antheric oil, and ones like them.
But if the fan is of wide parts with fleshy flesh, then it should be prohibited to use oil, and instead, the areas of the fan near the wind should be washed with cool water or cold water from a basin, or water from a chest, or water from a caldron, and similar substances should be used in those places.
And for that which the pain is due to moisture, wash its fans with wine, or water from myrtle and sumac, and similar substances.
And for that which the excesses are large, wash its fans with old wine, or water from santonic, which is marjoram, or decoction of antheric, or chamomile, and similar substances.
And it should be kept before bathing; having this, it should be administered shortly after the bath for one or two hours, and it should sleep near the fan.
What must be done that the wind-driven disorder and the phlebotomy be conducted before the release of winds.
When you consider the beginning: when the wind doctor or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and has sharp pain and inflammation, then you should take cooling causes, such as vinegar milks, endive in vinegar, lettuce, saffron, julep, and their like.
And give them foods such as lentils, pigeon meats, and well-seasoned foods, and those like them.
And for him of whom the colic is due to cold, take in his drink essaroop of almond, or essaroop of saffron seeds, sumac, and wine flavored with myrrh between vinegar and honey; and let it be commanded that he use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid lentils, beans, pistachios, small pigeons, and squabs.
And you should ensure that his drink is greater than his food on the day of wind treatment and phlebotomy.
And it should be given to drink in some hours to some men hemlock, or medicines of mustard, mustarded or linseed before ventilation or before phlebotomy or nearby, so that the principal members may be comforted and the wound be subtletied; and it should not be allowed them to take any food.
Let the vents that are his scarifications be vents placed on the liver, and over the gout and podagra, and over the umbilicus, in the areas of the joints, and the side of the abdomen, for these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
And it is not desired for those scarifications but for the drawing of blood from a limb, just as we apply a cupping ventosa on the breast in sickness of flux of blood from the blood of the nostrils; and we use that to dissolve the fixed phlegm in the limb, just as we apply it to the belly and the umbilicus; for that rarifies the limb and draws out the fluid and alleviates the pain by dissolving the swelling.
And it is applied to the gout when it occurs in their passage or foot, for by virtue of its strong drawing power, it alleviates the pain and removes the swelling from its place.
And it seems when it is placed on the liver and spleen, one should relieve distension in those enclosed.
And these distensions are administered often with suction solely; and sometimes with fire.
And sometimes these distensions are administered full of clear water in the illnesses of the spleen.
And this is because the distension should be full and larger, so it should be clear water alone or water in which suitable herbs are added.
Form of the distension administered with fire: let the width of the orifices be two fingers, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of the probe be half a palm; and be in the size of the probe, in the location that is in the circuit, the size of the probe, I take it to be small according to the quantity that enters it with an needle.
Let it be made of elm wood or citrus wood, coarse and large, equal and firm so that it does not lead the member to deviate from its position over it.
And place a candle at the midpoint of the thigh, either of wood or iron, where it is placed near the fire.
And let this large bellows be greater than that which we have mentioned; and the smaller mouth according to the ailments and the condition of him who uses it.
And the bellows for children and those who are weak are different from those for young people and pregnant women.
And the quality of placing this bellows near fire on the member is to extend the mechanical part of the bellows near a small candle of wax, and place that near the midpoint of the thigh in the center of the bellows, so that the fire is ignited around the area where the candle is placed to prevent the patient's body from burning.
And place it near the member of the patient, and let it be over the tube as we have said. When we have the bellows and do not need to hold it, and let the vapor rise over that tube, then the bellows will soon dissolve.
And then heat the pincers according to their manner, and repeat that if you need to do so.
In the case of ventosa for the illness of pleurisy, it is applied with water, in which there is no transverse or longitudinal scar, and it is not applied unless it is filled with water, and is placed over the body part only as needed.
And this is the form of the ventosa: And this ventosa, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a greater quantity of water.
Capitol. xcvi.
Sanguissuguas are not administered in large members but in the members where the position of ventosas is impossible due to their small size, such as the tongue and similar parts; or on a member devoid of flesh, such as the nose and lips and similar.
And the quality of using those that you have found sanguissuguas in two-boiled waters purified.
And after let them lie in warm water until they are relaxed, and that no cause of inflammation remains in their belly; then let the body be evacuated at the beginning by venesection and by purges; then rub the limb of the patient until it becomes red; then place them over a pillow.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if possible, apply purging to the area, especially in younger patients.
And if not, then wash the area with water mixed with vinegar and then apply and rub it well.
And if the bleeding from the wound is prolonged near the site of the sanguissugation, and if this persists, then insert a cold cloth into the water, and place it there until the exsudation subsides.
And if the bleeding increases, then sprinkle vitriol trissat or pieces resembling the styptic causes over it, until the bleeding is stopped; or place cloths soaked in decoction of fava beans on the area, and let them remain there until the fava beans adhere to the area, and the bleeding is reduced.
And if necessary, repeat the bloodletting, when possible change them.
And if bloodletting is prohibited by suspension, then apply heat to the area where recent bleeding occurred or insert a needle at the sites that are about to bleed; and place them there, until the bleeding stops when felt.
And when you want them to decrease, powder the area with a little bitter almond, or salt, or ashes, and apply it quickly.
Thus begin the procedures of the fourth part: restoration. This chapter is necessary advice in the art of medicine; and it deals with the restoration of fractures and dislocations in bones.
Oh, son, know that this chapter is taught by physicians, vulgar remedies, and those who have not recently read the works of the Ancients or even glanced at their writings.
And for this reason, this method of the scientists in our land is kept private; and I have not forgotten it after much study; and I have acquired this knowledge not through what others teach but through long reading of the works of the Ancients and studying them with understanding to extract the science from them.
And direct the experiment and study in the length of my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that concerns my science and on which my experiments have passed; now I abbreviate this to you others and deliver this from the occupation of expansion; and abbreviate this at the end of abbreviation; and show this at the end of declaration; and form this into motas forms of the instruments that are administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, thus as I have done in two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summarize and collect the essential information on fractures of bones, those which require preliminary attention before we begin the recollection of various bone fractures and their diversities. Begin then by saying what we will discuss in the prologue of this chapter; and the chapters to which the craftsman must be attentive at the beginning, so that they stand on the truth of those. It is you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art from others.
And therefore say that when accidents occur such as a fracture or dislocation or twist or consolidation, whenever you approach the beginning with ligation or to draw out that part, or any of them together, if no cause is prevented, such as weakness of virtue, or it is one on which an effect occurs, or very old in decrepitude, or is at the time of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
And therefore it is content in food consisting of fresh herbs and of meats of partridges and of crabs; and we prohibit fatty meats and fullness from foods and from all food that fills the veins with scum, until you are secure of abscess caut, and if you fear effusion of matter in the member.
And then return the patient to its primary regimen according to the custom of the disease.
And therefore, when the broken bone begins to be restored, then let the patient be fed on nutritious foods rich and heavy in which there is viscosity, such as foods made of cooked wheat in water, rice, eggs, fish, cow's stomachs, nuts, fresh meat, and other similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture is made slightly and with honey.
And know that the bones crack in those men who are in the first vitality and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they be continuous and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying of their limbs.
Yet nature adjusts and amends over the broken bone from any part due to a cause resembling glue in which it thickens and adheres strongly, joining them together at the end of strength and firmness, thus like fire at the beginning, yet no cause prohibits it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to restrict the patient's diet, a diet in which there is gravity, viscosity, and thickness, as we have said.
And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the thigh is different from the fracture of the skull bone; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the arm; and likewise all other members are diverse among them.
And I review my memory of all species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the others.
A great diversity of fractures within itself. And the species of fractures in bones are diversified; for some are caused by an arcuate fracture or one that occurs at the sutures; and sometimes fractures occur according to the length of the bone: such as those from the sagittal suture and tiles, and additions both proceeding and not proceeding, just as when a pen is prepared to write, there can be a fracture by a break and disruption in the head, or a small fissure.
And for each species there is a specific method or torture in restoration, according to the recall of it, which will be distinct in its places.
Sign of fracture of the bone. And by this it is known that a bone fracture has occurred: there is distortion of the limb, and an prominence or bump can be perceived through touch, as well as the pain felt when pressing on it with your hand.
And when there is neither apparent distortion nor pain, you should touch the bone with your hand with some force and if the patient does not experience much pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there is distortion or a small fracture, so test it by touching the area with your hand and applying compression; then place your hand over the medication area where you perceive a slight swelling at that spot; and it will likely be straightened by subtle contraction.
And you will know that the area is curved and not split into two or more parts as does not happen in such cases, when the entire part of its composition is inflamed; then you should begin your treatment to straighten it out, keeping an eye out for the formation of a boil.
And if an abscess occurs in him, let that be left for some days until the abscess ceases; then equalize it according to any method you can of levitation and of ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and piercing of it are lighter than the one in which you have occasioned.
And place it firmly according to the recall of it that will come.
More if in the bone you have occasioned it, then when an extension of this broken member into two parts is necessary, whether it be the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or one cord and the hand.
And let your position be such that you place the member in alignment according to its natural shape, while the parts of the broken member are extended, then you must force yourself to return those additions with ingenuity and according to any method you can in their places.
And see to it that your strength is such that you do not cause harm or injury to the patient through your operation, nor pain; and force yourself according to your power to apply one bone to its companion bone according to their best forms.
And ensure that at that opportune moment you touch it with your hand, and if you see any other cause different, correct it and equalize it by the quantity of your virtue.
And avoid excessive extension and compression, as foolish doctors sometimes cause an abscess due to their operations or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen from their operations.
The quality of the fracture of the affected member is that which I describe; so that you may know that the broken members vary in their smallness and in their size and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the said thigh and similar to those, cover them with a fine thin cloth.
And of those that are large like the thigh or the chest, cover them with an external and firm wrapping, for the firm dressing connects the large and strong member from all sides at the fracture evenly, ensuring that no stain enters.
And then begin, gradually with your dressing, gently apply three or four wrappings according to the part; and firmly hold your hand a little on the wrapping.
And then place it at the uppermost part of the location of the fracture, and firmly ensure that your hand is near where you have secured the area of the fracture. And then gradually extend the wrapping around the fracture site a little, and gradually soften the tension little by little, while you take from that place a large amount.
And then take another bandage and wrap the other layer around the injured area covered with wrapping, and gradually bring the wrappings to the part past the fracture; and let your operation be in the tension of the wrapping and in the softening of that according to what we said in the first wrapping above.
And then place the stopa (or a cloth) between the wrappings to equalize the tension of the fracture, if there is any tortuosity; otherwise, do not pause at all.
And then place it over the other bandage, and gradually equalize on these wrappings, stitch them properly as soon as possible, if there is no swelling or abscess in that area. Otherwise, place it over what constitutes the abscess there and which causes the swelling; leave that for a few days; then strengthen the stitches.
And let the staves of the cane for the left side be straight and well-formed; or made of ash wood; or of palm ribs; and let the width of each stave be according to this form and this figure:
But ensure that the stave which is placed over that fracture be thicker and slightly longer than the other staves, and the length of the stake according to what is read regarding the member's magnitude and minuteness; and then strengthen on the other bandage according to your first stricture; and properly fasten above with a decent bandage as we have said about the stricture, and it should be your stricture more in that place of the fracture, and the more extended from the fracture, the less the stricture.
And ensure that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of flax; if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some surgeons padding their thread cords with flax, it is a great error when fitting the stricture to equality.
And similarly, thin threads are not convenient, for you will not be able to fit the stricture with them as you wish, and it should not be that there is less than a finger's breadth between staves.
And if the patient is injured at the extremities of the vessels near the site of constriction in those areas, then place there those of stopa made from lion's mane or carded wool between them so that it does not cause injury.
Some fractures are caused by a blow, and accidents leading to disruption in the chain, and you will find them remembered in that at the Capitol according to their uniqueness.
And know that for all broken members, they are not set by vessels on the first day; this cause is that the member, when large, cannot be held still by vessels but may require up to five or more days, according to your safety regarding the onset of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters that the Ancients used to restore, which are applied over fractures, dislocations, and twists.
Method of plastering for the opening of restoration for fractures, suitable for complex cases and especially for women and children, which is done on what you do not apply heat or friction: and it is that you take powder of malt, which is the medula of the flour that results from the movement of the grain in the walls of the mill.
And you must sew it this way, but first strain the white paste of mustard, and proceed with the thickening of it not too thin; then use that.
Another method of plastering for fractures, dislocations, and sprains: mix saffron, dragon's blood resin, acacia gum, fennel seed, and myrrh, all measured in drachms. x; frankincense in drachms v; alcohol in drachms xx; all are to be sifted and strained, then mixed with alcoholic water or mustard paste if the wound is superficial; then use this plaster, which is of good composition, for it restores slightly broken bones and heals the affected area.
Another method of plaster for fractures and sprains: mix myrrh and half a drachm of white althea. x; frankincense in drachms v; acacia in drachms vi; Armenian wax in drachms xx.
All are to be ground in a mortar with the mixture, then strained, and prepared with water or mustard paste and administered.
Method of plastering joints and bones separated from their places, and for accidents in those areas as well as cracks and fractures: take fine wool and immerse it in sweet wine and oil of cedar and place it over the area.
More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, but of cauterization and expelling pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores fractures: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; mix them all and make a plaster from them.
Method of a quick plaster to administer for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want resolution of an abscess: take root of elecampane, chamomile, flowers of violets, bran of rye; mix all parts equally, then boil them in wine, if the limb is not scalded.
More if it is scalded, then dress that with water of fennel moistened or with water and use of it.
Another method of applying a stronger plaster for resolving an abscess when it is hard: take powder of saffron, of safflower, of balsam, of melilot, of marjoram, of violet flowers, of camomile, and mix them all together; grind them all fine and mix with water of saffron or water of two or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the color thereof.
May Hippocrates not instruct in this free passage that it be placed over the limb immersed to promote its restoration, but make a cerate of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommend that it be mixed between coarseness and fineness.
May Gualia be seen as placed over the broken limb to promote its restoration and the causes in which drying of lesser quality so like myrrh, frankincense, and similar to those causes we have recommended.
Method of applying a plaster that heals injuries and pain: take equal parts of myrrh, bark of incised human skin or rabbit hide, saffron, and salt; grind them fine and mix with water, then make the plaster.
When the quantity according to which it is necessary to cut the ligature and then untie it, you should consider if no pain has occurred nor any swelling, and if the bone is not broken nor displaced from its place, then do not untie for several days. And if pain severe or swelling occurs at the site, then you should cut or untie it immediately, and apply a plaster to it.
Take a cloth and a sponge soaked in fresh seawater, submerge that in brine, and apply it to the area until the swelling and pain subside; then place the limb at rest for an hour; afterwards, cover with well-woven wool soaked in vinegar or rubbed oil, and keep it on overnight until you are certain of no abscess forming, and reduce the swelling of the limb, easing the pain.
And then repeatedly apply that fine plaster and do not tighten your original bandage too much, but keep it subtle until the area is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the inflammation and all these accidents have already subsided and no longer require poultice and bandaging, then you repeat this as you did at the beginning equally.
And if no cause of those we have mentioned occurs in the member, then you do not remove it but for about three days or four, or five or seven; sometimes all this is left for twenty days according to how you judge by the mobility of the member, as we said, until the fracture adheres and rests on the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And then adjust the bandage tighter than your first bandage, and adjust for the swelling of the patient's abdomen, according to whether the recollection of it precedes.
And if you find that the place of the fracture is already drying and weakening more than it should, then you know that nutrition cannot reach there; therefore, soak that area entirely in water for a whole day. Do this for three days; and loosen the bandage a little, and by this operation, convey nutrition to the member, and it will heal slightly.
More than what the folkers do to restore a fractured limb on another occasion when it is not restored to its beginning, according to how it breaks, and is restored according to tortuosity, it is an error in their operation, and great fear arises. If they were right, this would have been enlarged by the Ancients in their books and they would have warned of this work.
And I have not seen them do so on another occasion, therefore it is more reasonable that this does not happen.
Capitol segundo: De fractura quando accides en le cap.
The species of fractures are mote fractures, and their figures are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures, they are caused by the impact of spaza, which compresses all the bone into the cavity, leaving the bone thus as in a wooden stump; through this, this species is named ascial. Or the spaza incides on some part of the bone, and incises the flesh but does not pass the incision to its marrow; and this species of fracture is named levatio absoluta.
And the pain of these two fractures is great or small, and of a fracture that grates or rubs; its cause is percussion upon the foot or setting on a stool.
And this fracture is penetrating, nearing the marrow which it leaves the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the pain of these two fractures is great or small.
And of this fracture, it is thickened in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair [cable], and for this reason it is named this species of fracture called capillary.
And this fracture is made either by setting on a stool or by percussion of the foot, similar to which it causes some lamina of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it is made in the concave location, as happens with clay tiles when they are struck, and is part of their entry into the internal parts.
And this is mainly done in the bodies of wet bones, such as those of infants.
And so for all these kinds of compound fractures, they are set thus as if by stars separated. And I will come to the remembrance of all this in its place.
And we know all these kinds of fractures by detection of them and by inquiry of the pain and appearance of the torn flesh that is upon them.
And the capillary kind is known by this that it is discovered upon the bone, is scraped, and limits upon it with a probe, for the fracture appears black.
More in the cure of fractures consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and when you see by the symptoms that they signify manifestly through signs of fear, such as vomiting of cholera, extension, loss of understanding, absence of voice, syncope, acute fever, and swelling and redness of them, and appearances similar to them in the greater disposals, then you should doubt that it is not healing.
And if you see uncommon symptoms, you hope for health, and then you begin the cure of it.
The cause is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of the injury and this is in the days of winter, then when you study in the bone's membrane before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
And if it is in the days of summer, then when you have cuts to examine the bone before the seventh day, having that what is left of the bone be corrupted by the synovial membrane, and that accidents occur which we have recounted.
And if the fracture has already reached the synovial membrane covering the marrow, and is broken into many pieces, then you must incise the fractured part and rub it, according to what I will recount to you.
And when you have examined the thigh of the injured person, and expose the bone according to custom and your method as is possible given the shape of the injury, and make it easy for the patient.
And if you encounter difficulties in detecting the bone, flows of blood or abscesses, then you must pause at this point and do what is appropriate. It is that you fill the area with wrappings infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the injury rest until the abscess is relieved; and be sure of flows of blood; and then proceed with the circuit of the bone and its excision.
And this should be according to one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you incise the muscle straight through, and this is its form: Then administer another incisor here, a little more lateral than the first; and this is its form:
And administer further with the incisor more lateral than the second.
And ensure that you have a number of different incisors, some of which are more lateral than others; and some of them are shorter and should be at the rear end of their extremities, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion on the incisors so that the head does not shake and guides it.
And if the muscle is strong and hard, then you must perforate in its circuit before administering the incisors at the travels, which you call shallow travels.
And they are so named thus only because those that stop at the end of the bone near it do not have a terminus at all, for so the travel is round extremity or margin about that which is left the head of it acute resembling a margin or a small circle, which you prohibit from being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these travels a great number of which each suits the thickness of each bone, within which let the extremity of all be acute, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this bone.
And this is the form of three species of travels: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you place the travel on the bone and rotate it within those tongs until you know that the bone has already been penetrated; then, return the travel to another location, and pause that which passes through all carrying the quantity of the thickness of the ray or around that.
And then incise with the incisor where each traverses of the bone, and make that pus subtle which you can over it at the end of levity, as we have said, while eradicating the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause by certain instruments which you will apply to it, such as fine forceps.
And ensure that the scalpel does not touch any part of the cavity.
And since you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and separated it from the cavity if it is continuous with it, and have extracted that part, ensure that you rasp and smooth that area to match the roughness of the bone itself, resembling a scalpel, but ensure that it be finer and more delicate than other scalpels.
And if you remove any small part of the bones and suture, then take that with ease using what you should use from the instruments; and then cure the wound with liniment and ointment, which we have said.
And the other method of operation is lighter, far from fear, which dissects Gualia and cuts it with great leisure; this is its saying: At the beginning, you must begin to uncover the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most severe and most evident. When you have uncovered that part and have paused with your hand on the end of this scalpel, which has this form:
And this is because the lenticular part is lion and you do not cut any cause, and the acute part divides it into two strips lengthwise, as you see; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the chisel along its acute face incident on the bone.
And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small hammer where you cut through the bone as it is facilitated, and you be sure of the panniculus that no accident occurs in which you fear in any way, and if the medicant were the best leaf of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, if he were asleep.
And if any additional cause affects the bone of the panniculus in some locations of the bone, it will cut that part at the end of the incisor lenticular, and deliver that part where it is facilitated, for it is delivered from its place of hurt and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and what is absceded or remains from the bone is its surface, and it remains in it roughness and fine threads, then scrape that roughness away and eliminate those fine threads with thin razors that you have prepared in various quantities so that you can administer of them the most convenient parts for your operation on that broken bone and its figure.
And ensure that you administer according to your reason, sharpening the blade at its beginning with the rough part of those razors, and then use the fine part of it nearby, and do not cease doing this continuously until you reach administering the thick pus and the fine pus from all of them.
For any other small fractures or fine fractures, ensure that you administer care according to what is lost for the correction of it.
And it is because they are not instructed in all those matters. And place this on what we have written about great fractures.
And if the bandage is cut when you extract the bone, then you should take a cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge that in infused oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another cloth doubled or tripled and submerge it in wine and infused oil, and place that over the first cloth, and do this on the pus lightly enough so as not to compress it; then administer ointment to that, and do not press it except by the amount that the wound has.
Leave that area for one day or two until you are sure of the abscess; then drain it and apply medicines to which excessive dryness is superfluous, such as linseed and wheat flour, powder of thyme and of arsenic, and similar substances.
And you make of these medicines a powder that is sifted over the wound, such as being dry; generally, apply all medicine to which cleanses and does not irritate.
And use your substance according to its virtue so that the wound in your cure is clean; do not leave any greasiness or other residue on it; nor allow it to become more virulent. For when it is applied to the bandage of the brain, it corrupts that and spoils it, and you will suffer a great harm from this evil.
And you will suffer in the scrofula of the head, as it is softened by the bone and especially when the cure of it is neglected, and there is darkness on the surface of it; therefore consider if you suffer from this evil the accidents we have said, know that it is dangerous indeed.
And if the blackness occurs only from the medicine that is applied above, and is caused by that medicine, then take a part of honey and three parts of rubbed oil, line them with a cloth, place it over the scab, and apply the remedies of cure as appropriate until it heals.
Capitol three.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that it is not the nose itself that is broken, but two parts together above, or one of those few fractures, because in it you have two bones. The part that breaks is cartilaginous and not fractured; thus, do not break it but rub it, and apply warmth and gentle compression.
But if one of the two parts is broken, then you must insert the little finger into the nostril, and equalize that fracture inside with your other finger, and outside with your thumb, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And do this for your own ease, and make sure that you do not fall due to your operation on the patient's pain.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose, and it does not reach there, then you should treat it at the end of the rib where there is a small swelling.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you make the appearance of this.
And apply this for the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture, if possible; otherwise, as soon as the seventh or tenth day, you should rest the swelling with a cautery.
And insert a strip of linen cloth into the end of the nose, if the fracture is in one part, or place two pieces of cloth, if the fracture is in two parts, and ensure that the piece of cloth has such a size that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pieces should be soaked in broth, and changed throughout the day. But I do not see this done; instead, ensure that the cloth is soaked in lard boiled with powder of mill stones; and leave it in place until the bone is set and the cartilage is hardened.
And sometimes instead of gout, it is an inflamed nose, with a greater pain wrapped in lion's skin; and you have the fracture of the nose very violent and that the patient is not prohibited from inspiration.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do this, and if you wish, do gout.
And if another attack of abscess occurs, cauterize it, plaster the nose with cerote or with a hot oil mixture, or with a diachylon.
But if no abscess occurs, when you need to plaster it externally, use sesame meal and powder of cinnamon mixed with honey; then place your hand on the patient's nose, and do not cauterize the nose for any reason.
But if the nose bones are fractured or comminuted, when you need to cut those areas, extract them with instruments suitable for those cases; then close the incision, and treat that area with what encarnates and consolidates, and with plasters as appropriate.
And if a swelling occurs inside the nose, then cure that with salt and administer lead pipes when they are of pure health.
Chapter IV.
For the restoration of the jaw when broken.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by swelling, consider whether the fracture is only on the surface and not split into two parts but curved inwardly. In this case, the pain is mild.
And thus, if the fracture is on the right side, insert the left index finger into the patient's mouth; similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger. Push the fat of the fracture inward with ease towards the parts outside, using your other hand from above the bone; do this gently so as to align it properly.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension to both parts according to their correct alignment so that they can be properly realigned.
And if you encounter a tooth abscess leading to rupture, then strengthen those of which you fear will burst with wires of gold or silver or catgut; and place a cautery over the broken jaw, place another on the doubled cloth, and one on the large star-shaped stake properly made, or a pin equal in length to the jaw; and above that, as it is convenient for your application, ensuring it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and maintain calmness, and place his food and drink on a lion's skin.
And if you think that the figure has already been altered in any manner, then on the seventh day you should cauterize and remove it; and then correct what has already been altered in him and plaster the area with powder of alum, chalk of oak, or flour of cornmeal, provided that you have applied a cautery to him, and place wool from a lion's skin over the plaster.
And then, when the plaster is properly applied to him and the bone's position is not altered, leave it as it is, without removing it until he is healed, strengthening the fracture; for this fracture heals in about three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what we have said多次出现的脓肿，应在其愈合前在其内进行处理，并妥善治疗该脓肿。
And if the fracture is open, then consider whether the bone fragment is separated or displaced, then you carefully determine how to treat those displacements in the removal of the fragments.
And if the wounds are wide open, then you enlarge them with the lancet according to the quantity needed.
And when you have set those displacements, and there will be no need to re-treat them, then you close the wounds if they are wide; otherwise, place over it one of the plasters that suit and cover it, until it is healed.
Chapter V.
On the restoration of the furcula when it is fractured.
When the furcula is fractured, in the anterior part you should consider the muscle, and that fracture can occur in one of three ways.
When it is broken, or separated, or split into two parts rather than naturally occurring such fractures; and it is easy to restore it; or it happens in such fractures, and it is difficult to restore it; or it is such that the fracture is widespread.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is widespread, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the aid and follows the broken fork, and the other extends the leg at that part.
Then adjust the fracture with the nails called entry so that the shape of the bone is restored according to its natural form, neither too prominent nor concave.
And if you need more extension, then place a pad or wool cloth under the leg and let its size be according to your need; extend and elevate the fork and press the pad with your hand so that you can adjust the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the extremity of the fork towards the outer parts because it is caught in the muscle, then place the leg on its neck, and rest a medium-sized cushion on the muscle.
And the minister presses the muscle of the patient at the parts left between that of the furcula may be elevated as in the presacral area, and then you realign the fracture and equalize it with the ties.
And if you feel the ribs and they are tender, then cut there and remove those fibers with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you ingenious incise of it with one of the bistourys which you have prepared for this, after placing your hand on the furcula to control the movement; and it is a bony or metallic rod of which this is the form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width according to what you have needed of it, according to the size of the bone or its smallness.
And the length of it should be according to what is possible for the operation; it has two ends like you see, and one end is broad while the other is narrow.
And if the wound disruption which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is large, and there is suspicion of an abscess, then you adjust the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the wound disruption is small, or you fear an abscess, then you use the wound with cloths and powders according to the amount of the incision of the wound.
And if you encounter an abscess, then fill a cloth with warm oil and vinegar, and place it over it.
And altogether, provided that the splint is not loosened over the broken bone; so that you may examine the wound every day, when the flesh has softened or see the splint already become loose, then you adjust this and strengthen the ligature.
And then place the patient's head on a pillow, and under their neck, use a small cushion to support them; so that the assistant raises the support of the affected side, and thus the fracture of the furcula is elevated by the elevation of the muscle; or attach the arm to the side of the affected area.
And do not loosen the bandage unless an abscess occurs in that place within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you see that it is adhering to the wound, and adjust the bandage to fit properly and restore the area, allowing the fracture of the furcula to heal and coagulate.
And it is strengthened and comforts according to the most within twenty-eight days, and in some cases, it is done in less time than that.
Capitol. VI.
For the restoration of shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is broken in the middle of the place and not across it but along the edges.
And so, when the place is broken—and it is broken in the middle of the place—and cannot be known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture, prepare the area and reduce it according to the natural figure in every manner of skill that is within your ability.
And then place over the area powder of ground white ash and stopped lion's gall; and then place powdered double-dried drapet; and then place on the table a thin slice according to the quantity of the spoon entirely or somewhat more.
And if you leave the slice concave in some part of the spoon's location, then level that concavity with stopped lion's gall, and then place the slice according to equality.
And then strengthen above with human fat a long strip of cloth and place the slice firmly in such a way that it is not displaced from its location.
And consider the pulse on each day; and all days that it is softened, apply another application and strengthen the stake if it has been displaced from its place.
And apply the patient's back over their side.
And the spatula is restored in xx days or in .xxv.
And when this number is completed, then you dissolve the pulse, and that you know securely which it is of the bones where the pain began nor its dissolution.
And if you proceed from the location of the bone pain and place a chain there, then cut over it, and hold it, and do as we have said in the fracture of the furcula with caution if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol VII.
On the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of its location and remains unhealed; more often, the ends become necrosed and comminuted.
And concerning the accidents when his spleen is broken it declines internally and occurs with great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, fainting, and bleeding; this is declared in the cavity of the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that the patient be supine on his back, and place a cushion between the shoulders of the patient; then press on the muscles of the patient, adjust the spine of the patient against the ribs, and perform the operation with subtlety according to every manner that is possible and convenient, so that the figure of the bone returns as it should.
And place something soft like plaster and cotton wool under a thin wooden board or one similar in lightness, ensuring you wrap this in cloth; then perform the operation with subtlety over the broken bone so it is not too tight; apply bandages several times around the back, securing them firmly but decently; always consider the bandaging at all times, strengthening it when it becomes softened.
And if necessity prompts you to perform incision or puncture, or pain, or abscess that occurs in the area, then you cut and separate that and eradicate the plaster and correct what occurs by this method of cure; then return the plaster, if needed for this face; and adjust the dressing until it is healed.
Capitol VIII.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are fractured.
Know that a fracture of the ribs occurs only in large areas where they join together; and from the ends of their parts in front, no such contact occurs unless by those that are cartilaginous. And the knowledge of it is not hidden from the sensation, as the inquiry into it is made with the fingers.
And the restoration should be such that you equalize the fracture with your fingers according to the possible method, while it is reduced as it fits, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed for that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is inclining towards the internal divisions, then it happens that severe pain occurs and puncture occurs, just as in one who has pleurisy, and for this reason he puts on a veil; and it happens to him difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
And the ribs are ingeniously arranged in that manner overlapping each other.
And from them they say: place the patient on a soft bed that causes inflation and distension, so that the abdomen becomes swollen and the fracture is pushed towards the external divisions.
More importantly, we must consider this so that it is not a trivial cause for generating a carbuncle, but if it occurs, then help with this.
And some of them say that it should be placed above the abdomen and near where it sucs with strength; and this seems like reasoning, but nevertheless, it is feared that the abdomen will draw the superfluities to that place due to weakness.
And some of them would say: cover the area with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and place powders between the ribs until it is filled, so that the dressing equals when you wrap it according to roundness; and then treat the patient with a diet and medical cure.
And if the pain is intense and unbearable, causing the patient to suffer, and the bone punctures do not alleviate it, we fear for the patient, then we should cut over the area, expose the broken rib, and place our hand over that instrument which preserves the memory of the procedure, and carefully cut the bone, and extract it.
And when we suture the two edges of the wound, if it is large, we treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then incise and insert powders in rosin oil, place your hand over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for the abscess inside.
And let him be placed on his side on the mattress on which he sleeps, until he is cured.
Capitol.ix.
For the restoration of fractures of the spine and the neck.
In some cases where there are fractures in the bones of the neck, and then apply traction and similar treatments to the spine of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be cured or not, then consider whether their muscles are already softened, numbed, and dead and cannot recover, extend, or strengthen. When you stretch them with ropes or prick them with a needle and do not feel any pain in them, then you can conclude that they are not recovering, and in such cases, it is fatal.
And if you prick those areas and feel pain when stretched with ropes or pricked with a needle, then you can conclude that the fracture of the bone is healing and that the patient will recover with treatment.
And if you see the vertebrae of the neck appearing to him and want to know if he is healthy or not, then consider his feet.
And when you see that they are already softened, consider what happens in the more severe cases, and when it is near to his side, he will become weak and have a desire to defecate and urinate but cannot, then know that it is fatal, and then do not trouble yourself with the cure of him.
But if no such cause occurs, the condition is better and more轻微的。
And the cure for him is that you should cauterize to induce sedation at the site where you pause over the transverse or rubbed vertebra, or with pieces of hot wood; place your hand there for some days until the apostema is sedated.
And then place one of the comforting and healing plasters, and apply a paste over that area; command the patient to rest and be tranquil, and not to lie on the part where he feels pain until he is healed.
And if by chance you find the tendon of the bone detached or some cause that has separated from it, then you must cauterize over the joint and keep that bone; then adjust the two edges of the wound, sew if it is large; then care for that with some red ointment until it heals.
And if the lower end of the thigh bone is broken, and it is the head of the bone, then you must introduce the base of your left hand into the buttock, and align the broken bone with your right hand as much as possible by second degree equilibrium; then place a poultice and dressing over it, if you need those, and strengthen it.
And if you feel the tendons broken in it, then you must operate on that, and set it, and care for the wound with the treatment that is applied until it heals.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are broken, and if they break, then the fracture is merely communication at the extremities of those bones and are split lengthwise; and pain occurs in the area and there is puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of the limb is that you place your hand over that area which is at the fracture where its figure is.
And if the fracture is only in the extremity of the limb, then you adjust it according to what appears appropriate by equalizing it so that it resembles its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the middle or is already declining towards the parts below, then you place the patient on his side and prepare for the restoration of that fracture. And when you have adjusted it, apply a poultice over it, and then place the wooden or copper splint over it, and secure it tightly so that you do not fear puncturing the fracture or removing the splint.
And adjust the indentation so that it fills the area where the splint will be secured, and command the patient to sleep on his back or on his side.
But if an abscess develops during the extension and restoration, then you stop the extension and restoration until the abscess is drained. Place something over it to drain it as previously instructed; then return to the restoration and secure it accordingly.
And if accidents occur in the joints or are comminuted, then treat them.
Capitol.
For the restoration of the fracture of the adjutori.
Adjutori is that which is between the codetta at the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take a rod of medium thickness according to this form:
And place two pins at the ends, and then suspend it from the elevated location.
And let the patient lie on a bench; and then throw his broken arm over the rod until it reaches the middle point where the curvature of the rod is attached.
And let it be suspended over something heavy, or the servant extend it to the parts left; and then the doctor place his hands on the fracture at the same time, until the fracture returns as it should.
And another method is that the patient be supine on his back and suspend his head by the neck with a cord; then command two ministers that one of them hold what is above the fracture with his hands; and the other hold the rest of him; and each extend to their side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then strengthen the hold on the fracture with one cord and another around it, and each of the two ministers extend to their sides.
And if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then hold the middle of the cord over the tendon and the other end of the fracture apply with your hand.
And similarly if the fracture is near the hand, then hold the cord at that location and over that hand.
Equalize that with ease and your work, and then strengthen it when it is equalized according to what is needed by good application.
If an abscess forms on the seventh day, then leave the incision open, place a woolen pad soaked in vinegar and olive oil under it, and wait until the abscess drains, then secure it.
The manner of securing it is to place a poultice over the fracture, then wrap a cloth around the poultice; next adjust the arm on this support, and place your hand open over its muscle.
Then wrap the cloth around the support for the arm so that the arm is in place, unless some cause of the broken bone prevents this.
Then use stays.
Then place that stay over the fracture which is both wider and stronger than the other stays; place the distance between each stay equal to the width of a finger, and the length of the stays according to the break, adding three fingers' breadth to every part.
Then secure the stays at the incision which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter.
And it is that your compression on the site of the fracture should be more firm. And when the fracture is longer, the compression should be lesser.
And so, if you place the stones in their position and apply the compression as we have said when you restore the member to its position, then you do this.
And if you fear an abscess, cauterize, then you leave the compression and stones for seven days as we have said.
And then consider the bandage in all parts for three days so that no swelling or inflammation occurs at the site of application; or food is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive compression; and then adjust all this according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that no cause of this will occur, then do not loosen the ligature for at least three days or more.
And let the patient's knees be on their back, and their hands on their stomach.
And place yourself over the auxiliary cushion filled with wool equally, and consider at all times of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not blurred nor dissolved, therefore correct this entirely with your virtue.
And pause the food of the patient according to the order we have mentioned, ensuring that the food starts subtle and gradually strengthens; then observe as the food thickens.
Four days after the auxiliary and belt are applied, they should be strengthened for ten days; then observe as they are loosened and a bath is given, along with ointments that correct this.
And if the fracture is still irritated, then do not loosen the bandage and the stays for four days or up to two months.
Capitol.xii.
On the restoration of fracture of the arm.
The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the ulna and the radius; the former is small, and it is that which forms the little finger side of the elbow, while the latter is larger and is placed outside the small one.
And if the large or small firestick is broken forcefully, and you must tear it apart forcefully.
And when the small firestick is broken above, then the restoration of it is light, and the healing of it is even lighter.
And when the firestick is broken, if the fracture is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
And even worse than that is when two long bones are broken.
Therefore, if the bone that is broken is the small firestick above, then it is convenient for the doctor to perform the restoration, which should be done with a slight extension and facilitated by keeping it aligned.
But if the large firestick is what is broken, then you must perform a more vigorous extension.
And if both firesticks are broken together, then you must perform the extension more forcefully.
And you must place your hand in such a way that it facilitates the restoration and extension of the firestick, keeping it extended over a cushion, and position the wrist above the parts above, more so than all others. The auricular finger should be below the other fingers, and the patient's thigh should be placed on a sloping board.
And place a cushion in front of them at their head or side, so that the patient does not further strain.
And then the minister extends the arm of the affected side and places it either on his own hand or on a pillow, while another minister extends it over similarly.
And then the doctor aligns the bone at the site where it dislocated according to the best possible alignment that can be achieved.
And if there are disruptions in the bone at the fracture site, then you must forcefully reduce the entire piece into its place with your virtue (skill or expertise).
And if there appears a separated disruption that prevents the restoration of the limb, then you must operate on it and set it according to the manner we have said above.
But if the fracture is open, I have already dealt with that in a separate chapter, and therefore proceed with the treatment of it.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with charcoal made from rubbed olive oil and white wax, making it halfway between thick and thin, and tightly cover the area with a fine thread to allow the abscess to drain; then remove the charcoal and apply a plaster prepared with powder of madder in honey, and place a bandage over it; and ensure that the stellate bandage is placed over and around that fracture firmly.
And you shall know that the number of the bones in the arm I see in the major dispositions, or rather the fracture in one joint or in two joints together.
And then place your compression firmly and vigorously over the location of the fracture. When the compression is more intense on the parts above the fracture or on the lower parts, place the compression a little more moist according to how the memory of it is recalled at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that you wrap around the fracture should be moistened with moisture, and should not be hard or rough. The fat of the lamb which is strengthened should be a mixture of fine and coarse, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the ligament for several days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, as was previously mentioned for what happens to the limb, then you should immerse the limb in water until that occurrence ceases.
And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the compression.
And if the contraction is already softened and the bone has been restored and appears like those, then correct all this with your virtue.
And consider more if the nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive contraction, for then you must soften that slightly and leave it for a few days until the nourishment reaches there, and strengthen that.
And if to the patient none of the causes we have mentioned occur, then it should not slip away in about twenty days or around those.
And place the patient's hand by its virtue of movement, and let it sleep on its back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or more thoroughly restored in twenty-eight days, and all this depends on the complexity of the injuries and the disposition of the virtue.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the thumb and fingers.
Know that at the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers tender there is a fracture, and do not hurt them but rub them gently.
And when a fracture or sprain occurs to the hand, you should make sure the patient remains lying down and in front of the limb for about one hundred equal parts of a day, and then place your hand over the extended area.
And then the minister extend the broken bones and the doctor must join them with good reduction.
And then apply plaster and cotton, if no abscess forms use a cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
More so if the tear is in the inner parts, you should make a pocket of cloth in the palm, and command the patient to hold that tightly with their torn palm; then hold it tight with long cloth.
And let the cloth cover be of cloth on which is placed something to lift it, so that the flesh is applied to the palm; and hold that tightly as needed.
If the fracture is on the outer parts, then you should place another strip of cloth above the bone and another on the part, in your palm, so that your hand is open and straight; then place the splint, as if turning your hand at the wrist among the fingers with wheat.
If you happen to break one of the bones in the fingers, then if it is the base of the finger, equalize it according to what you can see and then strengthen it on the palm. If you wish, place a small strip to the right so that the fracture is elevated and not aggravated.
If the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, then equalize and bind it to the finger where the bone is; or bind all of them according to their continuity, which is better; or place a small strip above that bone, as we have said for the base of the finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the placement of cautery and opposition — in relation to your operation — according to what you see when any cause from those arises, as per the repeated narration of it.
Capitol XIV.
For the restoration of fracture of the os coxae.
The os coxae is fractured and the pain is declared according to where it is converted to in front and on top.
And the restoration is done by strengthening the ligament over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, with the patient lying on his belly and face.
And then the minister extends the ligament to its proper place according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is close to the rim of the coxal bone, then extend the ligament to the side of the ilium, so that the extension fits there, and another ligament below the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the ilium, then make the ligament extend to the side of the ilium, and the extension to the parts below.
And then the doctor aligns the bone by bringing together his hands as you reduce it according to its natural form, and the bone is joined by good articulation; then cover with a plaster and bandage, so as not to infect the limb with an abscess. But if an abscess does occur, then you let it be for some days until the abscess is ready to be cauterized, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: cover the fracture with a hard bandage, fold it two or three times, and tie off any excess; then wrap the bandage until it reaches the ankle and the back of the thigh.
Insert a long piece of linen between the thigh and the leg near the knee at the splits, allowing the ends of the linen to extend well beyond both parts, then wrap this around the leg and thigh with any excess from the bandage.
Then place something on the thigh over the location of the fracture, and place a stick over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the space between the waist and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is constricted.
And then begin a strong constriction around the middle over the place of the fracture with three or four wraps. The closer you are to the site of the fracture, the tighter, lighter, and firmer your wrap should be.
And then extend the ends of the bandage to the parts you placed between which it should reach the foot cavity, and strengthen both ends of the stakes on the other side so that the bandage does not shift from its place.
And then keep the constriction over it so that it does not cause corrosion, abscess, or inflammation in the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, you should treat it with the appropriate remedy, and adjust what has occurred as soon as possible according to what we have said before.
More so, if in the bone there is a worse condition that requires it, then you must equalize that as much as possible; otherwise, treat it and keep the area immobilized until it heals.
And sometimes this fracture of the hip is strengthened by another that is adjusted to its ligaments, as we have said in the assistant and in the arm.
But more importantly in the restoration done in such a manner no harm is done to the patient's mobility; and if it is restored alone, or another side is applied to the other, then it is necessary that the one from which it was taken remain immobile.
And know that the hip is strengthened in about ten days or a few more months, and all this depends on the diversity of the complications and other dispositions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the tibia.
Know that the fracture of the tibia occurs more frequently, but it often takes several weeks to heal completely.
But if it is a fracture, then it is merely a crack or a tear in its parts, and this can be single or multiple, and over that, everything depends on the sensation.
And the restoration of it is attempted to be equalized as much as broken parts are placed between the fingers and according to what is possible by equilibrium, conjunction, and fabrication for ease and construction.
And then place the plaster and cover over that round stencil, if you need it; strengthen it above at the core towards what is appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as for an abscess, cauterize and apply a dressing to those areas opposed to any accident according to what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the ilium.
Know that in the ilium there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named the ilium; the other is thin and is named pubis.
And accidents of the species of fracture occur in the same way as they do for the two bones of the arm, and thus the restoration is made in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and the operation is one.
And if you need to break two bones together, the joint is dislocated in all directions.
And if you need to break the finer bone, the joint is dislocated in front directions.
And if you need to break the thicker bone, you find that mark, which is one of those causes not within your control.
And then administer extension, equilibrium, and ligature of the tendons accordingly.
More importantly, if the joint dislocation has marks or bruises, let the extension be less and more gentle, and this will alleviate your treatment's severity.
And in the joint, if there is any cause for an operation on the arm, when you equate the tendons and complete your entire surgical operation, then take pestles of wood which are placed under the causes that are stopped by sutures, and make them from palm branches; discard those with small knots, and not with rough surfaces, and let their length be according to the length of the joint and the depth between them.
And then wrap each one in two layers of cloth according to the length of the foot, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other layer on the other side, and let them be down below the base location of the foot.
And then place the two shoes on three points of both extremities and in the middle point, for at this structure the leg is prohibited from leaning to the right or left side, and this is for good stability.
And then a brace of wood has been administered according to the length of the leg; and place the leg in it so that it conserves its movement.
And especially ensure that you do this in fractures, and when there is swelling properly.
And then consider the leg on each day and study it carefully, and keep it free from boils and inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever any cause of these occurs, then immediately treat it to prevent further complications.
Chapter XVII.
Of the fracture of the tarsus and the bones of the foot and toes.
Fractures do not occur in the tarsus as a whole; more often fractures occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures of the toes of the foot rarely occur, and if they do not occur to them, I rub them on the appropriate parts.
And if fractures occur in the bones of the foot and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other, then place the patient's foot on a prepared surface as shown.
Then place the other foot on what is elevated under those bones, and compress, press, and align those bones back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and wrap it around, and place the patient's foot on a small table with two holes.
Then tightly wrap the foot with bandages and other materials as needed, ensuring it is well secured.
And when three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equalized, or broken, or dislocated, and the operation in those cases is as you know.
And if some are said to be broken, then restore those, and equalize them as I and have instructed you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the broken finger in position according to its length, and slightly above it; and place the skin on this table which you have prepared, and tie it securely in place.
And if what is broken of the bones are two or three or more, then place each broken finger slightly above its quantity enveloped in a linen cloth, and secure the table under the base of the foot, and standing over one of the ends of the table, make a incision in the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which we have mentioned to you in other fractures of the accidents we have discussed; and apply this to any similar case.
Chapter XVIII.
Of the fracture of the thigh bone and the shin bone and the groin of a man.
When the thigh bone is fractured, place that part in a crooked position, and then slightly incline it towards the side of the hipbone, and keep it supported behind.
And then the midwife fills the thigh with cloth, and it is done in the thigh as hoped; and then the woman is stimulated, and her leg is lifted little by little, for all this must be done between when it reaches the side of the thigh as hoped and the broken bone returns.
And then place powder on the leg, and when she wants to urinate, moisten the cloth to facilitate it; and then she urinates, return it according to the manner in which you prepared it at the beginning, and then return it to its original powder.
And do this for seven days or so, for it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of sheep and tighten it over the wound; then insert a catheter of reed into the wound; and place all the bladder within the wound's cavity, and blow through the catheter with virtue until the bladder inflates inside the wound, for the fracture returns.
And it is filled with pus and stays for a few days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
When the bone of the thigh of a man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and needle treatment of it what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these nearby fractures that rarely occur, especially to those who have some study and use and understand this my free will; for that fracture means to you through the major dispositional lines of rightful restoration and constriction of it, and therefore understand well.
In the case of the thigh bone of a man when broken, protect it from infection, and insert the thigh into it; then place over it an envelopment of cloth, and be wrapped, and let it be left for three days or about that time, and healed.
Chapter XV.
For the restoration of bone fractures when they are displaced.
It is convenient to treat those who suffer from displaced fractures, especially if the bone is large, such as the thigh bone or the femur, or similar. You should set and bleed them frequently, provided that the conditions for bleeding are met as we have said above.
And if the displacement exudes pus, then you should set it with retention, trying to sprinkle it with saffron powder, if no other cause is present.
Then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this, if an abscess does not occur.
More so if an abscess forms, then you should allow the restoration to continue for nine days until the abscess is resolved, and do not approach it on the seventh and tenth day, for then you will cause harmful accidents.
If the bone is broken and prominent over the knee joint, then you must carefully reduce it and align it with your hands with as little effort and extension as possible.
If extension is not at your readiness and the alignment with your hands is difficult, then you must reduce it with your hands using this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight inches and its width according to the quantity of the wound; for this reason, the doctor must take three or four of these according to the quantity needed in the treatment for all kinds of fracture.
And it should be round, and of small thickness so that it does not bend during the operation.
And it should have sharp ends at its extremities; and the bottom should be of greater thickness tending outward, and the middle part should be thinner.
And this is the form of it:
And it is named in Greek "labre volentz atelarem," so it is a small palette.
In order that the extremity of the limb be elevated above the end of the prominent bone.
Lift it up in one go so that the bone returns and is aligned with some reference point.
Therefore, strive to align the extremities of the fracture with each other. If the broken extremity is fine and does not take hold with the instrument for a good reason, then you must insert the extremity of that bone where the instrument has the power to do so.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise that part using the instruments we mentioned; it must be done in such a way that it is possible for you.
And then scrape clean the bone of roughness and small splinters.
And when the bone is reduced, and after reduction, if the patient experiences severe pain in the area, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; then do what you have been taught to give the patient great relief.
When your restoration of the mouth is completed, and then submerge a cloth in vinegar tightly wrung out, and properly during summer, and do not pause over the wounded area to apply salve or any other cause involving oil, so that no infection or corruption occurs.
And then administer steams at the hour of the full moon after the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered to see if it improves with fomentations and use coverings according to the amount of the wound.
And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the wound with the fracture, for as many times doctors have done this, and caused it to happen to their patients, either death or severe illness. It is a matter of health. And if the moon is in a weak, moist phase, different from the phase of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or a bad wound, and you fear certain evil accidents which we have mentioned, and find pain in the area, then do not pause over applying steams, but rather use cloth bandages instead of steams and strengthen it with those.
And when after one or two days the plague begins to form a scab on it, then you lift up the cloth that you had placed over that area, and then administer calxes, ointments which according to our custom we use to treat plagues, thus applying tetra-pharmcon and similar substances to it.
And you should untie the bandage and examine the plague at midday and evening in each day until it is consolidated and closed, and ensure that the member is prepared in such a manner that suppuration flows from it to the parts you leave facilitated.
If the plague passes many days and is not consolidated nor has the scab been removed from it, then you should know that here are situated the small bones, so examine the plague by probing it. And of those situated, those that are separate remain and are extracted, those from which they are not separated and cause pain in the member, forcibly you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if the plague turns yellow or green, it is stomachic or another species of corruption and putrefaction. Then you should know that this is preceded by a narration of the treatment in its own chapter.
And from where the main discussion lies, you should make your presence known: when the joint is torn, you should stand over the limb thus like the joints of the thigh and the helper, and seem like those of the large limbs, and do not fear the tearing or extraction of it, for many spots appearing by this cause lead to death; having left that within which can perish, for strong wind will fall by itself in about 20 days or so; and then cure the wound if you see fit, and otherwise leave that.
Capitol.xx.
For the cure of a swelling that occurs in the region of some fracture.
Spots appearing cause this swelling in the region of the healing of a fracture, and especially near the joints, and alter the shape of the limb; and strongly you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as aloes, honey, mirabilitum, acrasia, and seem like those; try which of them you take from it some or all, confirm those with vinegar or white of egg, or with wine, and place that over the swelling in wool, and constrain those on it by good constriction.
Leave the tension that you have placed there not loosened for many days; then loosen it and put another in its place, during which time the knot should be remedied; or strengthen above that lead strip downward, as lead has the property of remediating all that is swollen in the limbs.
But if the knot has already become fixed in the foot and is tightened, and necessity demands to loosen it, then split it along its upper part, and incise the superfluous and protruding part, or relax it with a hot iron during which time it should be remedied; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of a fracture when restored and then, approximately, the limb's subtle structure or vein does not follow its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and then the subtle structure or vein of the limb does not follow its natural course: this is done for several reasons. One reason is the excessive solution of the ligament and the joining of it not being done according to necessity; or due to an excess of tension in the ligaments while nutrition is prohibited from flowing to the limb; or due to excessive application; or due to excessive unnecessary movement; or due to a lack of strength in the body of the patient and its weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient something to eat and make the body of the patient tender while the fever multiplies within; give him baths; and insert sweet and pleasant things into him.
And place your hand over the member, so that the hand draws in nourishment, or continue the wet compress with white wine, while the nourishment flows and returns to its natural form.
Capitol.xxii.
For the treatment of broken bones when they are reduced tortuously, prohibit the operation that causes them.
When the member, already reduced near its healing from tortuosity and prominence of the broken bone and joint, occurs in the form of the member's deformation, yet nonetheless the member does not prohibit its natural operation, then do not receive the word of one who thinks that member is newly broken.
Yet there are many foolish doctors and reducers who have done this in our land; this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear from the sign of which is deadly.
If claudication and nodulation are recent, then immerse them in a mixture of goat's milk in which you have placed soft herbs, such as helichrysum and licorice, and melilot, similar to those; then apply a poultice with a well-made demulcent plaster; or prepare mucilage of licorice root and mix it with wheat straw ash or olive oil, and apply it as a plaster; or use fatty figs wrapped in pigeon feathers, resembling those mentioned in the medications called armernian consolidations.
And sometimes it is dissolved by gentle friction applied to the more humid parts, and movement of the limb should be maintained at all times in all hours.
And if tortuosity has already been present and becomes strong, forming a stone and requiring treatment, then it is necessary to excise the pus above the cecum and dissolve and incise the continuation of the bone. What is superfluous from the nodulation of that method should be removed from the bone using fine incisors, and facilitation should be administered in that area with solicitude and study.
Chapter XXIII.
On speech concerning dislocation.
Dislocation is an impairment of one of the joints of that location, such that it is forbidden movement, and alters the figure of the limb, causing great pains and injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is important to act quickly to reduce it, and not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area can become gangrenous, making the reduction of the dislocation much more difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be cut or stretched during the time of gangrene, for moisture and heat cause spasms and severe pains.
More importantly, when this occurs, you should prepare for the incision of the foot to drain the gangrene, and allow it to rest until the gangrene subsides; then, the limb should be soaked in warm water and oil, and finally, the dislocation should be reduced with ease.
And every member be treated with that water of which the memory will bring back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to what follows in fracture; from above the part of the body downward, then leave.
Chapter XXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the jaw, proceed.
When both jaws are dislocated without fracture; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are slightly moved from their place with little movement and slightly softened; or they are completely dislocated, after which they should be softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and so that they cannot have it nor close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient should be wrapped in a cloth.
More often than not, when the dislocation is slight, it returns to its place on its own with little cause.
More often than not, when the dislocation is complete and thorough, it must be reduced gently, and should not be delayed entirely.
And the minister hold the patient's head, and the doctor insert one of his hands behind the dislocated jaw in the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both of his fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers are outside and equal; and command the patient to cease moving his jaws and bring them back to their place; and the doctor equalize the jaw and push it back into its proper location.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are significantly dislocated, then administer evaporation with hot water and oil, while performing a light reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both entirely, as we have said before.
And when returned and equalized, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then place it over those powder pellets of cloth soaked in cerot, made of wax and rubbed with oil; and quickly apply a softening lotion with many lint pieces.
And let the patient sleep on their back, with their head standing between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to spit for any reason; having their food ready at hand, until when the pains subside and the jaws are loosened, then turn what they want.
And this should be administered easily, and when dealing with the opening of the mouth, do not work against the patient's comfort; allow them to eat, drink, and speak, until the jaw is loosened and healed.
And if the reduction of two jaws when dislocated at any time and cannot be returned to their proper places, then blisters often occur, causing persistent fever and soreness. And strongly swelling of the abdomen of the patient, along with severe vomiting of pure bile, often follows.
And when you see this, then know it is serious; and blisters often occur to those upon whom this happens within a few days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the furcula and the extremity of the muscle.
The furcula is not dislocated from the stern inside by its continuation to the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared by the sensation.
And the restoration of it is that the patient lies down and extends his arms. And place your hand over the area with strong pressure, for it will return.
And place your hand over the area with ointment and powder, strengthening it.
More often, the extremity of that which is connected to the bone is not dislocated in any day; therefore, it should be reduced and set as we have said and as is within your ability.
And place your hand over the area with ointment, powder, and compression, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And in this therapeutic procedure, the end of the muscle is returned to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Capitol.xxvi.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Know that the muscle is not dislocated in any manner, but according to three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated from the tendon to the bone.
And the second is when it is dislocated from above the muscle, which is called tarte; and it is not dislocated from the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated from the parts in front by the nerves.
And it is most dislocated and protrudes outward at the parts below the tendon, especially where the muscles are few, it is slightly dislocated; more so in those with many muscles, it protrudes outward with difficulty.
And sometimes such people are struck by a blow or fall, and the muscle of the affected area becomes emphysematous due to an abscess, and is ruptured because it was already dislocated.
Then cover what you have sprayed onto him, especially over him, and proceed with the cure of him.
When the dislocation is in the shoulder joint, you must use titillation; so that you can distinguish between the displaced muscle and the adjacent muscle, for which you find a manifest difference. You find a concavity at the head of the muscle, and by using titillation, you should feel the movement of the head of the muscle like a hen's foot, and the patient cannot bring his hand to his ear nor elevate it through any movement.
If it is dislocated, you must examine the foot or ankle, and then you will find a clear touch, which is not hidden.
And for this dislocation, a light reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is still in pain.
And the reduction is that the minister raises the patient's hand above the joint; then place your fingers under it and use titillation to raise the joint with strength at its location, and the minister raises the patient's hand and extends it there; then place your fingers so that it returns lightly.
But if, for what we have said, it does not return, and the dislocation began some days ago, then you should bathe the patient in cold water and apply a wet dressing that will soften and lubricate, as if using roots of plantain, fenugreek, and melilot in water, and administer it.
And then place the patient's foot on its sole and position it with the woolen cloth equal between levity and stiffness, and the doctor places his hand over the heel, elevating the head of the muscle by virtue, and pulls the patient's foot so that it is not injured at the joints, and another attends to the head of the muscle, ensuring it is not injured at the joints, for then it quickly returns to its place.
And if you wish, return the second in this manner: and make a person present who is longer than the patient, standing on the side of that thigh, inserting his muscle under the cloth of the patient's foot and elevating the cloth above the joints while the patient's foot is suspended in air, and another attends to pulling the patient's foot from the joints of his abdomen. But if the patient is light, then find something that another person can suspend from, so as to keep the serious part, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced by another method: and it is that the patient be placed on the ground with a long pole whose end is round in shape, like the brim of a mortar, neither too thick nor too thin, and placed under the patient; then cover its head with lion skins, and let the patient lie according to the length of the pole. Then extend your hand to the opposite parts of the body; and extend the other part of the body with strength, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have said, then use this remedy: and you should take a pole whose length is that of two braces, and its width be four fingers, and its thickness be enlarged at the base according to this form.
And place lion skins over the round head so that the pole does not injure the patient.
And then place the patient's head, and extend your hand or arm into the parts, and tie the limb to the supporter and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And then place the arm on a step of the ladder according to its width, and the hand extended to the parts, and the other side be suspended from the other part, that the joint may soon become stable.
And when the instrument on the patient is completed in any way that is possible, then place a wick of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared from powder of molybdenum and albumen of egg over all the muscle, thus thoroughly mixed above, and firmly tie the wick to the patient; the plaster should be thoroughly covered with the wick, and the hand of the patient should be attached to his neck, and the hand of the patient should not be moved for seven days.
And ensure that the diet of the patient is light, until the limb is comforted, for it is easier for the limb to heal.
And then give more food about seven or five times; and exercise a movement; and therefore if it is closed and not softened, then it is healed.
And if the joint is dislocated due to frequent humidity that affects it or for another cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery in three burns, as previously said in the chapter on cautery.
And if all this is done and after seven days the ligament and joint are not healed, and the poultice and stricture are reduced over it several times, but still not healed and catgut is not able to elevate that arm above the parts above, then you should know that the nerves of the muscle at the head of the muscle are either incised or stretched or softened, and you should know that the joint will never be fixed in its proper place.
For the dislocation of what is caused, you should reduce the foot and the calf or the parts behind, the reduction is made by impulse and extension with the hands, while it returns.
And let it be administered in the other constriction, and care that within it is healed.
And if there is a delay in the healing and tardiness in the movement of the limb, then the patient uses warm baths until that heaviness is relieved and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and seems to return with difficulty; it can be dislocated in all directions, but most commonly in front and behind. The dislocation is not hidden to you—whether you see it quickly or feel it upon examination depending on the form in which it is dislocated. When you reduce the dislocated shoulder joint into place, this is clearly manifest to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm or touch its own muscle.
And note that when it comes to the collarbone, reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it forms an abscess. For if it forms an abscess, reducing it becomes difficult, and even with great effort, it may not be completely cured; especially behind, for this is the worst of all types of dislocation, causing more pain and often leading to death if not treated promptly.
And the restoration of it, when that is what can be reduced, is that his hand be extended between two others, and his arm be stretched out, and the hands of the doctor be on his knees and let him, and push the joint with the heels of his own hands or with the edge of his palm as it returns to its place.
If the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it thus by bending his hand towards his own hand, striking the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then administer strong extension and vigorous movement.
And have two ministers stretch out their arms, and hold that position with two ministers so that the extension is not resisted.
And then rotate the arm completely, because it is wrapped in a long folded cloth around the patient's hand, or a bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it helps in the lubrication of the joint for ease; and then push the joint with strong pressure as it returns.
And after the reduction of the cavity let it be placed on that cushion in which there is infiltration and evacuation of white humor, and be externally secured with a belt, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and let it be left for some days.
And then release it; and if the joint is formed in that place, then you release the ligament and leave it.
And if you see the joint not well strengthened, then repeat the application of the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days until it is secured; and then release it.
May be if accidents happen to it gravitate after the reduction of the joint, and its disposition is in movement, then administer wet dressing and subtle friction, and compression, until it is alleviated; or pause over the joint for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion; and then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. And then apply that to it, and put it in a bath; and when it is soaked, then friction the joint with tempered friction, and then repeat over it for a while, so it is a matter of rapid motion, once, and the second, and the third. am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.
And if you wish, place yourself over that wet and cracked fissure on the side and strongly press upon it; do this several times, for that is wet and reduce it to its proper position.
Chapter XXVIII.
For the cure of dislocation of the shoulder, it is of the joint where the arm meets the hand.
Shoulder of the hand is sometimes dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy. The opposite is true for other joints; however, more importantly, it requires speed in the reduction at the hour when it was dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess occurs.
And the reduction of the shoulder dislocation is that you place the patient's hand joint on a table and have them extend their arm. The physician then places his hand or palm over the vicinity of the joint and gently push it back into its proper position.
More importantly, it should be considered whether the palm is already near the chest of the hand. In that case, have the patient place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; if the dislocation occurred previously, place the back of both hands on the table so that the position of the hand of the patient is precisely over the table, ensuring that the physician's hand falls over the vicinity of the joint.
And so if it returns quickly, that is good; and otherwise, then strengthen that by applying an ointment yielding to the abscess and leave it; and do not repeat this, for if you do not, you cannot bear nor perform anything more regarding its reduction.
Moreover, according to the tortuosity of the joint; and not noting any cause in the patient, but that your hand is mollified and cannot strengthen any cause; then you know that the nerves are crushed or torn, and there is no hope in it so you apply a cautery near the site of the injury and strengthen it with this to confer some relief.
And since the gout has returned, then place it over the ointment which we have applied, and let it be applied and strengthened for five days; and then gradually loosen it and leave it, and exercise his hand.
And if the movement in it has been restricted and any gravity occurs, then apply that with cold water and some friction several times, until it is relieved.
Chapter XXIX.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are completely dislocated.
And when one finger is dislocated at the base of the palm or in the palm itself, then hold the finger and push the dislocation back with your fingers, so that it returns to place.
Then hold the base of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, leaving it for two days.
Then suspend that part and extend it so that it can be properly aligned on that same day.
And when it is night, bind it according to that procedure, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And simulate this if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and bind that part to that location and perform your first operation on it until it is healed.
And when it is dislocated in other parts, do so similarly.
Capitol.
For the treatment of dislocation of the spine.
When dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the lower back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their proper positions, then there is no cure for that part, as death may ensue.
And the sign of this is that the patient's excretion involuntarily passes out, and they cannot retain it; often several times, the muscles of the patient's body, or their legs, or their arms, or one of those, are softened. Or a vertebra is displaced from its proper place, as multiple times a vertebra is displaced and multiple times the removal of those is done in four directions.
Then that vertebra is displaced to the back parts and is named gelbozitat.
More importantly, the treatment of this is that when you consider if the gelbozitat is due to puberty, as in this case there is neither cure nor complete recovery.
Moreover, in those that come by contact or percussion or semblance to those, the Ancients have already detailed the methods of cure at length, of which the more returns to being prophetic; but I, having already abbreviated from that of which there is little excuse for too much, through my proximity to your understanding, expose and explain this in various instruments of that by which I will show and expand upon it.
And of those, only the one that occurs precisely between the toes is cured.
And let the patient lie extended on his side close to the wall, and place something wet under him to prevent the foot from being bitten.
And place a straight stick, set in the ground at the end of the patient's side near his head, and another stick across the patient's feet at the other end of the stick.
And the minister hold the rod, and do not be fixed in a hole; and another minister hold the other according to that form.
And then wrap around the patient's head and let the titillic ligaments form a firm seal; extend the end of the ligament to the rod which goes over the head, and tie that there; and then strengthen the other ligament on the patient's hips with its ends, extending those to the legs; and then adjust all the ligaments and tie those to the other rod which goes over the feet.
And then the minister extend the ligament to the part of the rod, and do not move both rods and ligaments in their places where they are inserted, but do not fix them as we have said.
And the doctor place his palms on the spine with strength until he returns, or place him over a table, and then adjust his feet on the table until he returns.
But if he does not return by this method, then take a table of which the width or length is about three braccia, and cut into the wall where we said it is near the patient a place at the end of the table. And then place the patient's feet on the other end of the table, and the doctor places his hands near the spine, tightly holding it so that it is compressed and returns to its place.
And if you wish, hold the joint which is swollen in your hand; and when you stand, place the patient's head at the end of the palm of one stick, the length of which is as long as a man's arm, and place the other end of the stick behind the palm of another stick in the same manner; let the distance between each stick be about one palm's width, and now make sure that each stick is firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not wobble.
And let it be a round stick on which the joint is placed, and let it be rotated between the two sticks of the stakes.
And at the end of it is a stick on which the round stick is fastened, the length of which is one palm's width for what is rotated; and in the other two sticks, it is similar to that.
And then strengthen the ligaments that you have stretched on the foot of the patient in the thigh which you should place the head of it, and the ligaments that you have stretched on the thighs of the patient in the groin which you should place the feet of him.
And then you should place each groin and have a minister twist the groin with his hand, and the doctor align the spine according to what we have said.
And once the spine is returned and the area is aligned, then cover it with a poultice of honey wax, and some wool; place it over the poultice using a strip of tablecloth whose width should be about three fingers or slightly more, and its length should fit the area of the yellowish discharge, and over the part of the spine.
And then apply the ligament as we have said, and use the patient's subtle nourishment under which it should heal.
And if any danger persists in the area at the end of the healing, then you should administer medicines that soothe and relieve through continuous use as we have recommended; and already a lead plate is administered in that area.
Sometimes an imminent accident occurs at the base of the vertebrae of the spine, and it is caused by that dislocation; it is that bone which you already suspect so as not to give rise to suspicion to him regarding this medicine, for it will greatly affect your accident causing death.
Chapter XXXI.
On the treatment of dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should only be dislocated to such an extent, and not occur as what happens with other joints due to slight movement and凹陷。
And the joint of the hip can be dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or forwards, or backwards.
And it is mostly dislocated towards the inside, and little towards the front or the back.
And the sign of dislocation towards the inside is that when you adjust the healthy leg to the injured one, the injured leg appears longer and the sole is more prominent than the healthy side. The injured foot cannot bend; it must be reduced gently. This is the area where a chorde should be applied with a cautery, so that the head of the hernia is already secured here.
The sign of one who suffers from dislocation is on the outward parts, for the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
The sign of one who suffers from dislocation in the front parts is that the groin swells according to the injury, but does not bend. The pain is located in the depth. If it is forced to go further and cannot reach the front parts; the urine of the patient is retained, and the swelling is suppurative. You should treat the patient with a hot application.
The sign of one who suffers from dislocation in the rear parts is that it does not swell in the depth, nor can it bend what should bend, and the groin on that side is shorter than the other, and the swelling is soft, and the base of the thigh should be placed at that location.
Moreover, the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, at that time, if the dislocation is old or ancient, whether it has already become fixed. If so, then after closely examining its position, you administer a reduction according to its disposition; but this is not part of the entire treatment. Then, one should not assume anything further in that regard.
In the case where the dislocation is recent and one of the four species of dislocation, then take hold of it so that you can restore the joint and extend it to the internal parts and the external parts, and manipulate it to the right and left, for it usually returns by force and does not require other treatment.
But if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong counterforce and extend the leg on that side or its chest, or apply liniment which is rubbed over the leg above the ankle; and another minister extend his hand from this attempt to place his hands on the patient's wrists; and strongly apply liniment lion over the sole of the foot, and have another minister hold the end of the liniment.
And extend the limb from the angle to the part of the shoulder blade, or from the back part to the part of the hip.
And extend all these at once so that the patient is elevated on their own body and remains suspended.
And this species of extension is special for all four.
And so if the dislocation returns as we have said, it will be well; but otherwise, for every species, what I say about its own treatment is necessary.
In the reduction of its own, when dislocated, and the dislocation is inside, make sure that the patient's foot is returned to its natural position; then place the ligaments on the base of the thigh in that area which is between the head of the femur and where the sling will be placed; and extend the ligaments above the part of the groin to the upper part of the scapula.
And then another minister firmly takes the ankles, and compresses the large part of the thigh, extending the parts externally by strong extension, so that it returns to its place.
And this species is of the gentlest treatment for which this limb is reduced compared to other species.
But if you excuse yourself and do not follow the treatment for this species of treatment at all, then make sure that both feet of the patient are ligated together with strong ligaments, placed over both the tibias and both the fibulas.
And let the length of each be by the quantity of four digits, and let the bad leg be extended more than the other by a quantity of two digits.
And then the bad leg is suspended over the head of the bed, and it should be in the hand; let the length of it from the ground be by the quantity of two braces.
And command a strong youth to hold the thigh, and let him suspend the bad leg with another youth, and the other youth holding the thigh with strength, for the joint returns to its place with speed.
In the reduction itself, when dislocation is at the part outside, make the bad leg touch the thigh according to what we have recommended in having the patient lie on his side; and strengthen the ligament over the bad leg's thigh and over its ankle.
And place two beds, one under his foot, and the other under his head; and adjust the beds over the thigh on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the bad leg is not injured by the bed being between his thighs, for you need to allow the extension from the sides to proceed.
And each minister extend to his part, and the doctor with his hand equalize the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then lie the leg extended slightly, and this is according to this method of narration about the shoulder; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the shoulder blade of the patient, and closely draws the other hand toward him, and with that draw he places the extended limb at the side away from the side of the back.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then the patient should not lie with the limb extended at the side away from him, but elevated above the ground; and he should be placed on a hard surface, just as we have described when the width of the shoulder was dislocated outward, according to what we said about his lying on two widths; and he should lie face down with his hands extended, as we have already stated.
And ensure that a compress is applied on the area where the joint hurts.
So when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, for you have extended the patient's legs, and when you see those equal positions and the patient expands their leg with its usual relaxation, then you know that the limb according to need has been returned — then you adjust the thighs and apply bandage so that the width is not altered in any of the parts; and you adhere the patient to rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and compare one leg with the other.
Then, if you see those equal positions in the examination, then you know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then you let the patient go.
And if you see any cause for swelling, then you return and apply a plaster to that area, and adjust it according to your initial structure, and let it rest for three days.
And then release it, allowing it to rest in walking for some days until it is comfortable.
Capitol. XXXII.
Of the cure of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated to the outer parts, to the inner parts, and more to the front than to the back; it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of shoulder dislocation is that you command the patient to apply his hand to his hip; if the shoulder is dislocated, you will know it.
And the restoration of all these ways is that you place the patient correctly, encourage him to extend his hand, if possible; adhere your two hands to his face, and place his foot between your feet; then make your hands adhere to the shoulder, keeping those between his fingers on the shoulder with strength, while another minister extends his foot so that the shoulder returns to its place.
And a sign of relief is that their waist adheres to the thigh lightly without effort.
And then apply this and make the waist adhere to the thigh, and keep it with a bandage for three or four days, and remove it later.
And do not use the bad leg for行走，请继续你的翻译。看来你输入的是中文，而不是英文。如果你是想继续翻译这段文字，可以直接说“E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.”的翻译是：“And do not use the bad leg for行走，请继续你的翻译。”请告诉我如何继续。
And if the reduction of it is excused, then administer strong extension to the limbs as described in the previous narration regarding the treatment of the hip.
Capitol. xxxiii.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes reduced by slight movement, and sometimes dislocated according to the opposite direction, and the dislocation of the ankle is performed either internally or externally.
The sign of the dislocation is that you see the tendon swollen coming from the part where it is dislocated.
The cure for the removal of it is a light reduction, and it is that the tendons be extended with ease and be equalized as they return.
In the cure when it is dislocated by force, make sure to straighten the limb, and have a strong and brave assistant behind the patient at the affected location.
Then place your right hand on the foot of the upper part, and with your left hand hold the lower part of the foot at the location of the cleft.
Then pull the foot with your right hand, and with your left hand twice, then extend your left hand; and push the foot with your right hand while holding the leg steady.
Do this twice as we have counted.
Then push the foot towards the leg for the third time, and you will be at the cleft.
Then if it returns in one or two movements according to this manner, and you close the foot well, that is good; but if not, then you must repeat the operation, for it did not return.
But if the reduction of it as we have advised is prohibited to you, then lay the patient on his back on the ground, and place a hard pillow under him, and between his thighs, and you have already covered him with a cloth so that the hernia does not descend.
And let one minister hold his thighs, and another minister extend the foot by holding its ankles or the cloth tied around the calf; and each minister extend themselves against the extension of their part, and the pillow be placed between the thighs of the patient, retaining it there, so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the parts where you must maintain its extension.
And let the doctor equalize the dislocation by holding the ankles, and another minister hold the healthy thigh, so that the dislocation returns easily.
And when you have returned the dislocation and declared to you the health of the reduction thereof, then place a plaster strongly over it, and bind the foot with lint to the leg.
And keep in mind that you should beware or protect the nerves which are behind the talus, lest the lint be too strong and harm those nerves severely.
And leave it there for two or three days; and if the lint is moistened, bind it firmly.
And remove it on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. More if it is necessary to go before that space, be sure that the dislocation is not dissolved and corrupted, and that it does not receive healing.
And if an abscess occurs at this point, then be sure to administer what we have described in the preceding narrative for treatment and fomentation in another location until it is healed.
Capitol XXXIV.
For the treatment of dislocation of the toes in the foot.
Gently extend the one that is dislocated as little as necessary; what is not difficult, beforehand is easy.
But if the dislocation is in several toe joints of the foot, then you should place the patient's foot on a level surface such as the ground or a table, and keep it thus as if they were walking.
Then you should position your foot, and place your own foot over the area where the joints are located. Gently push that part with your foot to encourage it to return to its proper position, and observe that it is extended and does not appear as a prominence in the area.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that can hold the entire foot, which has two ends. Gently strengthen it with a firm and adequate structure for three days; then release it and allow it to rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and its recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
Of the species of dislocation that occur from a fall or a fracture or any other cause.
When any of these causes occur, and you are involved in the cure of that and its restoration, mistakes may lead to death.
And for this reason, you must not presume in the cure of it, but only one who is skilled in the art, long accustomed to its use, merciful and pious, patient, neither hot-tempered nor presumptuous; and one who uses at the beginning medicines that cause suppuration solely, leaving the disease to divine judgment, rather than to those to whom you hope for a cure, for alleviation of suffering, in which some hope appears. And then strive to perform the reduction at the beginning of the cause, before suppuration occurs.
And then, if the limb returns as we want, proceed to administer a regimen that causes suppuration and heals the wound according to what suits it with the drying ointments.
And if dislocation is accompanied by fracture and accidents in the separated bones, then you must treat them as we said for simple illnesses in what preceded in those places.
And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to which my preaching precedes you; for this is better to you, you should give it to your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true self those in your time. Thus you finish the words of Albucasim perfectly, for which may God bless him. Amen.
