Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The patient's body was opened.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, my intention is to complete this book, which is part of the medical science.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Then our understanding is that the pain in the feet is caused by something other than the cause of the pain.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And prepare for the surgery so that the second option is used as an explanation for the operation.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	This text describes the process of treating a patient with gout using a cautery to address inflammation in the affected joints.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The name Hippocrates refers to the first aid provided by doctors.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But if someone does not know the cause of the pain in the limbs, they may be misled into thinking it is something else.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	The doctor called it an abscess when a boil appeared on the foot of a woman who was suffering from the plague.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so he cauterized the man's body with another instrument.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And so if it is necessary to make cuts for a wound on the foot, they should be made by a doctor who knows what they are doing.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here's the translated sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	E apren le desies to the other parts of the body, but if the patient is sick, they are to be treated by another person's hand.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E yeu, and if necessary another remedy will be applied to soothe the pain in their legs.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But if the humors were spreading throughout the body, causing pain in the feet, then the doctors say it's something else.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	and for his health he had him treated by another physician.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the illness affects the bowels, then the patient should be treated by a doctor specializing in melancholic humor.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so it is necessary for you, sons, to attend to the patient's health, and to use this knowledge for the benefit of two people: one who has a wound and another who has no need of such knowledge.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Then you will have already opened the path to the cure, for it is customary to burn the affected area with a hot cautery.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so you should apply your tools to your patients' legs, with firmness and by the grace of God, they are called for that purpose.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And let the patient be blessed with the best possible healing, and may terrible diseases not remain in their body.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Another that applies to the leg or foot of the patient, and applies to the condition.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Let no physician be afraid to treat the condition known as gout.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first chapter of the book.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter is about the nature of illness in the body.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part of the division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter describes the use of cauterization as a treatment for ailments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si tu, as a physician, are treating someone with a problem in their joints, apply a cauterization to the legs only if they are suffering from pain in the feet, otherwise, consider other remedies.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoring the dislocated; and if it's necessary to apply pressure to the bowel, use a tool to push it back in.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The surgeon will place their hand on the patient's legs to apply heat during surgery.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When the pain starts in the legs, and the patient is suffering, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient must be treated by a physician and the use of  "cauterization" should be avoided in modern medicine.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And by doctors, it is considered a disease that can be treated with cautery, but I say that they call gout.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if you use it to treat two patients at the same time, it's called "a fire" by doctors as "tota materia".
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	Then use heat to treat those ailments caused by dry heat.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Gesso that men have warm feet, but if they are too hot, apply cold water.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And that's why I think it is necessary to have some cushions ready for those who suffer from gout.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Then, however, the physician is the one who is known to burn away those diseases that are caused by the bowels or other such things.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	The text describes a medical procedure involving applying a cushion to prevent injury during surgery.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so, the accoucheur placed his hand on the patient's foot to apply a cushion to their legs, which he had already done, and cauterized the affected area with a heated iron.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"And if it's necessary to treat the illness, use a cautery to apply heat to the affected area."
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, it is customary to say that it is gout.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And if the patient is suffering from pain caused by the infiltration of humors, it is best to know which ailment they have.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And so if the pain lasts for a long time, and you are using a hot cautery to stop the pain in their legs, use the hot cautery to treat the patient's legs.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if you want to cauterize the intestines, it is done by applying heat from the cavity below.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When the doctor places a cushion under their knees, you already know that the patient's body was not made for pain to be in the cavity of the lower part of the body where they put their hands on their knees.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays the doctor be consulted for treatment options if you have a gout flare-up.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	"In some cases, gout can return at any time, because the body's fluids are still there in the patient's body."
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E, if you have pain in the bowels, it is best to use a hot cautery to burn out the bad humors and then apply a poultice to draw them out.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	The text says that gout can be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And when the patient is cured by the means of the physician, he/she will be cured by medicine.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that gold cautery is better than iron, and another applies a poultice to their feet.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so that the patient's bowels may be kept warm according to your desire, and the other parts of the body which are affected by the inflammation may be treated as you see fit.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery to the legs, but gently, so as not to burn them too severely.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is necessary to open the body's humors, I have already ordered this chapter on the subject of the legs.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion the head with a cushion for cold and pain caused by dampness.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And so the patient's limbs are to be treated with a cushion.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And this is how you treat it with medicine, to put the intestine back into its place.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	E aprop you place their hands on the cushion.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your hand on their legs to prevent the pain from occurring in the area.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you must know that there are other ways to describe the location of the cushion.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And if one needs to apply cautery to a patient's leg, proceed slowly and carefully.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	E aprop reducu am tua, e letz le loc e ayssi cum la tua ma, si so.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then apply a poultice to the leg for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then you should place a cushion on the affected area for cushioning.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And apply the four-part remedy to the location.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	Then they say that when the plague comes to the arm, it's better for it to be healed by honey.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And then they apply a heated cauterizing tool to the bone within their legs.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then place your cushion on their bones to be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And other say that he suffers from gout, so they say.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that the pain is caused by bad vapors rising from the body in the legs.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then prevent the illness from spreading further, and stop the disease from setting in.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mays he who has been called upon by the patient's body will be able to see the way his name is spoken for in the same manner as all doctors are called upon to treat the body.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And a cushion for the first sign of illness, you should use a more medicinal one.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply the other part of the body, the one that you mentioned.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in the patient's leg there are cushions that are placed on their legs, they are for the most part, if the body's humors are concerned, to prevent the blood from becoming thick with bad humor and to apply other remedies.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then cauterize the affected area above the patient's leg, where the pain is felt, and another one on their foot.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the intestine and apply cautery to the affected area of the foot, — that is, the bone in the foot which causes pain.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if the patient's legs are in pain, they should be treated by a doctor who will know how to treat them properly.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And if there is a need to cauterize the head, the patient should be positioned so that the heat from the cautery does not reach their legs.
Capitol ters.	The third part of the text will be translated as "Then apply hot towels to the affected area and hold them there."
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	This refers to treatment of headaches.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When the pain of gout spreads to the legs or feet, it is called by its proper name in these parts.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The patient's feet are covered in honey and the patient's legs are burned with cauterizing tools.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then use your hands to apply pressure on the area where the pain is located, keeping it hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and leave it for two or three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the ointment which will heal the patient's legs.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	Then you must know that this practice is generally considered to be what doctors call medicine.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	This sentence describes how a doctor would perform an operation using a hot iron to cauterize a wound.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And if the pain affects the joints, the doctors call it a small, pointed opening.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And so you must apply a hot iron to the affected area.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if they are affected by a disease in the legs or feet, which are treated with cauterization.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply cushion to their legs to prevent them from having another joint pain.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you use cauterization, place a cushion under them.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Then apply another cushion on their legs, which are to be kept in this position.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	And then apply a cauterization to the affected area, using fire as the cure.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Therefore, hold the jaw still when it is necessary to treat it.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E lay the cushion at the beginning of the operation to prevent it from bleeding out.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then apply the treatment for the flow of blood according to the method described in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Here comes the translation: When you see that the patient has a fever, apply a poultice to their chest, and place a cushion on their legs.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you want to cure them, you should apply the cautery after first opening the area where the pain is located.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	This is about the use of cushions for cauterization of the body's humors.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the foot there is pain that needs to be treated by applying a hot cautery, this is the treatment for it.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When the pain is in the foot, then the first step is to apply the treatment to the affected area.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	If you are sick, you should use cushions to make sure your cushion is not too full of pus, a hot poultice should be used on the legs.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then use the cautery to treat the intestine and other ailments in the legs, as well as any other ailments that need treatment.
Capitol .vi.	The text you provided appears to be a mix of different languages and doesn't make sense as-is.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	The use of a heated tool for cauterization is used on the foot.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And it is cured by cauterization on the legs, as we have said in the treatment of diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	The patient's legs are swollen due to their illness.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	Then you must cure it with three cauteries.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if the pain in the body is caused by cold humors, it should be treated by a doctor.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	Then you will find the appropriate location for the cautery on the patient's legs and apply another cushion to keep the intestine from protruding.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form of the physician's treatment is to cauterize the legs, which is how it is done by those who are skilled at it.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	However, it can be said that you are ill with gout; maybe a little thick-skinned.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And you, using a bandage, treat the area where the infection is located so that the swelling does not spread to other parts.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This refers to the use of cauterization in treating old or chronic wounds.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And if apoplexy is present, use four small burns on the thighs to treat them.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And that's how the method for using a cautery is done.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is customary to use a cushion on their chest; then it is necessary for the doctor to apply cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	This refers to a gout treatment involving cauterization.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's legs should be kept warm and they should be given cushions and pills for relief.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if you are using an emplaster to treat the pain described in this treatise on the application of plasters, it will be necessary to use a specific type of plaster for the condition.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then the patient's legs are to be held still by the cushions.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	Then return the intestine or cushion to his legs, and apply it there as he was told.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then apply a cauterization to the affected area.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then, proceed to treat the patient by placing a cushion under their finger.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays le malaute es e.g., if the pain is in the legs, the person should be treated by a doctor who specializes in treating humors.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And if it is necessary to cure the patient, apply the poultice as described previously.
Capitol .ix.	This refers to the treatment of an ailment affecting the legs, likely describing gout.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the legs and feet, it is usually called for a burning sensation in the body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Apply a poultice to the patient's head. It should be placed on the patient's body as a remedy for the pain caused by cold humors.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	When pain in the body becomes severe, it is treated by cauterizing the affected area with a hot iron.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And so the intestine that causes it, may be healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of a condition related to the location of the pain.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	You are correct that the second source sentence is a reference to treating the condition of gout.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, the physician should apply cauterization to the foot when it is necessary to drain the pus from an infected wound or the body's natural fluids are being drawn out.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	This sentence describes a situation where someone is being treated for a condition called gout.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	E aprop pause on la man's head to stop the pain.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient has a strong constitution, then cauterize their legs and chest using a cushion.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the child has gout, the treatment is with a hot, iron-tipped cautery tool.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	On melancholia, the treatment is as follows.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	If the patient suffers from melancholy due to corrupted humors, then cauterize them.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	A person suffering from melencolia may be treated by cauterizing their brain if they are prone to that illness.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And a poultice of the pigeon be placed on the head, and another be used to treat it.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the disease is spreading through the limbs, then it's best to apply cushions to the area.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And so apply liniment to the area; then if it's necessary to use a poultice, or for the patient to be treated with a poultice.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And then he will be heated by fire on the altar of medicine.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cushion upon their legs so as to soothe the pain that arises from cold humors in the feet.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	This refers to the need for cushions and a doctor's careful attention to ensure the comfort and safety of the patient during treatment.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then you must place your hand on the foot to prevent pain from arising there.
Capitol .xii.	Another patient has a cushion for his/her pain.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And so is the practice of cauterization on the body.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	The patient's foot has been opened (likely due to a cut or wound) and treated with cauterization.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And thus they applied a cushion to his legs and thighs.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then cauterize the affected leg or foot if it's necessary to cauterize it.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When there are many doctors who treat the veins, they apply heat to the veins in the thighs.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if you cauterize it, you must see to it that the blood flow is not obstructed.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And here we are told that the veins and arteries are inflamed.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if you need to cauterize the bones, they must be placed on their feet.
Capitol .xiii.	The thirteenth chapter of the book of recipes should be read by physicians.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if you use a hot cautery, it should be done carefully.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the joints are affected at the location where they cause pain.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have already been diagnosed with gout, then you should use a hot cautery to treat the pain.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio del pes e.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	A doctor will know what to do for the patient if medication doesn't work.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And place a cushion on their thighs to prevent them from being opened.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard yourself from the part that is burned by the fire.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And here's another way to say it:
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply heat to the affected area.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to burn the skin between the eyebrows, apply two cauteris to the feet.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, it should be done by the number of times the patient has been affected by gout.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	This means that you need to use a cushion for the patient's feet.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then you must cauterize the bone behind the knee to relieve pain.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the body is cold, it should be treated with cushions in two ways: by warming it or by applying cautery to its feet.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If a cauterized vein has caused gout in the foot, apply a bandage to prevent further injury.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And thus the body part affected by the ailment will be treated.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a poultice on the affected joint, and place it upon the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And so he placed his hand on their body, and they were in danger because of the burning pain.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then apply another treatment to their hands, which we will call a cauteri.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see the patient's eyelids already contracted by the pain, he/she has already been afflicted with gout, and a physician should be consulted.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your leg and place it on the cushion for three days, and if it is necessary to apply the proper name, call it gout.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And so he placed the medicine on the patient's body.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Then apply cautery to the eyelids as needed.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	When the condition appears on the eyelid, one must be careful to avoid cauterizing the foot.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And thus the patient shall be treated with a medical cauterization.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And you have already placed the patient's body in its proper place for treatment, using another cushion on your knee if there are other causes for the pain.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When pain is severe or intense, it is called gout.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, if it is necessary to make points on the patient's body, he must use a cushion for the pressure and apply it on his legs.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the foot, it is customary for the surgeon to apply another cautery to their body.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Gathered around the patient's legs are cushions, for they are the ones who need to be treated by medicine.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is what the patient's legs should be like after they have been treated with cauterization.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And so, you know that the humors are applied to different parts of the body depending on where they are placed.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	E no sira le peitz of the patient must be kept safe from further injury.
Capitol .xvii.	When pain occurs in the legs, you should apply the cautery below the knee and use a hot iron to treat the feet.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si te ha detto what you should do to treat a tear in the eye.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a wound in the legs or feet, place the patient's head on their own chest to keep it calm.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then the physician would place their hand on the patient's body to prevent further swelling.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And you have opened the space between the legs and feet of the patient.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	And now he has to be burned.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	When you wish to cauterize the intestines or other parts of the body.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, and so then apply heat to the affected area.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, he who is skilled in their craft may be better suited to treat them.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then apply pressure to the area if it is necessary to close the wound.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to that area and hold it closed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then you should apply the hot cautery to the patient's nostrils, leaving them in pain, if they have a cushion under their head.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat with a cauterizing tool for the pain in the bones, then apply a burning cautery.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This illness, if it doesn't heal within a few days, will be treated by the physician as a severe ailment.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Then place a small amount of heated lead on the location of the wound to help those affected by the fistula in the first few days.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	If the fistula is healed, they are to be treated with cushion reduction.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	The burning or cauterizing of the legs should be done by a skilled hand.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Inflammation of the child's lips is often treated by applying compresses to the area.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And thus you treat the patient's intestines by applying a hot cushion on them.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And if they are affected by cold humors that cause pain, you should treat them as gout.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if they have pain between their legs, be careful to avoid the use of a cauterizing tool.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a hot cautery to that part of his body.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.  is translated as **Chapter 19.**
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	This refers to the treatment of fistulas in the legs and feet.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And in the case of the uvula being inflamed, or the mouth, or the teeth, they are treated by those who are skilled in treating these conditions, with a pointed cautery to make a small incision, and with a cushion to reduce bleeding.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And so if the wound is healed, you are good to go; but if not, measures should be taken to heal the wound or treat it with a cautery.
Capitol .xx.	The translation you've provided for "Capitol .xx." doesn't seem to be from an actual medieval medical text in Latin, Italian, Spanish, or French.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Single-line guessed translation: This refers to the cauterization and softening of the gums and teeth.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the joints are inflamed by humidity, apply medications to cool them down.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs and apply the cushion to their body.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E already the patient's legs are treated.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then apply cold water to their mouth to cool the gums.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	A cushion should be placed on the patient's legs to apply a hot cautery to their painful stomach.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply a hot cushion to their legs, and another on their chest, where they are being treated.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When the patient’s pain is caused by cold humors that are located between the legs, place a cushion under his legs, and apply heat to the affected area with another cauterization method.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May the first line be: But if the pain is in the legs, then you must place cushions on the patient's legs and thighs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply heat to the affected area to prevent further swelling from occurring; and if you are unable to do so on the same day, then prepare it for a different day.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	This is the form that the doctors use for gout when they are treating the patient's legs.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way to treat the illness by using a small cauterizer.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of extractions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When you cauterize the patient's body, we must do the same to their other limbs.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the inflammation is small, you will cauterize the area for three days and apply a cushion to the legs, but only if there are few other options available.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment to that area and use your hand to treat them with another cushion.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And here's how the probe or lance is used to treat gout.
Capitol .xxiii.	The first two sentences are from English translations. Please provide me with the first sentence for me to translate.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	A cushion is placed under the patient's thighs to prevent pain during treatment.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then you have to apply the heat of cauterization to the affected area on the leg, and if the body is cold, use another cushion for that which is in the foot.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Then apply heat to the affected area, but only slightly to prevent burns.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other joints if they are also affected by gout.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if you wish to cauterize the legs or any other part of the body, use the preceding method.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Make a note of this point in the text.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Here comes the translation: And if it is necessary to treat illness in the lungs and chest, use a poultice for the ailment and place your hand on their chest to prevent further spreading.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When there are two or more cushions under their feet, the patient's illness is considered to be gout, as if they were called by doctors.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, apply your own method of cauterization.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E si sial has cays de la
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery should be used by this method.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Et autre siat un'altra persona e la possa;
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the knee of the patient is swollen, you must treat it with a poultice to draw out the swelling.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, you have already applied a hot iron to the affected area, which should be treated with a cautery.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there are pains in the body, apply the cautery to the affected area.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so you have treated the pain in the legs, and another se's on their chest.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes, if a patient has their intestines or feet out of place, it's because they have their hands on their hips.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply pressure to the wound on the leg for a few moments to stop the bleeding.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if a cushion is placed on their legs, then you must cauterize the affected area on the leg.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduzeys le dolor del metges es a common practice.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This refers to a treatment for stomach ailments.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area between the legs, and place your hand on the cushion to make sure the patient's leg stays closed.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is appropriate, the amount of heat applied to the body will depend on the severity of the disease.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, the patient's body can be burned with a cautery on their legs to cure them from the evil humors.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, it should be done according to the amount needed for the patient.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name to the patient so they can be properly addressed.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply a bandage to their feet.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Translation 1: And if the patient has pain in their bowels, it is usual to treat them as gout.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the pain is in the legs or thighs, then it's called sciatica.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on their legs.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the pain stant on the intestine, it is necessary to place cushions on the thighs and legs of the patient, and then they must be held by the doctors, e.g., "if the pain is in their legs, it is a member; but if the pain is in their feet, the foot is a member"
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is how you use a hot cautery on the body and treat other ailments.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if it is possible to cauterize the joints if you have already made them open and prevent them from being affected by cold humors.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	The author is using a language that resembles Latin but has some Italian and French influences.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When there are signs of inflammation in the feet, it is called gout.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	A wound or inflammation on the foot is called gout in the case of the intestine, the pain is located in the intestines.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it's in the tunic, the doctors say it's an illness called the gout.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then, apply a bandage to their cavity; if the bandage has been placed on their legs.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize the affected area, which may cause pain for the patient, but will be healed by the fire.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then, if there's a need to make a cautery on their legs, they should be treated as needed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if a patient has a condition that requires cauterization, you must know the proper way to apply it.
Capitol .xxix.	The other is gout.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When using this as a model for the translation of "de" to mean "of" in the context of the provided text.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This method uses a cushion to stop the bleeding from flowing out of the body.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a hot compress to the affected area to draw out the heat from the patient's foot.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	You should be careful, because the Latin word "cove" means "to have" but is also used to refer to something being "appropriate" or "proper".
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The Latin word for gout is "gout".
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	"The pain in the joints occurs when there are problems with the flow of humors."
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	This refers to the process of treating a wound on the foot using a burning tool called a cautery.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat them for an ailment of the thighs, it is customary to call it gout.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	This translates to: And if the patient has been bitten by the plague, we will use that method on the other limbs or a little higher up, which is the same as used for the thigh.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you have to cauterize the patient's legs, and one does it with other burns.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	This sentence describes a method of applying a cautery to the patient's left leg.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so that the patient's body may be opened by means of cauterization as needed.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then return the patient's leg to its place and apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And therefore they place four cauteries on their legs.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you must burn, use a hot cautery to make your three marks on the body.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then, you use a hot cautery to treat the illness in the leg.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter xxxi.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	And if it is necessary to perform a cautery on the patient's body, apply it to the affected area.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion to them, and then place a cushion on their chest.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	The patient's belly should be treated with a hot point.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if a person has an open wound, place a cushion under them.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And place your cushion on their arms to make them feel better.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	If you are treating a patient for a burn, you should always use a poultice to draw out the poison.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	And apply the burning tip to the leg according to the shape of the body.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is a disease characterized by an excess of uric acid in the body, leading to painful deposits in the joints, especially if the foot is affected.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	And then apply the cautery to the patient's legs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	And if the patient has pain in their hands or feet, then apply a treatment to them.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply the cauterization method using two cauteries, one on each side of the body.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The translation you provided for Source 1 is incorrect. The correct translation is:
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And you should let the disease run its course for a long time and keep the patient's legs comfortable and free from pain.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Aproper la cushion on its legs, and then apply a cushion to the surface of the body.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs of the patient, it is customary to apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Then it is customary to treat the abdomen with a cautery.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Gently warm the area affected by the pain.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if they are experiencing a painful swelling in their feet, then I would say that it is a case of gout, which requires the application of leeches to remove the excess humors.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery only to the area that needs it, and make sure the patient's legs are supported.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply a poultice to the area between the legs and knees, and avoid using your method of treating with heat and pressure.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cold and the food isn’t digested, then apply a cushion to the belly and use a hot cautery on the face, and a large one on the other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxxv.	This sentence is likely referring to a surgical procedure, possibly using the word "junctures" in a metaphorical sense for a specific area being treated.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And here comes the translation of the first sentence:
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	And now you understand the pain to be caused by the disease called gout.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the foot and place cushions under the patient's hands so they can be used.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you have to cauterize the legs or feet twice, it means that one leg or foot has been cauterized more than once.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	This is a description of using a burning cautery tool on a patient's body to treat them for pain caused by a condition similar to gout.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This likely refers to the chapter 36 in a book or treatise.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And if it is necessary to use the cautery on the body, apply it carefully to the affected area.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not return to its place, it is customarily called "natural" by doctors.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Thus, when there is an illness in the body's humors, another method for treatment is to use a cautery on the affected area.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then another place it on their legs, and apply a cushion.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the patient has a boil.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And he/she will cauterize that which is needed.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there are burns on the body or an open wound in your legs, it will be necessary to use cushions for support.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the place with the proper remedies.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When there is inflammation in the lower leg, and it has been present for a long time, it is called a chronic condition.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if there are fluids in the body, they may need to use other methods for their treatment.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there's a need to cauterize the bowels, they should be treated as if they were in the foot.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	This treatment is for gout.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the gout attacks or a pain arises in the foot, then apply a cautery to stop the pain.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so, in this way, you will have opened the area for the second time with a small cautery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	This refers to the treatment of cauterization on the legs.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then apply cold to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Burn that in every way which is needed for the treatment of the foot.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And then place the cushion on their legs, as if in pain.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es a la persona que costuma.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so, the patient's pain is treated with a hot cautery on their legs, where the heat will be applied.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	The practice of using three cauteries in the treatment of the abdomen and limbs.
Capitol .xl.	The text "Capitol .xl." likely translates to **"Chapter 40"**.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the subject of dislocation of the hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there are signs of a cold nature in the body, it is customary to call it gout.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And a pointed cautery is used to burn out the disease in their legs.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then you must know that gout is treated by applying heat to the affected foot.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you want to make points on the knees, apply the cautery there.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	Then, if you are using a cauterizer, do not burn the patient's legs or feet.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make cauteries on the legs or feet, it should be done by a skilled hand.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	The treatment of pain in the vein in the leg.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A person suffering from pain in the leg joints should be treated by someone who has the knowledge to do so.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method for treating the illness is called gout.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient's legs were opened to be treated with three more cauteries.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"Then apply the treatment to the affected area."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At least four are used to treat pain in the thighs.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to cure the patient completely, cauterize the affected joint in order to burn its form out.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to treat a painful swelling in the legs with cauterization if you wish to prevent its spread.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	Mays if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient, the doctor should be careful.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the physician applies a cautery to the patient's body, he will do so according to their condition.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if one has a wound in the foot, apply a cautery to cauterize the pain.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain affects the legs, they are usually treated by a physician with a cauterizing tool.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if you have a cushion on your legs, it is customary to call that a hernia.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	Then apply cautery to the leg or wherever the heat is needed in the body.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply a strong laxative to the body, and place them in the abdomen, and carefully cauterize the stomach.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if there is a need to reduce pain by applying hot points on the body.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When they cauterize something in the foot, one should use a small, sharp cautery for that purpose.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you have already opened the intestine of the patient, and made them ready to be treated with a cushion.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Apply heat to the affected area on the patient's leg and place your hand on the patient's foot while they are burning with fever.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And then cauterize that one with a hot iron.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Leave it open for three days, and use the other cushion to treat the gout.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This translates to: "And this is how Albucasis, and if of this type we have used it, for the treatment of this ailment, as a rule, it requires a surgeon."
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And so, when you have the gout, it is advisable to place a cushion on the affected area.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri (the patient) be used to place the cushion on their legs.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a poultice to the affected area (the foot) after applying heat with a cautery, as needed for pain relief.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if water is applied to the body, or "water" for the patient's benefit, they are called hot baths.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if it is necessary to apply other cushions, do it for three days, then apply the hot cushion, and after that, you must let it go.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cautery to the area where the inflammation has affected the legs.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This refers to the way to treat it with hot compresses.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When you are treating a patient for a blockage in their joints (or a hernia), use an alkali and make sure no other doctor's advice is given priority.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	That's how you apply cauterization to the legs, using a cushion to protect the skin from direct contact.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And place the hot iron on the patient's body to apply cauterization using its power.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And if you are to cauterize the affected area, then use a cushion on the legs to be used to apply heat.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Then, if necessary, apply a cautery to the man's body.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is good for it to be applied where a pain is felt, or in the case of gout, on the legs.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And if the pain is in the legs for three hours, the swelling will subside.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And if your body is in pain, then put a cushion on their legs, because they are the ones who will be treated by the other two.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then know that these medicines are used to treat ailments by allowing for the removal of harmful humors from the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When using lan for the first time, use a hot poultice when treating the foot.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply heat to their legs and use a cushion to support them.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you see that there is a need for a cushion to be placed on their legs, e.g., on the foot, place your hand on the other side so they can't feel the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cauterization by fire.
Capitol .xlii.	Translation: This is the chapter about how to treat someone for an ailment.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the legs, already having an opening for the treatment of the pain.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	This is the English translation for the second sentence provided:
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then the cautery should be used only for this specific ailment.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily necessary to apply a cushion for the patient's suffering from pain in the legs, you must apply it to their legs, not just the surface.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And here's another thing: place a cushion on his legs so that they don't get cold.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When you want to treat a pain in the foot, use this method for cauterization.
Capitol .xliii.	The capital 43rd.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From the burnings at the beginning of the illness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This text describes gout, a condition of pain that occurs in the joints.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And apply a hot poultice to the affected area behind the knee.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you apply a hot cautery to the burn site, use a cushion to apply another part of the body to the area that needs cauterizing.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then put the other hand on their legs, to prevent them from spreading to the rest of the body.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want to treat it, cauterize it on the leg or two on the body, using two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	When doctors treat gout, they are often said to have "cured" it by applying cushions to support the patient's body,
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	and to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This refers to treatment using cautery for cauterize pain in the feet and treat joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	And if they are afflicted with gout, apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent them from suffering.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And so, once the gout is cured, it is customary for doctors to use a cushion to treat the condition.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize their intestines, use a cautery tool to do so, and another cauterizing tool on the other side.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This is how doctors are treated with hot iron.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	When it is necessary to make points on the legs.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain arises in the joints, it is treated with a poultice on the affected area.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use a gentle touch on the legs and arms, and avoid using excessive force.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	Then use a cushion for their feet.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then apply the cautery to the area where it's needed, using a technique where the foot is placed in a position so that the intestine doesn't protrude from its place.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then another placed his hand on the patient's legs and another on the body.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	Then if it is necessary to make a cut on their leg or foot, they should be cauterized.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	G: When the body is afflicted by illness, other remedies are prescribed.
Capitol .xlv.	This likely refers to chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	The cure for broken bones.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	If a member has a pain in their foot, then use other remedies to treat them.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you are a physician, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, which will help the patient's body temperature.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if the physician wishes to perform surgery on you, he will do so on the bones of your leg.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you need to place a cushion under their feet.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is necessary to apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then the patient's abdomen will be opened to expose the intestines.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you are treating a patient for pain caused by a humoral imbalance, you must apply a cautery to their legs.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on the cushion you have put under the patient's legs.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then you should know that the other method to apply the cautery to the body is to cauterize it when it's not painful for the patient.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are treating a patient, use a hot cautery for a cushion if necessary.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on the leg, do so carefully.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E aprot cura le loc should be applied to the area of the body that needs treatment.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has another problem, they will be healed by cauterizing the legs and feet.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Then, if you have already been diagnosed with another type of plague on their legs, they will be sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And if your hands are cold, you should use a cushion during treatment.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then, if you have to make an incision on the leg, it is important to do it properly.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you should apply this remedy for reducing the food and drink intake.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so you apply the cautery to the already ruptured part of the body, and another person helps to hold the patient's other leg.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Then you can apply cautery to their legs, and another one on their feet, which are the areas that should be cauterized.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the other hand is upon the chest, so that the patient's feet are kept warm.
Capitol .xlvi.	This is the start of a new section in Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	When there's pain in the joints of the body, it is customary to call it by the name "tortico".
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then use a cautery to burn the affected area.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And if one cauterizes the hands, they should be placed on the legs of the patient.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	When one's skin has become inflamed and painful, and the pain is felt in the legs, it is called gout.
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter on the treatment of gout.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	For which it is customary to place a hot cautery on their legs, to apply it to the affected area.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then they place the foot under your arm to prevent the skin from getting too cold.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then apply a cushion on the affected area if necessary, or use another tool for the procedure and keep the burning heat away from the patient's body.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if you have an excess of fluids in your body, use caution when applying cauterization.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you have already expanded the meaning of the term to include both thighs and the area where the legs join the body.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And if you place a cushion on their knees to keep the intestine from being burned by them.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat, the other on le colet.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if you are in pain from the cushion, it is said that you should use cushions to support them, etc.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	This is a translation from English:
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And so the cauterization is done to the patient's legs, and another remedy is applied to them.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then apply it to their legs, they will be treated for stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then you cauterize the affected area of the body as needed.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When your hand is on their thigh, they are to be cauterized.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply ointment to the patient's legs, applying a bandage after.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, it is said that the pain should be cauterized on the ankles or legs.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is Latin for "May his/her knowledge be applied to all the limbs."
Capitol .xlix.	This text describes how to treat different parts of the body using a cautery.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	A hot poker on the foot will cause the patient to experience pain.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs to reduce swelling.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	When health is affected by the cold humors, it is customary to treat them with the use of cauteri and lentil flour, applied to the leg.
Capitol .l.	Capitol .l. means Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient has been cauterized.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if the cancer is starting to spread, then cauterize it with a hot iron as soon as possible.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise men say that if the pain is in the foot, they will use a hot cautery.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine of someone in pain.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to apply a cautery to the affected area, place it on the patient's legs, then apply it elsewhere on their body.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are painful sores in that place, it’s a good sign for the doctor to know that the patient needs help.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And so apply cautery to their body.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You are treating the patient for gout.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	And if you translate "the pain" to gout, then you should use a cushion when applying the cautery to the legs.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area, ensuring all parts are treated.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterizing their legs and feet with oil.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then apply cold treatment to the patient's body.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	Then apply the cauteries again to the affected areas if there is no other way.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And for those who are treated by medicine, the patient should be given medication.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	However, it is more properly called gout by doctors.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	Therefore, the treatment for this condition is to apply a poultice to the affected area and keep it warm.
Capitol .liii.	Of gout in the joints, which are typically located on the legs, it is necessary to make a point of applying a cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This refers to the application of cautery (burning) to treat joint pain.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	This text describes using a poultice to treat gout, which is applied to the affected area.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already used a cushion to treat the patient's legs for a while, but now you must cauterize them.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply a hot iron to the affected area, and carefully treat it.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it be left for three days so that the patient may heal.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then place the poultice on their legs and leave it there for one night, as if to eradicate it from the body.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply to the location already affected by the disease the same treatment used for the legs and feet.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And so, if the patient's body does not return to its normal state, apply a small amount of water to the area for a period of time.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then the physician should be careful to avoid the vein becoming too inflamed.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, so that they are warm.
Capitol .liiii.	The original text appears to be in Occitan, a language related to Catalan and French.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	There are a few ways to interpret this, but I'll go with:
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Gualtier shall be given to the patient when they are sick, but only for tremors occurring in the nerves or fever due to the cause of their ailment.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if it is necessary to apply the cautery on their legs, then the patient should be burned.
Capitol .lv.	This is the 50th chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply the other causers of the illness to the cushion being placed upon them by the physician.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	This sentence is likely describing various types of medical procedures involving cauterization.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to treat the pain caused by gout.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Another servant may be used for bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has a burning pain in their legs.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And so you should apply an ointment to the affected area and use a tool to burn away the cushion of the plague, which causes pain in the feet.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	A hot iron cauterized the pain in their legs and sometimes caused it to burn, but they were strong and held their hands steady.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place them in order by size, from smallest to largest, according to their severity.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then place your hand on their foot to prevent further damage.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Then if you are applying a cautery to the body, be sure to apply it carefully to the affected area.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then apply your hand to their legs, so that they don't mistake them for another person's.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias que si the pain is caused by excessive bloodletting or by an excess of humors in your body, it should be treated with appropriate remedies to reduce the humors, such as applying a cushion to the area.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if you want to stop a fire from spreading, you must apply a cushion to it.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Therefore, if the physician deems it necessary to treat a patient's condition with a hot cautery, he should apply it to the area where the pain is felt.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And now commence the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	When you need to cauterize a limb or treat an ailment of the feet, you should use hot burning tools.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on the head to protect the wound.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then we will discuss how to treat those who want to know how to be healed by this method.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And if it is necessary to make cuts, then you will use the same methods as in the previous chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence describes how to treat the foot with the appropriate medical procedures for different conditions.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And place a hot cushion on their limbs, so that they may be healed by the warmth.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And put another hot compress on the back of your hands, for as some times they are heated by fire.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And when the pain of his illness would be fatal to him, he must use a cautery on their feet.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And if it is dangerous to apply cautery to their legs, it is because they are filled with a dangerous ailment.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	A person should be careful about a condition called gout.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And place your hand on the patient for inspection, ensuring their health and good memory are protected.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, sons, if you are unable to understand or grasp the meaning of something.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are using a cushion on the legs of a person suffering from pain, you should know that it's for the good of the patient to be relieved of the pain in the thigh.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so the child was cured by placing a cushion under their thighs.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que la noyrissa is the cause of this illness in children.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	When translated to English, the first sentence is: "And then you must apply a cautery properly."
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And if they have seen this disease in their child, they will place a cushion on their chest or place them on the legs to prevent them from running away during surgery.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have already opened the area under the child's navel, the cushion should be placed on their legs and they should hold the place between them.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And if the doctor determines that a patient has gout, then they should be treated with a pointed cautery.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When there are humors in the affected area, it is called by its proper name.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the moisture is present in excess, it is said to be treated as a burn.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if it's necessary for the patient to have his/her water-filled body parts drained, then the physician should apply a cushion or something similar under their limbs, and carefully hold them during the procedure.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover your patient's legs in the following manner: by applying a bandage or cushion.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if it is necessary to open the intestine or to stop it from being closed, and another poultice for the wound
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	The physician will examine the patient to determine which method of treatment is appropriate.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	This is a list of instructions for treating another patient.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And for those who need to make incisions on their legs, they will use a cushion to protect them.
Capitol segon.	This is the second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are painful swellings in the legs or feet, doctors use a special cauterization tool called an "a la sua loc" to remove the excess fluid from the body.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you want to cut into a vessel, then apply the cauterizing tool to the patient's leg, otherwise the skin will be damaged.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then you place a cushion under them, and a tent over them.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if it's pain in the legs, then other things are used to treat it.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if a person's legs are affected by gout, they should be treated by applying cushions.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the pain does not subside, apply a cushion to the area between their fingers and toes, that is, three fingers' width of padding.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if the patient's humor is from the blood, then it is considered a gouty ailment.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider the plague, if another considers the cushion to be helpful for the patient, then apply it to their legs, and to their foot.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to use a poultice on their legs, then apply it to the affected area.
Capitol .iii.	E. If the patient has a fever, it is customary for doctors to call for a physician, but if the pain is in the feet, they are treated by applying a cautery.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This refers to a method of treating gout by drawing blood from the temples where they are placing a cushion.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is pain in the legs or feet, apply a cautery to the affected area.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The way to treat someone for a condition like gout is with a cushion placed on their legs.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the patient has a cushion under them to prevent the opening from becoming rough or the pain from spreading to other places.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you wish to treat the patient's condition with a cautery, do so on their thighs.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	This text appears to be describing a medical procedure for gout, likely involving applying heat to the affected area.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	Then apply cautery to their extremities to prevent them from being too thin, and use a cushion for the rest of the body.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And if you are seeking the blood of a living person, apply it to their veins.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	When the pain of the arrow is severe, the patient should be treated with a strong cauterization, which is what you call the treatment of the affected area by placing a cushion under them.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's feet to reduce their swelling, and another to the rest of the body.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, apply cautery to the affected area, which is in the leg, as needed.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if it is better to apply cautery to a patient's legs, they are using other methods for that.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if you have a pain in the joints, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the legs or the other parts of the body affected by the inflammation.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if you are experiencing other pains, they are usually treated with cold poultices and by applying a remedy to the affected area, but sometimes the pain is caused by something else.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if there are no two places where the artery can be treated, then you have to use the same method for the other parts of the body.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the way to apply cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And apply the cauterizer to the cushion where the patient's body is located, and place a cushion on their ribs.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it is best done slowly.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And so when there are swellings, it is known as gout in certain limbs.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best done with the legs apart.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if necessary, he should be burned in a way that can be applied to the body.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the treatment of wounds on the legs and feet by a doctor using specific methods for each body part.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And so the patient must be treated, for the body's humors are no longer in balance.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are experiencing pain in your feet, they are to be treated by those who are familiar with them.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if it is necessary to make points on their legs and other parts of the body.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And take care to treat the wound in your legs, and make it long.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if there are three fingers' widths between the patient's thighs, they will be in pain.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you are dry-needling, you put the sponge on the body.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You already have a clue to the patient's condition, and another comes in the form of two sharp points on their legs.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	This is the second part of the medical treatise.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Apply heat to the area of the bone, so that the second one may be healed.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And place the instrument on the patient's legs.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Another way to say "gout" is "a cushion on the legs".
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	Mays one of the most common diseases among physicians is gout.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	If blood flow is restricted to the feet, apply a cautery.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then you should apply hot poultices to the patient's legs so they don't get cold.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day, apply a bandage to the area to keep it closed, and apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This means that the patient's legs are to be supported by something else when they are being treated.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by excessive humors that have caused an inflammation in the affected body part.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's mouth (when making incisions, place another cushion over the wound in the temple area to protect them from the heat of the cautery.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a cushion under them to prevent the inflammation from spreading up the leg.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then you should apply a poultice to keep the wound dry.
Capitol .vi.	This refers to the use of a cautery (a tool for burning) in treating gout by applying heat to affected areas.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This is about treating the disease called "gout" in the 3rd-person singular present tense.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints or similar to that, just as if you were a stone and a vein, which is the way they are treated with a cautery.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if the patient's legs are affected by the cause of the pain, treat them according to the treatment of the legs.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if the patient has a cold humor in their body, apply the treatment to their legs and call for cushions; perhaps he's suffering from a painful swelling in the feet.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if you are not using an instrument, it is called extraccio de la vena by the doctors.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Then you apply the treatment to their feet.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is not a cushion, the patient should be given another treatment by the physician.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	In this way, you will be able to cure the cause of the ailment of the foot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then place a cushion under their arms for support.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	This sentence is written in Occitan, the translation is:
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Then place your hand on the affected area to relieve pressure.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when you have done so, if the ailment is in the leg, then place a cushion under their foot, and do as follows for the treatment of gout, but make sure to use a cushion suitable for the patient.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you are thinking about using the warmth of the fire to burn away the illness, keep the heat from the fire on your hands.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then place the patient on their body, holding them down on the area of the legs, and use cushions to create pressure points.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And then apply a cushion to the knees.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The patient's pain will be relieved by applying heat to the affected area.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And so if there are many inflammations in their legs, let him be called a gouty patient.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When evil humors enter the body and reach the feet, then treat them with light hand as the other ailments are treated.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	A good treatment for the ailment known as extraccio de verm, which causes the intestines to be painful to the point where they must be cauterized.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there is a worm in the body, take it out with a hot needle, or apply a poultice to its location.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if you have a strong pain in your joints, that's because of the way they are affected by the cold humors.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays si no beu-lo, e thus it es necessaire to use the method of cauterization when dealing with worms, and you may find it useful to know the Latin names for the various parts of the body.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When you have opened the body's humors to be released.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And if you want to apply a remedy of silver, I will place the cushion on their legs.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then, if necessary, place a cushion on which the patient has been placed.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to apply a poultice to the affected area, use a cushion to support the leg and press out the oil from the poultice with your hand.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And when it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the foot, and the patient's legs are held apart by force.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	The pain in the foot should be addressed by applying a hot poultice directly to it.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And when a patient's ears are treated with cauterizing tools.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then, some causes are caused by humors that cause pain in the feet, others by the illness itself, and sometimes a wound.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	This condition, which is difficult to cure, is found in the thighs, legs, and knees.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you have to make points on the patient's legs.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have to treat someone who has a clear case of it, you use a sharp instrument.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if there is pain in the legs of the patient, use two cushions to keep them from being too constricted.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply it to the flesh of the patient's body, and apply another on their legs, preventing further damage.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply a hot cautery to the patient's body and burn the area a little bit, and use another type of cautery for the other areas.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Et autre se
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to apply a poultice to the wound.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	This is a description of an operation to treat a wound on the body, and it is necessary to apply pressure to the area.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of the condition which is known as the athiez.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	And some use for the pain in the eyelids of those who are suffering from gout, the patient's eyelids should be cauterized to prevent swelling.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Thus, the text says that if the patient has pain.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When the pain in the legs spreads to their veins, then apply the other.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat them is by using a cautery to prevent the infiltration of the pain into other parts of the body.
Capitol .ix.	This passage is describing a surgical procedure for treating a condition called gout.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	And if there are cold humors in the eye, and you need to make a cut in the eye?
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	And if someone has a wound on their legs, they are burned with a cushion, which is called a cold poultice.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And another treatment for a swollen foot.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if it is necessary to treat an illness in the body, it is common practice for doctors to apply hot compresses to the area.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, we will use a pointed cautery to apply that to the thighs, and it is best if the patient has no sensation in their feet.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if they have not been properly cauterized, don’t cauterize the foot, only apply a cushion.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is large, then you fix it back to its place in the thighs, and use another cushion for cauterization.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is little, the doctor will restore health to those limbs by using medicine and treatment.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the pain spreads from the cushion to the inside of the body, apply cold to the eye.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to cauterize it, cauterize it with salt water.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	And so you have placed a cushion on the legs, which are swollen due to gout.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A long time ago, when doctors were called upon to treat the pain in their patient's feet, they would use a pointed cautery.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And if you are feeling pain in your foot, and you need to apply heat to that area, it is called "a cushion" by the physician who applies a hot iron to the affected part.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	When one has an excess of humors in the body, they are usually called "sputum" or "humoral fluxes" by doctors.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the entire leg, then use a tourniquet to constrict the blood flow.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And if you are applying the treatment to the foot, use a cushion for the pain, and another under their legs.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When doctors say that a pain caused by gout has been brought on by a cushion.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Then you have already opened the wound in the process; you can see the veins through which the blood flows to the affected area.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if it is necessary to put the cushion on their legs, one should do so carefully.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat that area accordingly.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When pain occurs in the area where it is located, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the methods of treating the body, there are many ways to address the issue, but only one thing truly works for this ailment: a pointed cauterization tool.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	The text appears to be describing different methods for treating gout in the foot.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then place a cushion on the patient's feet so as to prevent the physician from putting their hands on their legs.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so if it becomes necessary to cauterize the body part, place the cushion under their legs, and hold them in the same way as you would with a burn; and do it in the manner of a leaf of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then you have found out the cause of the pain in the eyes, place a hand on their face to prevent further injury.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and hold your hand over the wound.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if it's necessary to be treated for your ailment.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then burn the cushion for the humors that are caused by heat in the body to be purged.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And already the pain from the feet has been relieved for three days by placing a cushion beneath them.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you are concerned about a specific ailment, that's what causes the pain to be called a gouty pain.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	This refers to the joint pain experienced by the patient.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's veins, use a heated needle to pierce the skin on the affected area.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is not possible to burn away the pain, it must be treated by physicians.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to suture or operate on the patient's body.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have a cushion ready to be placed on the legs of the patient, they should place it on their legs and then put their hands on their legs.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if there's an opening in the body that needs stitching or closing, use stitches for that purpose.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then return the hands on their thighs or legs to ensure proper cauterization technique.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and you can apply the use of the other remedies to help treat the condition.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if there are other wounds, treat them with thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And if there are humors in the eyes or eyelids that cause pain, they should be burned away by the physician.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es tardat, the patient should be treated with a cushion on their legs and another person should hold their hands.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	The patient's eyelid is elevated, and other cushions are placed on their legs to keep them from being opened up.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then, the other is to make cushions for the patient's body parts, and the rest of the cushions are placed on their legs, which are used by doctors to describe the way they treat gout.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it's a case of neither too much nor too little, they call it a proper amount.
Capitol .xii.	Another person's hand should be placed on the foot if they are in pain, and another person's hand should be placed on the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	It is customary for doctors to use the word "agente" when referring to an ailment caused by a fever or inflammation.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If your condition requires cauterization, be careful to use a delicate tool for the operation.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the quantity of the fibers be as much as a hand's breadth, and no more.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And so you'll be able to apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And so the patient's soul can be seen to have been put in contact with the sun by means of an operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then apply a needle to the vein under the skin, which needs to be done quickly when it is needed.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply it to the skin or the foot so as to prevent bleeding.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then treat the patient in a way that they are healed naturally.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply a cushion to the area where the wound is located.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus you should apply heat to the affected area three times a day.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	E si's a mays lonc (long) del·la pel·la, e sia no se ajustes.
Capitol .xiii.	This is the thirteenth chapter.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When a doctor treats someone for a condition involving the eye,
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a cushion is placed on the patient's legs, they are then said to have a pain in the feet.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	This means that you must use the technique of "the cloth" method to treat their ailment.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And let it be known that you should treat it carefully so as to prevent the cushion from being affected by your condition.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa that to which a doctor may apply a poultice.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treatment for your ailment is to apply cushions so that the pain does not leave the initial area.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if the patient's body is in pain from this operation, then apply a cushion to their legs, as it is done when treating ehalixacrati.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	And if you're referring to gout, place your hand on the foot.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true case of a disease which happens in the eye, but which is called gout by doctors.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then place a bandage on their legs and another on their feet.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then the patient's eyes are opened and a cushion placed under them, and another cushion placed between the thighs on their legs.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cauterization to the patient's legs, and place a cushion there so that the intestine does not receive further damage.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or body to prevent the infection from spreading further down the leg.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's legs should be held together if they are experiencing pain due to humors in their legs, and the surgery should be performed carefully so as not to damage the intestine.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it should be done to the area above the feet, but not to the toes themselves.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	When the pain is in the legs or feet, it is customary to treat them as gout.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Use cushions to soften the affected area when treating injuries caused by cold.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	Then apply cauterization to the wound as needed, if it is a suitable case for it.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then you separate the lips according to what we said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And in the case of joint pain, it is called gout (or something similar) depending on where the pain is located.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And so the surgeon's tools are already used to bring the body back to its natural form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	When there is a cushion between the legs, it is called the "other" if they are placed on the eye, another on the other side.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply a cautery to the eye, so that the other one may be treated if necessary by applying a cautery to the leg or the foot.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if you have to perform surgery on the patient, you must place cushions under them so that the intestine does not become injured.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When you use a cautery to treat someone for a pain in the foot, place your hand on the patient's legs.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply a cushion to the legs under your feet, so that the humors do not flow out.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cushion to the patient's eyelids.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	A physician attends to the patient's pain and places cushions for comfort.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then you will burn with a hot iron, or with a less painful method if the pain is not caused by fire.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When there are two sources, they should be used to make a cushion between the legs.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If there's swelling in the foot, then you must treat it as a cushion.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And if the patient’s foot is swollen, apply a cushion or needle to prevent it from getting worse.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you should cauterize the thigh of the patient if they are suffering from pain caused by a buildup of humors.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then apply a cauterization tool to the skin near the ankle to reduce subtle swelling in the intestine.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there are many humors in the foot area, they should be cauterized as needed to prevent them from spreading.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that the patient's bladder doesn't touch the tunic cornea and also that the eye isn't poked or injured further.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Aprop the cautery to apply it to the affected area.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if you cannot return the nail to its place in the foot, apply another treatment to the feet, and use other remedies.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to treat it, open the opening between the patient's thighs and use a fine cauterization tool.
am subtilitat.	And if you are skillful, do not use the other one.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Then if you are making room for the physician to use on the patient's legs or feet, and have placed a cushion there, place your hand on the patient's legs and another on their knees, so that they cannot feel the pain in those areas.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And apply another cautery to the affected area, but in a different way than before, so that the patient does not feel pain.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then place another cushion on their feet and let the patient hold still so that the pain will subside.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	If there are signs of infection in the eyes, the patient may be experiencing a tearful condition.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cushion to their tear ducts and the rest of the body.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply the lancet to the affected area of their legs, and apply another cushion to their feet.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The patient's eyelids are affected by a cushion in the cavity.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The patient should be given a massage if the pain is in the legs or feet.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And so you will find the intestine already in its place, or have placed it back in its cavity.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then apply the hot cushion to the affected area, which is where you would usually treat an ailment with a hot cautery.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if the condition remains, you should apply the cautery to the affected area.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then you must carefully avoid cauterization or other treatments that might cause further harm.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	The practice of medicine in the past involved burning a hot iron on the affected area to relieve pain.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	And if there are cushions to support them, use another to soothe the pain.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, at first, you must treat the other ailments as well.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And place a cushion under the patient's head according to your judgment; ...
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus they have opened up the body's cavity.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then cauterize their veins to prevent them from being inflamed.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And if you have placed a cushion on the legs, take care that you do not harm the veins in your work.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then apply something to the patient's legs so that they don't have pain.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And if it is a pain in their legs or feet, it may be treated with poultices and other remedies.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area for healing.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is how the form of the scissors is made.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A la sua origine, el dolor del nas es una malattia che si trova nel nas.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	And if you cure by another method than by cauterizing the other's legs with a burning cautery, it will be necessary to apply heat to the affected part.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, if it is found that the ailment is in the legs or feet, you should treat them with a cushion.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, then use a cushion or apply a sharp cautery.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then, place your hand on the affected bone to treat the condition, knowing that it can be painful.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the affected area, the doctors will apply their knowledge in the use of specific types of heat cautery.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the sickness is confined to the body, it will last forty days, and if it doesn’t go away, it's a sign that it is in fact true gout.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you are uncomfortable, a cushion will be placed under your armpit and another on your legs, to prevent it from protruding.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The patient's limbs are weakened by gout, which is a disease that causes pain in their feet.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand on the patient's thigh to hold the swollen part in place.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, when the intestine or hernia needs to be cauterized, it should be done by the physician.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	When the patient's body has become stiff, one must apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xx.	It is customary for physicians to treat the condition of gout in the same way they would treat an ailment of the feet.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then apply a cushion for treatment.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	Then apply to the patient the remedy for the complete illness, which is called the "huel", so that there is no loss of blood, and the pain does not return.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	The patient's foot should be covered in four folds to prevent further infiltration.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then return the patient's intestine to its cavity.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply cupping therapy to the affected area, placing a cup on the bowels for pain relief.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then when the ligament is tight, it must be treated straight away.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then if it is necessary to use a cushion under them, as we already discussed, do so by putting it on their chest.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the pain in the feet persists, apply heat to them again.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a hot cautery to the swelling in the patient's legs.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	This text describes how to perform a medical procedure, likely an operation on the eyes.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then apply the hot poultice to the affected area.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And for the comfort of the patient, place a cushion under their feet to ensure proper drainage.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And if the pain in the foot is severe, apply a bandage or cloth to the area.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	The translator will place a cushion on their legs to prevent further pain.
Capitol .xxii.	Another cushion should be placed under the body's chest, and another on the foot.
De curacio de alconati.	Here is the treatment for a pain in the legs.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This disease is customarily called gout, but it is not what it seems.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And so you see, if a patient suffers from pain in their legs, they are said to have a point, or a small ailment in their feet, which is caused by something other than a larger problem.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend, you should know that it is called sciatica.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	The tunic is to be carefully cauterized in the area around the bone where the pain originates.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	So if you are experiencing pain, apply heat to the affected area, and use cautery only if necessary.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is treated, then the patient's pain will be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand holds the patient's legs, while another one holds the other leg.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Here comes the translation for the first two lines:
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	This refers to a specific type of medical treatment involving placing cushions on the patient's legs to prevent the spreading of pain in the joints.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then make sure to apply the cushion to the area where the patient's legs are placed on the bed so they don't become stiff.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And so you should place a cushion on their feet.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use your right hand for one side and your left hand for the other.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you open the foot too much, put a cushion under it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on their legs to prevent the first servant from being necessary.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When there is an opening in the body for the use of applying a poultice, the physician should apply it directly to the affected area.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you see a patient's intestine protrude, hold it back to its proper place.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then close the points that are open on their hands.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus you have reached the end of the pain in the foot and the cushion has been placed on the patient's legs to help them.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Mays it be known that we are dealing with a description of the use of poultices for treating ailments in the legs.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then make sure the patient's legs are not obstructed if they need to be treated for their bowels or a hernia.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And when there are swellings or inflammations in the feet, the physician should use cauterization to open them up, but not too severely.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And the patient's body should be treated as one.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When it comes to the treatment of the feet, doctors will often apply a cushion to prevent them from being in pain.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And place a cushion on their chest so that they may be healed.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And for the patient, the cushion will be placed on their legs on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then apply a hot compress to the patient's affected foot, and let them know that it's for their own good.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And then apply heat to the legs, as needed, using a cautery.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if there are other causes for their pain, those should be treated differently.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if a pustule forms on the body, apply a cautery to their legs.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When there is a severe case of gout or pain in the joints, apply it to the feet for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And apply hot compresses to that area to relieve their pain.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The disciple is not exempt from the operation if they have some pain in their legs or feet; they must also be careful about diet.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And then some say that they have brought fire to their legs and feet.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps it has been seen in our country only as a condition affecting the old.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the ways to treat the body's humors, so that it is the one who uses a cautery on the leg, and not the other way around.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if they are to be made, use a cushion for support.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. translates to:
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When the ailment resembles gout or a polyp but occurs in the nose, it is called scorpio.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if there is pain in the bones, and they are hot, then apply heat to the area above the knee; but do not use a cautery on the skin below the affected area.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if you are experiencing pain in your legs or feet, it is important to have cushions readily available.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When you have to perform surgery on the foot, then you should apply a poultice to the wound.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	When a person has a malignant illness, the pain is often in the lower extremities.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then you must use a hot cautery to remove the excess from the nose.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas is a cushion or other protection for the body.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the pain is in the thigh, you can be sure that it is not caused by a wound.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	And if there is swelling in the legs due to an excess of humors, it is customary to treat it with a poultice on the foot.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a hot cushion, and prepare for the patient's cushion to be placed on his chest, which will cause him to be more comfortable.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	E then the patient's own body heat will be enough to keep them warm.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting for the patient, they should be put in a position where the cushion is placed on their legs.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then hold your hand on the patient's legs to prevent the spread of the ailment.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then use a hot compress if you are already treating someone for illness in general, and apply cold compresses to their legs to reduce pain.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta de la natura del nars (nose) being that the patient's bowels are cleansed, and to avoid the risk of the nars (nose) becoming infected, you will need to use a specific type of cautery.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And keep a cushion under their arms, for the sake of the patient's comfort.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you are concerned about a patient's health, use a canula (a small tube) for treatment.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this one is called podagra by doctors.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you are applying cauterization to the leg or the nose, it's best to be careful.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	They are applying a cautery to his legs to treat a patient's ailment.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to make the wound heal quickly on their legs, then do so by cauterizing it with a cautery.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And if it is necessary to use a cushion, place it under the patient.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then if it is a case of gout requiring treatment, treat it accordingly.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	When there is pain in the intestine, it is possible to cure it by applying a cushion under the patient's knees and placing a hand on the area to support them.
Capitol .xxvi.	E a la persona que se li fa un punt, e ha de posar la mano en el lloc on es troba la còpia.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if your hand has been injured by the knife or a wound, treat it with a poultice for the swelling and a cushion for their hands.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in many cases, you will find these ailments are more common in men than women.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then, if there is a wound on the leg, apply a poultice to it.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the patient's lips are chapped, you must cauterize them.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the legs of the patient with the cushion and apply the plaster to the affected area.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When a doctor has to use a cushion to keep the patient's leg warm after surgery, it is called a surgical dressing.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the afflicted area according to the custom of physicians.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When using the second translation, it appears to be a continuation of the medical discussion from the previous examples.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The patient's pulse is taken as a sign of their health.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to treat the intestine and other parts, you should apply a burning cautery.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii.  translate as Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"This is a common ailment affecting the gums" (this is based on the similarity to the Italian translation provided in the prompt)
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	> And if you want to do surgery on the gums, it is customary to call upon those who use three types of tools: the first for the teeth, the second for the jaw, and the third for the teeth.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs and use other substances to create a burning sensation.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize the flesh, but only in a controlled and specific manner, so as to avoid further damage.
Capitol .xxix.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is somewhat similar to Latin, Italian, and Spanish, but uses an archaic vocabulary and grammar:
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a cushion to their feet and legs.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the body's humors are in balance, it is customary for them to be healthy.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And if there is anything you need to know about the patient's condition, I will be there for you.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you are translating a text from a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish and slightly to French, it's likely about the use of a cautery tool for medical purposes.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth need to be heated by fire, and the body will be in pain.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the intestines from being cut open, they are called a special type of knife for the patient.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translated to English means Chapter 30.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	The substance is another reason for illness in the case of gout.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When a tooth is removed from a patient suffering from toothache, the pain will cease if you remove the infected part of the gum, but the pain from the other teeth will continue until they are treated.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	When you know that a pain in the foot is caused by something that is painful and has been diagnosed as gout, place a cushion near the patient's leg to support their knee, and another cushion under their chest, so that they don't feel the pain.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And apply a cushion to their joints so that they will not be injured by the cold.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if you are in pain from the instruments, the first aid given is done with great care.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	This sentence translates to:  "And if the tooth is decayed or the pain is caused by the gums, use a cloth to cover the tooth."
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And if you work carefully on the gums of the patient, they will be protected from the disease of the teeth and the pain will be stopped.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are already using heat to treat the patient’s feet, it is called gout when applied elsewhere.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	Then another servant would be required to be present for the patient's mouth to be washed.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When the blood flows through the legs, treat it accordingly.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	When using forceps to remove teeth, you should make sure they are suitable for the patient's needs, depending on whether it is a tooth or a series of teeth,
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let the great intestine be treated with remedies for its ailments.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are suffering from gout, which was then called gout by doctors, they are often in pain because of their legs.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the pains that affect the limbs, some are caused by humors.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if it is necessary to extract a tooth, use proper tools for removing bones from their sockets.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then you should place your hand on the affected area to prevent further toothache.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The doctors will treat them accordingly.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the patient's condition doesn't improve with the use of forceps or with applying it to their joints, then you can apply them to the rest of their body.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the intestine is thin, another cushion should be placed on the leg of the patient to hold it in place.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	And if you have already opened the patient's thighs, then they are good; otherwise, use other instruments to treat them.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then create a second line that is thin and delicate.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then there's help for the patient's legs, which is in this form:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if they are other things that cause the pain, then use the following methods:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the patient has a large or twisted foot, they should be treated with a cushion on their legs, and if the foot is swollen or inflamed, it should be straightened.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you should apply cautery to their legs and feet, as they are different from other parts of the body.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that medicine should be practiced with knowledge and precision.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when the foot is injured or the other bones (in the mouth) are affected, then place your hand on the jawbone, their position in the case of a toothache:  the other use of the cushion should be done with the doctor’s assistance.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is a pain in the foot, which the physician calls a cold that has infiltrated the body, causing inflammation.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if someone has pain in their legs due to something lodged there, use another method to treat them.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling in the joints, particularly in the feet.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from the treatment of the teeth you will have taken care of them by the time they are done.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then use a poultice for the natural humors of the body.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que lu sua o lesi, it is necessary to apply a cautery to the tooth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: And if you want to make a treatment for gout, use a file to scrape the skin.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place your hand on the patient's foot to make a poultice.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then the patient must be kept warm, and the body's humors in balance by other means.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if you find pain in a joint, then apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And apply cautery to the affected area to treat the pain.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	When it is necessary to treat the teeth by making them golden or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if a blow to the knee should cause the joint to be inflamed, it is said that it is caused by the disease of gout.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the patient has a bile duct or vein that needs to be treated, then you can use a hot needle to treat them.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply heat to the area where the patient's skin will be pierced.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When the gut is affected, apply a bandage to the area.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's legs are placed on the instrument to prevent further injury.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And apply your hand to that area as gently as possible.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And you have to be careful with the patient's legs, so they don't get gout.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if you see two humors in the body, then treat them separately.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	Then apply the cauteri to the cushion on their feet.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And they are only to be treated by those who know how to handle them.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Then put a cushion under them, on their legs, and place a poultice on the area where the pain is.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And if the tongue is swollen, it is called swelling by doctors.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This is the first line of a Latin-like phrase: This ligament is which to the tongue, which is natural or what has been caused by accident.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Let the patient's mouth be cauterized if they are suffering from gout in their feet.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If a person experiences pain in the joints, especially in the knees, when the temperature changes or if it is caused by the foot being affected by the plague.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	If the patient has a joint pain, it is because they are experiencing an imbalance in their body's humors.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	and put the patient's body back together, or apply a cold compress to their legs, and if there are still open wounds, put another on them; so they can be treated.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	This is a medical treatise describing how to treat a patient with a wound or injury.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then place it under the affected member to prevent further injury.
Capitol .xxxv.	This translation requires context about the meaning of "junctures" in this specific language usage.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply this to the legs.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if there are several ailments in the body, small ones that prevent the tongue from performing its natural function.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then consider the infection in the mouth of the patient carefully.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see that it is a red foot or black foot, which has no other sensation than pain, treat it with a hot compress.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E then treat the affected part with a cautery.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the proper remedies to the patient's legs, their body will be cleansed by the other medicines.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text appears to be written in a combination of languages, possibly a dialect of Occitan influenced by medical Latin.  A possible translation for "E si es necessitat" is:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	And if there are other sores, they should be treated similarly.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When you apply a cushion to the afflicted area of the body, you are speaking of gouty pain.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the pain is severe and the cautery is used on the body, and you have to stop it from going out, apply it carefully.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When a pain occurs in the foot, a physician should apply a cautery to the affected area.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then you apply the other two cushions on their legs, while the patient's body is held still by one hand, and the other cushion is placed so that the patient's leg is supported.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or with a tool of iron.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if it is necessary to apply heat or use a cutting tool on the patient's thighs, then you should do so with great care.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you want to treat that with an instrument, do so with a cautery.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if the patient's body is closed with forceps, they are treated with another tool for pain in the legs.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if a cautery is not available, use a knife on one side, a spoon on the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then mark the one who has an infected joint as if they were in the hospital.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mils si endeve are, then it heals the pain.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Then put hot coals on them, for the patient's legs will be treated with cauterization.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And she was already being treated for a boil, which was on their groin, and they put a cushion under her to help her breathe easier.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already risen to such a degree on his legs that he needs two lancets to treat him.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And if there is a pain in the joints, and you are to use a cushion for their treatment, it is customarily called “podagra” (painful swelling) by doctors.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And if it is placed upon their body, they are given a small amount of blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The cushion will be placed on the body, and the patient must stay in bed for a long time, so that the wound may heal.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And if you have gout, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area; do not apply it to the feet.
Capitol .xxxvii.	In Chapter 37, we will find more information on the treatment of humors.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision of the patient's legs.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the illness affects the feet, it is called podagra, which is the same as gout.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you are treating an infection in the area we have mentioned, it is customary for doctors to treat it with cauterization, which is why you must apply a bandage.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	As you have described, the condition of the tongue is said to be similar to gout.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	If you want to know more about what is causing pain in the body, use a cushion on the legs, and if it is necessary to know about the location of the pain, then place a cushion on their legs, and another above the patient's feet.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And use a cushion on the legs when making an incision.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a patient is suffering from pain due to a sharp cautery, apply a poultice to the affected area and use soothing words.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When the doctor applies a cautery, he should do so to the affected area and apply pressure only on the part where he wants the cautery to be applied.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And so if you apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located for a period of one hour, the patient will be relieved by the pressure of the cushion on their legs for a while.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Then you should use a cannula on your hands, to put them in the medicine, so that the skin does not break.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply a burning iron to the body, and if it is necessary to make a cauterization, place a burning iron on the leg.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this type of treatment is more saving than cutting, and long-lasting in its effects.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	A cushion is placed on the patient's throat to prevent choking.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the pain is caused by humors that are already in the body, then apply the treatment to the affected member.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do this at the beginning if the inflammation appears in their feet, and that's what they usually treat with a cautery, as you know.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	This is a question about if the use of this instrument is necessary for the patient's health.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if it's necessary to use a cautery, do so carefully.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to keep the foot warm for its healing.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if you want to remove your tongue from its cushion in the mouth, then press on the legs and have a doctor examine it.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	If you put your hand on their stomach, they will be unable to vomit.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if it is necessary to bind a bandage around the leg to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"When you are treating someone for bad blood, they should be treated with an iron cautery."
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, put a cushion on the patient's legs so they can be cauterized while the wound is being cauterized.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a bandage on his legs to protect them from further injury.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	When the doctor has placed his hand in the wrong position, he will know how to treat it.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Then, place a cushion on their neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating someone for the pain in their legs, consider that the cushion may be placed on the foot.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you must use bloodletting, apply it to the legs only if necessary.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the patient's toes, the surgeon will hold a concave tube against the affected area, pausing on the toes for as long as necessary.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then apply a bandage to the vein after washing it with water.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If you are experiencing gout, then apply heat to the affected area by using a pointed instrument.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And then they are called by the name of gout.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	When the physician has placed the instrument on the surface of the foot, he should apply heat to the area.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you don't drink water, it is necessary to avoid eating foods that cause gout.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This text describes the process of bloodletting when treating gout, which was thought to be caused by an excess of humors in the leg muscles.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then if you use a cautery on your neck, it will be marked by a red spot.
Capitol .xl.	This is the fortieth chapter.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When your body is affected by gout, it is said that the illness has spread to the legs.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if they have a boil, they should use a poultice to draw out the pus.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then use it to apply cauterization.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And to apply another cauterization method, you would use a hot cautery.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May some of the doctors already know what they should do when there are boils on their feet, but not in the usual way.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Then, apply a cushion to the affected area, if they are inflamed or swollen from being overworked.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When a boil has matured, you can lance it.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then translate the following: "And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply another cushion under them."
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's inflamed area.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if at any time the patient feels pain in their limbs, apply the cushion to the area where they feel the pain.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays, when the abscess is healed, it is considered a good sign when the wound heals well.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes doctors incorrectly call it gout when it's actually caused by other factors.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if it is a small perforation, apply a cushion to the larger perforations.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others use other methods to treat the swelling of the body with poultices and cauteries.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And then, from those who are sick, place them in their cavity.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And so you should apply a cautery to their legs in both a round and crescent shape.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When the patient has no more pain in their legs, then only a few people will know about it.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The pain will be most severe if you allow the affected part to be treated with heat and pressure by physicians.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the opening to the urethra, so you can treat men and women, or children, for the disease.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	This chapter describes how to treat a wound on the feet or legs by applying a poultice or using cauterization.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound was caused by an abscess or concave wound, apply a cushion to prevent it from being further damaged.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if blood flows from the patient's body, apply water to the area where it happened.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if it is necessary to apply the treatments described in this book, you will use a cushion for their pain.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If there's pain in the ankles, then use this method for applying the poultice.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	If it is summer, apply cold water to the area, and if necessary, make incisions on the legs of the patient.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then apply a cautery to each point on the body.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This means to make a cut on the legs (or perhaps thighs) to prevent the infection from spreading further.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	And then you apply cauterization to their legs and feet if needed.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are to be cauterized on the legs, and their hands should be kept from being infiltrated by lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And for those who are affected by dampness, which causes the pain in the legs; they should be treated with a hot cushion, or something similar to that.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the case of gout, the patient's pain will be felt in the feet.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the patient's legs are being treated by those who know how to treat them.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if there are many fluids in their body, then you must use a cautery to open the intestine for them, and treat them with appropriate remedies.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	Therefore, you should use a hot iron to cauterize that area if the patient has a disease that causes it.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then put your hand on the patient's leg if necessary, and leave it for another day, but if it is a cushion or a cushion in the foot then apply the cauterization.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the pain in their legs, which are already known to be affected by the plague.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And so, if you are treating a patient for gout, here's how to proceed.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When there is a pain in the area, we have already found its cause to be bad humors, then we should use a hot cautery on the legs and the other parts of the body that are affected by the pain.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if you're working on the patient's feet and thighs, the archer will be helpful.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here's another example:  "The following comes from the text:" "And if the body is too dry in the area where you cauterize it, it's a sign that there are no ulcers and it is necessary to stop the burning before the pain becomes unbearable."
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	This is the first part of the text that I need help translating.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You apply a cautery to the lowest parts of the body.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply a poultice suitable for the area to be treated with a cushion.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain in the joints occurs due to a particular cause, it is called by its proper name.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	And if there be a scrofula on their neck, then apply the cauterization to the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And some people say that if you put cushions on your legs and ankles, you'll be healed by the use of cautery.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	The sentence provides instructions for treating "gout" in a way that suggests it's more similar to a general term for inflammation or pain than a specific disease.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And if there is a need to apply a cushion to these parts of the body, it is best to place it under the care of a doctor.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And if you must cut into the body, have your cutting done on the leg of the patient.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution should be taken when dealing with their feet than they would usually need.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This sentence describes a situation where a poultice (pasty medicine) is being applied to the affected area to treat inflammation.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drawn out.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	This is a bit tricky, but based on your examples, it seems like it means "Therefore, return to your own operation" in the context of medical procedures.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then apply poultices and poultice-like treatments for small wounds.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if there are many large humors in their bowels they are called gout by doctors.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	A strong person must be present to hold the patient's legs and feet, and the surgeon must perform the operation with care.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply Egyptian oil to the patient's legs using the methods described above.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cauterize the body for that purpose, then you should first cleanse the area by making incisions to drain the pus.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays there be some other reason that you say that the patient has a swelling from the scrofula.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When there is pain in the foot due to a superficial infection, apply a cautery on the patient's limbs.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And a proper cautery should be applied to the affected areas, with the patient's hands on their own body.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the body is healed, apply a cushion to their legs.
Capitol .xliii.	The capital 43rd.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Here comes the first line from the original language: De seccio del pilhot in another place on their body, the physician must be careful to avoid the flow of blood.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	"When the ancients saw that the patient's condition was caused by an excess of humors in the body.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription for that statement.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply cauterization to the legs if necessary.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In cases of pain in the feet or ankles, it is customary to use medical treatments.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, if you are treating a patient with a small cut in their feet, make sure to bandage them up carefully.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is poor, you should cover their face with a poultice to avoid further harm.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return the patient's body to its original state; it is the cushion that has been placed on their legs, which you should remove after they are in a stable position.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then the patient's legs should be treated with other methods.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, use a cushion on the cushion-related areas.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then apply medicine to the legs where the pain resides.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And if there are cushions upon which the patient rests, they will have a cushion placed under their legs.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let the plague be left to fester until it becomes a good thing; then in three days, they will cauterize it and apply a poultice for such a time as their pain subsides.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I have seen that the doctors are called to treat the illness, and if they can't find a cure for it, then they call it plague.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, we must confess that the patient suffers from the ailment caused by a specific condition.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you are treating someone for gout, you should know that healing takes several days.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the operation.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on the legs is called a hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And this swelling on the legs is called by doctors as a "hernia".
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This means: And according to the two ways, natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case of the foot, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And hold the patient's foot still when they are experiencing pain.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And if a person has a small intestine, then do not assume that it is a cushion unless it's clear they are small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you are already treating that patient, see what is in the cushion, and if they have swelling, it's likely gout.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter 45.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the treatment of various swellings.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the nodes, many types of pain are known to be caused by the various humors.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And if you wish to apply cauterization, it should be done to the legs and feet.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the intestine so that it doesn't come out.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	Mays is related to "may" meaning "it's possible" or "it may be".
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is the other person who has a pain in their bowels, it is treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area, which is what we call the "other" for gouty pains.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And so, when you arrive at treating a patient with a pain in the body, you should use another method other than what was written in the previous sentence, which is to say, you should apply a cautery to their legs.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that doctors call this disease by the name of the affected area, which is where they put their hand in order to treat it.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And apply the last cautery to the affected part of the body.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if you have to cauterize the leg, place a cushion under the foot.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then apply the cauterizer to the area of the patient's body where the humors are known to be present.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	When there are cold humors that cause pain in the feet, make sure the patient's legs are warmed up.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And thus, if you wish to heal such pain, you should use a cautery to treat the condition between the legs.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it's necessary to break the skin for a bloodletting, it is done in a specific way.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if the body has too much or too little of a particular humor, then the symptoms will be present in the opposite way.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if some pain remains on some small part of the body, we should cauterize it.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When there is a large amount of pain, you should apply cauterization to the affected area.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if you have a problem with your blood flow, apply it to the veins in the legs.
Capitol .xlvi.	Capitol .xlvi.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the necessary instruments, the cushion is used for their feet.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these three signs, which must be done carefully, comes the word for "of those who are" in its proper sense.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then if the patient is ready for surgery, you have put a cushion on their legs to prevent the joints from being inflamed.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way to treat gout is in this manner:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	"And here comes the treatment for the ailment."
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let the patient's veins be cauterized if necessary.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	The body would be called gouty, if they are treated with cauterization.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if it is the feet, they are great in pain and few in number (of doctors).
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then apply a cushion to their body.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de la medicina più simile alle lingue moderne è il latino moderno.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Gaiters are used to protect the legs from the effects of gout, which is why they are called "socks" in some regions.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The patient must be treated in a manner appropriate to their condition, whether it be for pain in the foot or other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And then the patient must be cauterized, the large ones on the chest.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if you cauterize it through the blackening of its color, it will be relieved from the pain.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Gout is a disease that affects the legs, feet, and other parts of the body.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	This could be interpreted as:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead-based treatment of the ailment.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	When applying a cautery to the body, ensure it is applied carefully by placing a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent their leg from being burned and protect them from injury.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The patient is subject to the risk of one-sided pain.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And so there are three kinds of people.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And there are two types of those in the body.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And if they are suffering from three curves, and three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Then the patient's legs are placed in their proper position.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Take care of your health, and if necessary for treatment, use special cauterization tools.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple wound should be treated directly.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text describes a process of applying heat to the body in a specific way to treat joint pain.
Forma de unci orp gran:	And then apply a specific type of ointment for that purpose.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	And then apply a poultice on the patient's body, and place a cushion under their arm for support.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And form a small incision in the leg, and if it is necessary to remove the intestine, place your hand on their thigh.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	This looks like a description of a medical condition, and the use of "Forma" suggests a Latin origin.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	And so that they have two cushions placed upon them.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And if the patient has a sharp pain, put a cushion under their feet and another on their thighs.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Having three curves, a large one has a cushion on their legs, and a cushion under their feet.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma del corpo having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	And you will find that the body is swollen, and you will see this on their knees.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat the nodes with cauterization: hot, cold, and by applying a poultice.
Forma de scapel gran:	Shape of the foot in its entirety.
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del scapel migia means "of the shape of the knife" but I need more context to understand what it refers to in this case.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The way I would understand the meaning of "Forma de scapel" (from the context you've provided) is:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	And if they are sharp or another pain in the foot.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And then he will show you how to treat the different types of almagidas.
La forma de magda gran:	The translation for "La forma de magda gran" is "Gout is a disease".
Forma de magda migier:	This means: A form of treatment for gout is to apply a cushion to the area.
Forma de magda pauc:	This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess at a Translation 4 for the given context.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	When the pain is in the legs or feet, it is treated with cauterization, but only by those who are knowledgeable about its nature.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to make a point on the leg or elsewhere, then place a cushion under their legs, and use it as you see fit.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of badness of the bowels are known as humors that cause pain in the feet, which are called spatimis (in the given context).
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And then apply the other one's hand on their joints, and let them be held in place.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are types of cupping for the blood.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And if there are many sharp pains, they are caused by something else besides cold humors.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are the various types of cups used by doctors, who used to apply them directly to the body (in case you're wondering, that's what they'd call a "cupping" session in Latin.  It's a way of applying cupping therapy.)
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But if they are to be treated with a cushion, you should place the patient's body on their hands or a cushion in a place where the patient can easily touch their skin.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if you placed a cushion on their legs, they would have been used for this purpose.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round in this way.
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter title is "Chapter 47" in Latin.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	When talking about the treatment of men, and another about their feet, they are speaking of the breast or foot pain.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some parts of the body are swollen in gout, which affects men's feet and hands differently than women's.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	.B. is the name of the body part to which you have applied the poultice.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	The English translation provided for Source 3 seems to be about using different types of treatment on the patient's body.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E then apply the treatment to the patient's legs, so they can be cauterized.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A hot poker is used to treat the patient's boils when other methods are needed.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if they are in pain from an abscess, use a cautery on their veins to stop the burning.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And already has been evacuated the bad humors from the intestine; then you must apply the cushion to their thighs.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And so the patient's affliction is cured by the application of a suitable remedy.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When it's necessary to treat a boil or abscess, you use a cushion of poultice for the specific ailment, and apply it to the affected area.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Then administer the cautery as we have previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	This sounds like the beginning of a medical text, possibly describing an examination or treatment process.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This likely refers to the process of treating a boil or abscess (arceria) using a lancet or by other means (like drawing it out through a vein), but the phrasing suggests a more poetic or metaphorical approach to medical language.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And so the pain becomes a well-known ailment.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When the pain comes on gradually from the accumulation of cold humors, it is said to be a gouty attack.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if the patient has their foot cauterized, it is often considered an error to cauterize them in the groin, or knee, as complications are more likely there.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Mays over that which is inflammation of the bowels, usually causing pain in the intestines, would be treated by placing your hand on a cushion under their feet.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a pad on their legs, which will be used for the second time to apply the other cauterization method.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When placing a burning iron on the affected area, place the patient's body in a position where the heat from the cautery will be felt by the person who needs to be treated.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cure the patient, apply remedies to their legs, and use other methods to treat them, and apply a bandage to the area to prevent further injury.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu, the which in the body's muscles, already mentioned, is called a cushion for the pain in the foot.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you have to cauterize a wound, use a cushion on the four limbs.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then apply a cautery to remove the excess water from the patient's foot.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then apply heat to the area.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This is a chapter about an ailment related to the opening of the intestines or another location in the body, which is what causes the pain.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And so too, when an abscess appears on the body, you may find pus in the thighs, veins, and other parts.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if there is pain in the feet, apply cauterization to the affected area.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if a wound is severe, and the other remedies have failed to work.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if your doctor says you have a cushion in your body, they are wrong.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, cauterization should be used on those who have pain in the legs due to inflammation.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And you apply a cushion to their forehead or head.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays it be that your doctor may say it's a disease of the foot.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is great, then you have already sutured the other legs.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The first cut affects the body's belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then, if the pain is severe, put your hand on their foot, for they are often called gout in that area.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And he was a cushion in the bagatelle.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	When there are ulcers in the legs, it is said that they have gout.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if there are many cushions, you may need to use more than one cushion.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if the operation in the joint is necessary, use a cautery to burn out the bad humors from the patient.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if the patient’s pain is severe, use the method described previously to apply leeches and leeching.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	E another must be used to treat the gut with a tool to remove excess humor.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays if the pain is in the legs, it may be called a gouty condition by doctors.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you will be burned by the hot iron of illness.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then treat that person's body with a remedy.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Then apply cautery to the exposed area, but be careful not to burn the good flesh.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you have already opened the space on their legs and feet.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of eminence.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	And there are many causes for the affliction of the abdomen, as well as if one has to apply pressure to the intestines.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May it be known that gout is a disease that affects the legs.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if the humors are on the feet, they should be treated with heat to relieve the pain.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if gout is caused by moisture, it's best to keep the legs warm and dry.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And you will see that the patient's swelling has begun to subside.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When there are no other explanations for a person's pain, it is thought to be gout, depending on the severity of the symptoms.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by wind, they are already suffering from gout, and you should press on their veins.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This is a very difficult task, so it's likely that I will make mistakes.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the patient's legs and for the patient to be given a cushion when they are in the leg, then for the patient’s foot.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	Then you've found the affected area and can feel the pain there.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found the cause of the ailment.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	When you are affected by gout in your legs, use needles that they are for this purpose.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, apply a cautery to the patient's body for the purpose of burning away the pain.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	This translates to: And if the omentum is swollen, you must apply heat to the affected area for a while.
Capitol .liii.	When the text describes a condition affecting all parts of the body; it is described as being a type of gout.
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "de curacio" suggests a medical context, potentially referring to treatment or healing. "De" often means "of" or "from" in these languages, and the word "cranc" (with variations) appears in several of them, meaning "sick" or "ill".
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In this case, it is customary to apply medicine to the affected joint after using a hot cautery to treat it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	E in the breasts or in the other parts of the body,  a cushion should be placed for the treatment of pain to work correctly.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When cold and hot, it is customary to call it gout by doctors if it is a problem that can be healed by it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This refers to the process of treating someone experiencing a bout of illness, particularly one that affects their legs, by drawing out the black fluid associated with the black death.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then place a cushion for another cushion to be placed on their legs, so that the operation will be successful.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something on the body, apply heat to the area but do not use excessive force.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps if it's an artery, but when you have already opened the vein or applied other treatments, then use the term "artery" for the veins, and apply a different treatment method to the blood vessels.
Capitol .liv.	The other hand should be used to support the patient's body during the procedure.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to the patient's symptoms.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	The patient has already been cured by the cushion, but the other person is still dying.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The first line translates to: And if in another case you have already treated this disease, and in that other case the patient has been cured by treating them with a different type of medicine.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When the patient has the malady, the remedy for them is that they be treated by means of a hot cautery.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	The intestine must be kept open for a while during the operation, so that the doctors can cleanse the patient's wounds.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And if the patient's body has been opened up by placing a hand on their stomach and another on their feet.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the patient has a fever, let them be treated for three days.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if your legs are affected, it is by the humors that are in them.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	The pain is in the side of the body where the patient needs to be cauterized, so you can place your hand on the affected area.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And if necessary, you should cauterize the instrument on the affected area, as well as beneath the cushion.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And if it is necessary to make an incision, then do so on the patient's body near the foot, where they need to be cut.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place a cushion under the patient.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This is a bit tricky to translate directly into English as it appears to be a mix of languages. The sentence likely describes a gouty condition affecting the body.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	The first part of the sentence refers to a medical condition.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if you have already diagnosed the illness, other things are done by the patient, as well as the doctor's recommendations.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	Then follow the ancient doctor’s advice.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	E you have already applied a hot iron to the area affected by the ailment.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if he has pain in his legs, they are often cured with the heat of the sun.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And place your hand over the stomach and apply heat to the cushion for the patient.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And so treat the treatment of the ailment of the urine in children, so that they are not affected by the pain of the bladder.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some people have a cushion placed under their thighs, but the pain in the foot is so bad that they are called "the gout" because of the place where it appears.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And thus, the pain of the patient is felt as a subtle prickling sensation.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice of lead to the affected joint, and use a poultice of three kinds to treat them.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, he urinates.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then you must apply cautery to the patient's legs and not let them have gout in their feet.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	This is a description of how to treat gout in the legs, using hot iron to apply pressure to the affected area.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The surgeon will place a cushion under the patient's legs.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if it's necessary to use a cautery on the patient, you should hold them down securely.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi.**
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin should be treated for inflammation in the head of the penis.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Here comes the first part of the intestine or something:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of those is benign and the other is gouty.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No malignant disease, place a cushion on the area affected by the illness; place another on the patient's feet, and another on their chest.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the illness is severe, use the other type of cautery on their legs, which are being treated.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the inflammation is outside the foreskin, it is customary to treat it as a separate condition.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then you put your hand over the patient's legs to prevent the intestine from being exposed and that they are treated with a hot iron.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if it is necessary to treat the other's member with cautery, then apply the heat there.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	So if the patient has a flow of blood, then apply a bandage to stop the bleeding.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And if the patient's legs are cauterized, the blood flow is altered.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you want to know where to put your hand on the skin.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then place a cushion on the head of the patient so they don't get gout.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then you must cauterize the affected area to prevent the return of the ailment.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then apply a sharp instrument to separate the patient's legs and feet.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area, and allow it to heal.
Capitol .lvii.	Another [person] on their leg, and another cushion on their legs, et another on their chest.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Then apply a hot iron to the legs of the patient, and place a cushion on their feet.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When the patient has pain, the other sources are already in pain.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary to use a cushion under them, the patient's legs are treated with novacula and the rest of the body below it by barbers.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	When your feet are affected by cold humors, it is customary to call them other things.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	C'est dans les deux sexes que sont la causa des problèmes avec un membre viril.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And you will put your hand on the chest of the patient during surgery.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's humors are bad, but it is necessary to apply a cautery to the affected area.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if you wish to treat the ailment that afflicts the patient so as to remove the pain from their limbs, do so by using a hot iron to apply cauterization, but be careful because it can be dangerous.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way to treat the first case is that you should use a cautery on the child's body.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if it is necessary to treat them with herbs, then do so carefully.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And he who has made you open the space between your legs, place a cushion on his legs or his chest, so that the patient does not see him.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	E aprop monsifies a la tua ma in lu.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Then you have to place the cautery on the patient's legs.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	You apply the oil to the skin and use a cushion to elevate the swollen area; in the morning you will find it less swollen if applied with fresh rose oil.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is a description of the process of treating gout with cauterization.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The length of one leg is shorter than the other, and they are as different in length as the difference between two cushions.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And if there's need to drain the body or open the bowels of the body.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then make sure to apply pressure to the area above their foot when you cauterize it.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	Then apply heat to the legs with the other, and then apply the cushion.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days, apply a poultice to the area where the pain is felt.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And if the patient is to be burned, it should be done carefully at the head of the leg, so as to avoid burning them on the foot.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore the treatment for the plague is that which consolidates the humors.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is incited by the pain to be worse.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if there is no cushion beneath their body, they should be kept below the waist.
Capitol .lviii.	Translation: Another is for the cushion under the patient's legs.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retaining the urethra in its place, apply a cushion to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then return the patient's bladder to its proper place, and place a cushion on their legs so they can no longer be in pain.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then apply your hand to the patient's stomach and place a cushion on their body.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then you must put your hand on their back to prevent pain from spreading there.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	Then use a needle to draw out the fluid from the patient's legs if they are affected by what you have mentioned.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you apply pressure to the area where the intestine or bladder is located, you will cause pain in the joints.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And apply the cushion on their legs.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs, and apply it in such a way as to bring the pain to the surface, and place the cushion on their legs.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if the patient's illness is due to cold humors, and their condition requires it, the urine will be released from the bladder.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply a cautery for healing purposes, and provide relief to the patient's affliction.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	If you are able to apply this knowledge to other areas, use it to help you understand the following:  When there is a pain in the cavity of a person's bladder that can be treated by applying a cushion, it is known as a "vesical ailment" or "bladder stone."
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you've got an ailment in your bladder or a boil on the foot, then make an incision to allow its humors to drain, which is done with an instrument called a lancet.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When the patient's body is hot, it is customary to say that they have a fever.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And for that reason, you have three cushions, one on each of their legs, so to place them on the thighs.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place a cushion under their legs.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When you want to stop the pain in the legs, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply the cauteri to the patient's body; and if it is necessary, place the patient on another cushion, and the patient should be treated with a hot cautery on their legs, for the burn of the disease.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is the first line of a treatise on treating gout, which is often caused by excess cold humors in the body.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is made of silver or of tin, and another servant is made to apply the cushion, it will be said that they are placing a bandage on their leg.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And place a cushion on their legs so they don't get cold.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	Another placed a cushion on their feet to make them feel comfortable.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to stop the bleeding.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you want to treat it, apply a poultice directly to the affected area.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply a poultice to their humors to soothe them.
Capitol .lx.	The chapter number indicates this is likely a continuation of a numbered text, suggesting it is not an isolated sentence but part of a larger document.
De extraccio de peyra.	Peyso is a cushion for cushions.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos ja havem spoken of the types of stones that are found in the bladder and kidneys.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if necessary they are to be treated by doctors, even if it hurts.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And if a stone is formed in the bladder, which can be treated directly by the physician.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use a pointed instrument.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And therefore I say that to heal the child’s ailment, one must be careful not to let the disease spread from their bladder to other parts of the body.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And then you should apply hot remedies to their feet, and another cushion in the legs.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May be that in young people, it's called gout more often.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if you wish to make an incision, make sure the patient's leg is held firmly in place by the doctor.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	This is a tricky one! It seems like the text is describing a medical procedure involving the intestines or something like that, but using a word (that I can't translate) for "peyra" which means "painful" in the original languages.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient's legs should be kept warm by the doctor.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you are ready to cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, and prepare to cauterize others.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	"You have already placed the hot iron on their legs," or "And apply a cushion to the patient's legs."
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if there is a stone lodged in the foot, apply pressure to the affected area.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you are applying a treatment to the affected leg, it is necessary to use another method on the other leg.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if you don't have a stone to hold the patient's foot, use your hand to support it.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn (it) back into the bladder's space.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply heat to the body on the area between the patient's knees.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And have the minister press on the affected area with their hand.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, then do so with a pointed cautery, as in this case.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And if it's necessary to make a point on their side, the one who has them will hold the burning iron to their left leg, allowing the foot to be burned with cautery.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And if you understand that the pain is caused by something other than heat, then treat it as gout.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from their legs, it is called gout by the doctors.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then you have a point on their legs, apply another cushion to the other side.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	You are right to think that the translated text should be clear and concise.  The first sentence means:
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot get rid of the pain with pressure, then treat it with a poultice soaked in vinegar.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	This is the first line of the translated text: When the pain is worse than usual, the doctor says that it is a case of the gout.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	When there is a large pain in the body, you have to put your hand on them, and another on their side, so that the patient's bladder is treated with knowledge of the cause of the illness, but perhaps not the cure.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	The original text uses terms like "punct" (point) and "forfexs" (to cut), which suggests medical procedures. So:
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore after you have completed the operation, apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and another to their chest.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And when you have found the patient's intestines and another part of their body needs to be treated, the physician will use the same method on the other part.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then you must put the patient's body on its back, and for three days, keep the patient elevated.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient's intestines are inflamed, they say it is called gout, and treat it accordingly.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when the body is affected by the plague, which causes painful ulcers, it's important to place a hot iron on the affected area to treat them, but be careful not to burn the skin.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the patient's feet, only if necessary.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And if it is necessary to do something to the legs, the pain is felt in the feet, which they call "la podagra" by placing a cushion over them.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there are small stones, a cushion should be placed in that location.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When there are swollen joints in the patient's feet.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then place a cushion under them, and place your hand on their foot, to avoid the pain in their feet?
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And if you need to cauterize the affected area, do so using a heated iron on the vein, while he has another cushion under them, and another near their legs.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then the doctor would use a small needle to make punctures on the patient's legs, little by little, until your urine is finally released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	The cauterized wound is already healed over, so you should put your hand on their knee.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And apply heat to the area while using a cautery to cauterize the pain.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area so that they don't get worse.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And place your hand on the patient's legs.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then if the patient's foot is swollen or has pain, apply pressure to the affected area with your foot, and use a hot iron to burn the cushion, which will draw out the inflammation.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	When the body has been treated with a poultice, and then the joint pain returns, it is said to be a case of the plague.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if the disease affects the legs, you must apply a bandage to the knees and use other remedies for the ailment as we have already described.
Capitol .lxi.	Another interpretation of the sentence could be:
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common treatment was to apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	This translates to "And pain in the leg is customary" or "Gout is usually caused by excess fluid in the feet."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Treating gout is often difficult and prohibited by numerous methods.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman's pain is caused by an excess of blood in her legs.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if it is necessary to burn away the excess fluids caused by the second physician, it is important to note that he's treating the patient for their illness.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third line of text will be about cauterizing the intestine or treating something that affects the intestines.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth condition is that if there are indigestible substances in the body, apply a poultice to the area to draw them out.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And when the pain of gout is caused by other factors, it is customary to use cautery on the body, but in this case you must apply the cushion to the feet.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	When joints are affected by that illness, they will be called gouty by some, but only their legs are truly considered so by doctors.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if the woman is afflicted with a disease that causes pain in the lower part of her body, then she has the disease called gout.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you encounter such pain in the groin area, cauterize that part of their body.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, then use another cushion to prevent them from having an attack of the spleen.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then place a cushion under their bladder and apply it to the area where the pain is.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then, if you have a wound on their leg, treat them with a cautery to stop the bleeding.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And if it is necessary to make a section at the beginning; then put another on their legs, and another on their feet, the first one being the most important one.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that some stones are from the legs and if it is necessary to apply cautery to the leg it's called gout.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And thus you will know which species are affected by the ailment.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if blood flows from a wound on the leg, cauterize it with a hot iron after it has been stopped by the use of another tool.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And so the doctor said, prepare you for surgery by using the tools.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And apply heat to the joint pain, which is what doctors call gout, to the legs, etc.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then apply the patient's hands to their chest.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	The cushion is placed on their legs, so if there are no other instructions, you can close the intestine to prevent further pain.
Capitol lxii.	The text describes the use of acupuncture needles in treatment.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then another cushion under their legs, and another on their feet, for the patient to be cut open and have a cushion on their chest.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And if it is cold, you can use a cautery to treat it.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And if there's weakness, which is what causes the hernia to develop, then it is this weakness that will cause pain in the groin and other parts of the body.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And if it is necessary to cauterize someone's intestine, it is best done by placing a cushion under them.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then apply a cauterizer to the affected joint if needed, making sure no inflammation occurs in their legs.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if there is moisture in the intestine, it should be treated by making an incision and allowing it to drain.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the doctors call it gout, it may be a sign of other ailments.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the location of the inflammation, the nature of the fluid will tell you.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if they are to be cauterized on the foot, then the doctor's hand must be placed over the patient's legs and another over their feet.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if you apply cauterization to the legs, a little bit of heat will reduce them.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And another puts your hand on their left leg, and another servant on the right, and another on the chest, to prevent the intestine from moving.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then apply a cautery to the foot's toe, if necessary.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make an incision along the line of the groin, where there is no need for cauterization.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened the way to the patient's legs, and you must now carefully examine them for signs.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And you have already placed a cushion under their legs, and opened the wound with a cautery.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	E a prop separa la persona affected by doas, e leave the space between their legs as they are.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if the pain persists in the legs, use a different technique for the patient's relief.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	If a doctor diagnoses someone with gout, they will put their hands on the body part affected by the pain.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply another cushion to their feet, so that they do not leave them unattended.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When water is accumulated in two parts, it becomes a disease; but when it accumulates in the legs, they call it a gout.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then you have to wash the blood away, and put another cloth on the wound.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if you have already placed a cushion on the leg where the pain is, then apply cauterization to the joints.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Then you have to use a knife for that.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is caused by Greek fire, it is called gout.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When you are ready, put a cushion under them.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And apply a cushion to their legs so that the patient's thighs are protected from the heat of the fire.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if you have already diagnosed the patient as having a cold-related ailment, it is best to apply a cushion on their legs, and another for their feet.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Then you must cure the gout in their legs, as the following describes.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When there is a pain that is caused by cold humors in their feet, they are truly experiencing a terrible thing.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, if there are other signs of illness, such as a swelling in the body, the physician should use the term "perforation" for the treatment.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And you have already opened the patient's legs, then place a cushion under them.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if they are pointed on their location, then they will be in pain from the aforementioned swelling.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, hold your hand on their thighs, preventing the disease from spreading to other parts of the body, and another on their legs.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	At that hour, apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area to prevent further damage.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the patient's intestines are inflamed, they will suffer for many days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	A sharp instrument cuts into their flesh, and a cushion is placed on which to rest their body.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Then you know that in the section on the treatment of hernias, it is feared that they will be lost to other diseases.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	The patient's legs are being caressed and comforted by cushions.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then return to the patient's body the cushion or a hot compress should be applied.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there is a need to apply a cautery to their legs, then it should be done carefully.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a strong pain in the legs, which can be felt, but not on the foot itself.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes cold humors cause pain in the joints.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	If you have a cushion on the patient's legs, then place it under their hands, and avoid touching the affected area; if it's on their foot, treat it with a cushion.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When blood vessels are inflamed, they are often affected by gout.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E then you see if it is necessary to make incisions in the flesh.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humors have already consolidated in the patient's legs, you should apply a cushion to them, and another on their chest, and hold their hands.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there's an adherence in the leg, apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Mays is meat or flesh that is already behind so you should be careful when applying cauterization.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then since you are opening the intestines for treatment, use cushions on their legs and feet.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64.**
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This refers to the treatment of a condition related to the patient's legs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Then exercise caution when burning the affected area to avoid burning the intestines or causing pain.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This means that the patient's own body uses its own resources to heal itself.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But if a surgeon wishes to cauterize, they must prepare for the operation.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if you place a cushion on the bowels, they are to be elevated; and the gout in the legs is to be treated by applying cushions to raise them.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain in their joints.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then apply the cautery to the area of the affected part of the body.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	This sentence describes treating gout with a pointed cautery to drain the excess fluids from the affected area, likely caused by the old belief that humors were responsible for the condition.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	Then apply cauterization to those legs.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with a poultice as you would the plague, using a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is needed to apply a cauterizer to the patient's legs, it is applied with a cushion so they don't burn themselves.
Capitol .lxv.	et altro e la persona que es que vol dir "and so on"
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply the treatment to the intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	This refers to a hernia that occurs when the intestine protrudes from the cavity through a rupture in the abdominal wall.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this pain or cushion of the legs is caused by many things, such as pressure on the nerves or a sprain, but it is customary to call it gout.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The doctors cauterize the cushion in the foot to treat the gout.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when the patient experiences violent pain suddenly; and the other signs are different.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And in some cases, it is called this condition of the intestine.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	E.g., Some people experience pain in their legs due to the wind, which is called "windy gout" in the foot.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then return to your patient's body the intestine has already been treated for their condition, and place another cushion on the chest.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you put the patient's body on the bed, and place your hand upon their limbs, you will have to command them to keep still.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas of the body.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si' la dolor sia in the legs.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then he will be ready to help if you have already placed a cushion on their testicles.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are in pain, apply a cautery to the feet.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you need to apply cautery to the foot, use a cushion for protection and have a skilled assistant hold the tools.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E cerqua am looking at the intestine for signs of disease.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find that there is a reason for your illness, the patient should be treated by applying remedies to their feet, which are related to the cause.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And so put a cushion on their legs, which are also called "thighs" in some cultures, for the purpose of a cushion in the foot is to keep the patient's body warm.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then place cushions around those legs so that no further injury occurs to the body.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply this treatment to the other side of the leg, where the pain is less intense, e.g., 3 times a week instead of every day.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	You placed a cushion in the knee of the bed.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let oil be applied to the patient's legs, so that the white blood may flow;  and if the disease is due to an excess of phlegmatic humor, then apply a cushion within.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Then apply hot water to the area as needed.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the plague, and for another plague let them be treated by another hand.
Capitol .lxvi.	"When there's a need to treat pain in the joints by applying a cautery tool to the affected area."
De hernia ventosa.	Then treat the patient for their gout.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And then if you have to cauterize a part of the body, another cushion would be placed under them.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then you will make a small incision there to drain the swelling from the affected area.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence is likely from a translated version of the original text, as it's in a language that uses words like "podra" (could) and "cushion")
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Then return the wound to their place on the legs, and apply pressure elsewhere.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there are painful swellings in the foot, apply heat to the affected area to alleviate the pain.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Then you have to put a cushion under the patient's knee if you find that the intestine has been swollen for some time.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This treatment is called for when there is pain in the legs, but it is important to specify what type of treatment you are referring to.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the patient is treated by placing his hand on the cushion.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And you shall apply a strong cushion on the head where the pain is felt, and then hold their hand over the place where the pain is.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Translation 4: Then open the knee joint with your hand to prevent a condition called "the other" from occurring.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And place a cushion on the patient's body to adjust the two parts together.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then you remove the stones from their proper place, but be careful not to damage the intestine.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And for that [condition] you should place a cushion under their legs, so as to protect them from the effects of the other things.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And if you have opened the site, and they are in the process of being healed, the patient will be better served by another method.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And if you must place your hand on the patient's feet, then place it on the other parts of the leg.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And if it is necessary to make incisions in the skin, they should be cauterized.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, adjust your treatment accordingly.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a cauterization to their legs with three or four cushions.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And for that you have to make a small incision on their feet.
Capitol .lxix.	Another patch of the skin is exposed on your legs.
De castracio.	On castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And the rest are for the treatment of those who have them.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castration can be done in two ways: by attrition or by incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	And so that the body is softened by heat and made less stiff.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then apply a remedy to those joints to resolve the issue.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When you need to perform surgery on the surface of the animal's testicles, use a cushion to support the body and keep the animal still.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there is an obstruction in the legs, you can treat it with the use of a cushion.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cauterize the legs where the cold humors are, so that no more will be affected, and make an incision on their chest.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And if there are other causes for the pain in their legs, apply a poultice to the area.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is the way to castrate in this manner.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the plague where it is within the body.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In men it is called hermaphroditism but in women it is called something else.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And yet another place to place a poultice on the body is the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	One could also translate "Mays" as "May it be" for a more poetic rendering.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of cures: by fire, by water, and by medicine.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Cove es that you should know, what the doctors are doing when they apply their trade to the patient's legs.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And as for the second type of ailment, it is not yet curable.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The slow-growing pains are caused by various factors, including diet.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And some are affected by strong humors in their legs, which causes pain.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And then if you have swelling in your legs, apply your hand to them to keep the humors from spreading further.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to make cushions on the surface of the body, you should place your hand on the affected area.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	"May your flesh be born again"
Capitol .lxxii.	This appears to be a set of Italian sentences, but I need more context to provide an accurate translation for "Capitol .lxxii.".
De curacio de alratica.	The following English text matches the provided Italian/Latin sentence and translates the Latin phrase:
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, if it's necessary to make incisions on the woman's body, she should be given a small incision.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so the pain is either natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And if there are other conditions, such as pain in the flesh or feet, that cause discomfort, they should be addressed first.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	You must hold your hand on the patient's body, or as needed for their feet, one should use the cushion to support them.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if the pain in the legs is known to be caused by that ailment, put your hand on the area.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the patient has gout in the joints, then you can treat them with a poultice.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do not let the patient's legs be touched, except by the physician.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Another already sits on the patient's chest and holds her hand in place.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then apply oil to the area and put the cushion there.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is already on their legs, you should move them to the other place where the problem is located.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May be called "the meat" by those who are affected by it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs, and if necessary, use a cauterizing tool.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a lead cushion to their legs, so as to prevent the plague from spreading easily throughout the body.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have had a cushion for that purpose for several days, they should be treated by the physician accordingly.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you should apply another cautery to their legs, and another to the feet.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, then cauterize according to this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When it's necessary to cauterize a wound, the patient must be willing to have their legs or feet burned.
Capitol .lxxiii.	"The intestine has been called a cushion by you."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Then use emollients to soothe the hemorrhoids on her legs, and apply the red-hot iron to the affected area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The translation of "E.g., the ancients used to cauterize the veins of the foot."
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And apply cauterization to the legs.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And when there is pain in their legs, it is called gout.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those who suffer from gout are often treated by having their legs or feet cauterized.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And then that it is customary for the physician to apply a hot poultice to the legs, as well as a bandage to the bandages, while the patient is in pain, and another to the chest.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize those areas with the appropriate cauteries.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply a cushion on their feet to prevent them from being cold.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flux of blood persists, apply a poultice to the affected area to draw out the pain.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cups to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cushion on their legs, and another to the location of the pain.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	This pain is in his/her foot, and must be treated by the physician as he has explained.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by a pain in their feet, they will be called gouty.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The surgeon makes an incision on the foot.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Some types of boils are called apostilas, but the doctor will treat them properly.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if you have removed the pain from the body, the patient needs to be placed on his/her legs.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you want to know about hot poultice applied to the body, I will tell you how to apply it properly.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When you first feel pain in the foot and the signs of inflammation are present, apply heat to treat it.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And so the doctor will be able to see her disease through the examination of her feet.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And so, when the midwife uses her knowledge and skill, she will administer the instrument which will be used for its purpose.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then use a cushion to apply heat to the affected area so the pain subsides.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you place a cushion on the legs, to prevent them from being burned by the hot cautery.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if you are already experiencing vertigo, the doctor should apply a countermeasure on their legs to prevent further injury.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you cauterize the legs or feet, be sure to apply the cautery to their proper place.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if the thigh or leg is affected, it is customary to apply a poultice of a cushion with a cushion; place another on their chest.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When the patient is experiencing pain in the legs and feet, place your hand on the affected area.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the healing balm to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, place a cushion under them.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	Then let the doctor be careful when applying cauterization to avoid damaging the patient's intestines.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to "Chapter 75"
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	And if midwives are needed to treat someone's illness with bloodletting, they must be careful to avoid applying it directly on the patient's feet.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must ensure the child is in the proper position for delivery by using natural methods to guide its placement.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see these signs, you should know that it is true that a small cushion can be used for good if it is applied correctly to their feet.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then apply cautery to the patient's flesh, but be careful not to let the heat spread to the other parts of the body, or cause the skin to become burned and blistered.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And if she avoids mistakes and subtle errors in judgment by her skill as a midwife, it's the best way to ensure the safety of both the woman and the child.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And if you are treating a patient, use those other tools to treat the legs and feet.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the illness has weakened the body, apply heat to the affected area to treat the patient with a cauterization.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then apply another cautery on the thighs to make them sweat.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And if the pain is in the legs, then cauterize the area near the groin.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays it be that you have to apply leeches on their leg, in case of pain.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if the patient has a strong fever or cough, they will be given other instructions.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, use gentle methods to reduce them gradually.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if you are too obese to be treated by means of a hot poultice, they are typically treated by doctors for pain in the legs and feet, which causes swelling.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if a patient has problems with their bowels, do not let them be burned, but treat them by removing the bad humors.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then burn the affected area with a cautery to remove the excess humors.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells and pain occurs, apply a hot poultice to the affected area gradually.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should place a cushion under the patient's legs if they have pain in their legs.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the pain in the body, you should place your hand over it.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	When the pain is localized to the limbs, then apply a cushion of water and gum.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply the treatment to the affected part.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	E cum that to be a disease of the joints, which are called by the same name by the doctors, that is to say, gout.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area, and treat the cause of the ailment.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply cauterization to relieve the pain in the patient's feet and legs.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	If you have to open up the abdomen to see if the intestine is inflamed.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then carefully apply pressure to the patient's abdomen, gradually increasing the intensity.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the intestine or hernia is not painful, then it's probably not a problem.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and ensure their hands are covered.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Then apply heat to the foot, and place your hand on the area to prevent the pain from spreading.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if you have to reduce the swelling, elevate the leg and apply your hand.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then apply strong cauterization to the body only after the patient has been properly prepared for it, and ensure the cushion protects the patient's body from burns.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And place a cushion under their feet.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The patient's legs are to be kept warm by placing a cushion under them.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	This midwife should be given a proper name and she should be treated gently.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	The patient's legs are already swollen from the fluids that cause gout.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command your legs to be treated by placing cushions on their legs.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is brought out through the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When applying leeches according to this method, consider the following instructions for using them.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you have a pain in the face or neck, apply a cauterizing tool to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if it is necessary to make a mark on the body, one should apply a cushion to their body, so that they may not be injured.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	And so you make them return to their proper place.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	And you must know that it is three or four days ago since the patient was taken to his bed, which is when he will be brought back to health by nature.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if there are many more than one, make a second incision on the foot.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if they are difficult, some parts of the body are more prone to be affected by gout than others;
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And for a cure for a patient with gout, you should use a pointed cautery on their foot.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	And apply a cautery to the legs if they have difficulty standing up.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"And if you have been treated for a while, you can't be sure that all the bad humors are purged.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, then do so.
Capitol .lxxvi.	The translation for "Capitol .lxxvi." is "Chapter 76".
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Then, when the patient's body is affected by gout, apply a cushion to their legs.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	Then consider if you should use a cautery to cauterize the affected area.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the doctor's hand is placed on the woman's legs, and she is customarily called to be healed.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And if there is a problem with the leg, it is customary to apply a cushion.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then apply the hot oilments to their legs, and another cushion for the patient's feet.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if one has to apply cauterization to the affected area, it is done so with heated tools by the midwife.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then consider whether the patient's body should be cauterized, which would then be done immediately by placing a cushion on their head and applying heat to the areas around the left side of the chest.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if it is over their feet, then it is a cushion.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you have already burned your hand on the left side, then put a cushion there to protect it from the heat of the fire.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a hot cauterizer to the legs, but only if necessary.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, they should be made quickly and carefully.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if there is a pain in the limbs, the surgeon should use a cushion to protect them.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if there is a need to treat the patient's leg, they are treated with hot poultices on their legs.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	This is an example of how a medieval physician might describe the location of a problem:
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And thus the patient's condition is such that it can be used to treat the other ailments.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Mays use hot cauterization on the affected area, if they are not already suffering from gout.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if the patient has gout, you should apply the cautery to the affected area.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the vein is cut, then the blood will be released onto the legs.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	The patient should be treated with cupping therapy.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the patient has pain in the legs or feet, they are to be treated with a cauterization.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the patient has a light fever, and the pain is in the feet, they should be treated for gout.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Here comes the first explanation: When you are using the word "coyssi" you are referring to "cloying".
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Mays, the other foot, was opened (by the doctor) because the patient has suffered from the ailment of gout.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is constricted or cramped, which is called gout, the person who applied the cushion should be careful to apply it carefully.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply poultices, and another treatment for the patient's feet.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then apply heat to the affected area, if needed, as well as the treatment we just described above.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When it is not possible to cut into the body, you should place something on the legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then you should leave no part untouched under their feet.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	E cum tu es in pain, place your hand on the affected area to prevent it from worsening.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if it is the other way around, it means you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have seen women afflicted by a fever and they say their pain is due to an imbalance in the humors.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You will apply a cushion to the area where their foot is burned by the disease, which causes gout.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if there's pain in the body, ye need to place a cushion under them.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you apply a poultice to their legs, etc.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then they were already applying the heat to the bones of the dead man's feet.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, the plague will be treated with proper treatment.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	When there's pain in the foot, the other one is on the legs.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Then use a cushion to extract the foot from its space.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the legs, as it's necessary for their pain relief.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs, where they are located to apply the caque.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And so if they are in need of treatment, the physician should treat it carefully and gently.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The patient's pain must be treated by applying a cushion to their feet.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And if there are two cushions, place them in the mouth of the patient and apply it to their mouth.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Take the form of a cushion (or something similar) and apply it to the legs.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you are to use forceps on the patient, they should be made of wood.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the most common type of ailment affects the feet, so use the term "gout" for that.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This is a description of how to treat the feet.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you must open your patient's body up to what's needed.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the patient's condition, not their body part.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	When the form of treatment is unknown because it is in a foreign language, it is customary to say that the patient has a strange ailment.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The patient's legs are being burned at the affected areas.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And for those who have pain in the legs, they should be treated with forceps applied to the affected area.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The patient is in pain.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The text describes someone experiencing gout, a painful inflammatory condition, needing attention to their legs and feet.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci having two points means it has been burned in two places by the use of hot needles.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This form of tongs are used to grip the skin between the fingers.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If a pain appears in the foot, which is caused by bad humors, they should be cauterized.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply a cautery to the affected area.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those tools are used for surgery, and all sorts of people are prepared to perform surgeries on them.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you must apply cushions to those places where there are points in his body.
De extraccio de la segondina.	When there is pain in the joints from an excess of humors.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the pain spreads to your legs, you should use gout remedies.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if necessary, you apply the cautery to the body part affected by the pointed pain.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them should be steeped in water, and then put on the feet.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a cannula in the mouth of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then place your hand there so quickly that the patient's hands are kept warm.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	And if you find yourself unable to use this remedy, because the humor in the patient's foot is too thick for a poultice to be applied, then use a hot iron instead.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before applying cautery to the affected area, the patient should be treated by the surgeon.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if there are cushions to be placed on the limbs, apply it in the manner of cauterization.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if it is customary to call it by the name of gout, it is necessary to apply a poultice to the foot.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it's in the legs, use a cushion to soothe them.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when the pain occurs in the legs, you should administer medications to treat it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May you, in your wisdom, use dry cupping and cauterization for medicinal purposes.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	And if it is necessary to place a bandage on the patient’s feet, do so carefully.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	A cushion under their thighs would be placed on the legs if they are seeing other than the pain in the feet.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	Then, when heated on the fire, place it (the cauterized area) in the patient's chest.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And another one should be cauterized on their thighs.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Take care of the uninjured child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the body is affected by cold humors, it is said to be afflicted by gout.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	When the midwife applies the hot iron to the body, she must be careful not to touch the patient's bone.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	This patient has been treated with cauterization using a cushion soaked in wine and oil; then they should be anointed with other cushions.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	The other hand should be placed on the child's feet while the other is used to hold the child's legs in place.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the disease of the plague affects the body, its location in the bowels requires special treatment.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When there are swollen veins in the legs, it is customary to apply heat to the affected area.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The which are called fistulas, are located in the legs or on the body near the thigh.
E es una fistula o motas.	And there's a cushion for the patient's feet.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	If that ailment afflicts you again, place cushions under their arms.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if it is necessary to burn away evil humors from between the legs, then you know what to do.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected part, the pain will be relieved.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	If you have a problem with a fistula, use a gentle touch to apply the hot iron directly to the affected area.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When you are in pain from such, on your legs or feet.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If there is no pain in your foot, then place your hand on it to prevent the need for a cushion.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then the patient must be given a hot iron to cauterize the fistula so that the urine may no longer enter the bladder.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps this one refers to the pain being caused by something penetrating the joint capsule and that something is an injury to the tendon?
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas that go deep into the body, the other doctors are already cured.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if you are going to cauterize the intestine, put something under their legs, and place a cushion on their feet.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you want to cure an ailment in your legs, place cushions under their knees and feet during treatment.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then at that time, place your hand on the patient's body to feel for the ailment.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	When pain in the joints is felt in the toes, you should know that it is gout.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then apply pressure to the patient's legs when they are healthy.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a fistula, it is customary to apply several cushions on the patient's legs and thighs.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And if the body is treated with medicine, it may be cured; but if the pain arises in the bones, then it's called gout already.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the patient's body has been infiltrated by the symptoms of gout, then treat them for gout.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And the surgeon places a cushion on the affected area and another under the patient's feet, and also above their head.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	May leas is a cushion, and you should apply a bandage to their legs.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And so you must treat the plague in the leg with a cauterizing tool, to burn the flesh and prevent the infection from spreading.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And apply cauterization to the affected area; when the intestine is healed it's no longer necessary to cauterize.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	When the disease spreads to the body, they are called the fistula and inquirees were in the rectum.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If the pain is in the feet or hands, then the patient should be treated by doctors for a type of ailment that is caused by an imbalance of humors.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then apply to the patient’s body as many cold poultices as are necessary to bring the healing properties to the open fistula.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply heat to the affected area using a needle-like instrument, to close the opening at the location of the wound and prevent further bleeding.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the pain is in the joints, it is treated by a surgeon who will use pointed instruments to make incisions or punctures in the affected area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you are using a pointed cautery, then place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then apply a poultice for the purpose of healing the ailment.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if there are fistulas, they should be treated with a cushion on which the patient's hands rest.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This is the process of cauterizing a fistula when it is a sharp pain.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When treating the joints, the patient's body should be kept warm.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And when the bowel is inflamed or swollen, it should be treated with the same care as given to the legs and feet.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And in the legs, both small and large, it should be applied to the legs, and the hands should be placed on the body to prevent it from being cold.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And they should be treated with remedies that reduce their heat and humidity.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you put the patient's feet up on their bed with an instrument to hold the cushion in place, while another person attends to them.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then you should apply a bandage to prevent further swelling.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another will cure those ailments within them.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have placed the cushion on the patient's thighs.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If you translate "the pain" as the cause of the hemorrhoids being outside, then they are healed by cauterization.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And he that has a wound, take strong thread and apply it to the part where the needle enters.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Then let the fluids flow from the body through the veins.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And put them in a warm bath to remove the excess of humors from their legs.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has been cauterized, and they are cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to treating fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moles or other ailments are often caused by excess fluid in the body.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you are treating a wound on the leg or foot, apply a cushion to the area under those limbs.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area and treat it until the illness heals.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Then apply cautery to their legs.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Here comes a rough translation of the first two lines: "Know that gout can be caused by an excess of humors in the body."
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then apply a cautery to the area on which it has been applied.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	This one is difficult to guess without more context about the meaning of "le mas" in this specific text.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Then hold a cushion over the body's feet, for they are often affected by the small bumps that are characteristic of the disease.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And if you want to treat them, it’s necessary to use a cushion for that purpose or the one made by the other methods.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use fire or medicine according to their need.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus the pain in the legs and thighs is treated.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If a patient has pain in their body, they are said to have pain of the skin.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And if you want to cure the patient's legs, it is good to use a needle or cauterization to open the space in the body where the leg bones meet the cushion of the body or the body itself.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, apply the following to the patient's arm:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Then use the following method to treat them.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, use a cautery on its surface and another cautery for the rest of the body.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And place a needle under the patient's thigh to remove the pain from their legs, for the good of the patient.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This passage appears to be describing a medical procedure for treating a condition that affects the bones, muscles, or joints.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	When translated from the medieval Italian language this phrase is closest to, this means "the way to apply cautery," or "to cauterize the body."
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The cauterization tip should be applied to the area of pain, but gently.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	Then apply the cushion to the area of the wound.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot compress to the animal's bladder for a hand span.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if they are able to be opened up for them; and if the joint pain is caused by a boil, then that is the way it should be treated.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then place your hand on the patient's chest, and hold it there for a while.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And if necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, they will be treated with another type of cautery.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if a cushion fails to stop the pain, they will be in need of another medicine for that.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are able to cauterize that which has been affected by inflammation, then apply the cautery to their legs, and they will be healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you are suffering from pain in your foot, then apply a cushion to its cavity, as well as to the other areas that need it.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then treat them with cushions.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You will have to judge for yourself if this is correct:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	When there are cushions on their legs, they should be placed above the other.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And if they are not cold sores, then you must know these as signs that something else is wrong.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Then apply heat to the affected area, like that which the doctors do for those who have a burn in their body or on the feet, if they are present there, with a heated cautery.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, place it elsewhere on the body to avoid the area around the existing condition.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you will see that the plague has caused a great deal of pain to his/her legs.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is in the legs, it is a simple disease, and if the bloodletting is necessary for the patient, they are to be kept in mind, but only if there is no other reason to avoid it.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if you must use a hot poker to treat the affected area, make sure to hold the cushion in place.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	When the patient has a problem with a small amount of food, they are already close to being cured.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And on the legs, apply a cushion to their surface; if an apostema is present, treat it accordingly.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	This may be a surgeon's tool for treating a recent abscess, as the word "plagua" can refer to a plague or a wound dressing.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if it has been open for a while, he will apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe or if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, it is best to cauterize their lips, and place your hand upon the thigh of the patient for another plague, and apply another cauterization.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so, the patient is treated with a plague of the body by another: a cushion and another by a poultice on the affected area, and yet another by the foot.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you apply cautery to the decaying part of the body.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If you find that the patient has swelling or pain in the leg or foot, it may be necessary to use a cushion on their feet if the pain is caused by a nerve affliction and not a blood clot.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these problems are simple and small, cauterize the area where you apply the poultice.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then apply the powder to the affected area, using a scale to measure one part of each ingredient.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if you have opened the patient's body with a cauterization, then leave the wound alone.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then have the doctor apply a poultice to the affected area.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus they are called gout by doctors.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if these are the affected parts, treat them with a cautery to cauterize the grain in those parts, which will heal them.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if you have already diagnosed a patient with a broken bone, then treat them with a hot cautery.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the head, place a cushion on their legs.
De las plaguas del col.	When your hand touches the intestine, it is called gout.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	The text means: If the pain continues to worsen, then the illness is likely due to an imbalance in humors.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If a patient has gout, these treatments should be used to treat the condition.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not have any pain from the brain, because the substance of the brain is the brain itself, which is why you must cauterize it, lest it be consumed by its own heat.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is caused by light medicines, they are to be treated with water that is pure or sweet.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	The doctor should treat the patient's body for the plague.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays if the intestine or hernia was already out from their chest, the treatment would be cauterization.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the patient's veins are being cut by the plague, it is necessary to apply a cushion to their legs, and someone should be there to hold them in place.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The intestine will heal itself in its natural course if left undisturbed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if gout has caused pain in the bones, you must use a cautery to cauterize it.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if it is a recent illness, dust it with powder that has been recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient's legs are affected by the plague, it is customary to treat them with a hot water bath.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or apply a lance to the patient's foot when they have an abscess.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there are pains in the legs or feet that are due to the imbalance of humors, it is possible they will be fatal; but if the body is afflicted with the disease, the patient must be given a potion to restore balance.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no depth in the intestine, apply a poultice to their legs, for the recent gout will be relieved by this.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And you apply your hand to it, in order to prevent the plague from affecting them.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When there are three days or more that have passed since the plague has subsided, and the other symptoms are gone, then the body is considered healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If treatment of the ailment is delayed, then the patient should be treated with a cautery on their feet.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Then apply a bandage to stop the bleeding if needed.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the foot is injured, or when there are other complications, the patient's pain should be addressed by a doctor.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	Mays might be a warning to separate from the infected if you are not already separated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, which are treated by cauterization.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And on the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	When there is pain in the stomach, it is called colic or bellyache.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then you must use a cushion to protect the patient's body from harm.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	and that is why the treatment of the intestine is difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E quindi you will have to treat each part of their body separately.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you should know that the other four types are more common than the use of sutures on the feet.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And there are two other types of sutures, but they are not used for anything else.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you are now ready for your next question.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And then he comes to say that the plague can be caused by inflammation in the legs.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And if the pain is in their head, place a cushion on your head, for that is how it's known as ays.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	Sometimes the body needs to be purged, so apply a cushion to their legs and another on the affected area.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's swelling subsides, apply a cushion to the legs and place another on their thighs.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids, which are located in the leg, to make them smaller.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And so the physician has treated the patient's condition.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if they are using instruments on their body, they will use cushions to protect the patient's limbs from injury.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Then, one who already has an acute case of gout should be treated by a doctor.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, when the plague is increased, it is customary to do as follows, so that it may be treated properly.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When it's a serious case, you should make a point to put them on their back, legs higher than the body.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if there is imbalance in your bowels, then you have to apply medicine to the part of the body where the problem is located.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line translates to: And so if you have to use cautery on the patient's feet for a while.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	When there are small pains in your body, put a cushion under them on your legs and use a cauterizing tool to treat the pain.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa que es la disrupcio de la piel, e per la qual es called "la manieyra" in Spanish: "The pain is a common ailment among those who are ill."
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then apply another cushion to the area, placing two cushions together on the patient's thighs, one above the other.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The agues (rheumatic fevers) are characterized by pain in the joints, but it can be differentiated from pain in the bowels or due to a hernia.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if it is necessary to make another hole in the body, then do so carefully, so that the needle doesn't cause harm when it is inserted.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And then they place a cushion on their legs, and other remedies are used.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you have already pierced the patient's feet with needles, it will be best to apply a cushion on their legs so they don't experience pain.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These types of stitches are best for small wounds.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	This means if the patient has a cushion on their legs, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then, if necessary, use a needle to open the intestine and a cauterizing tool to treat the plague by cauterization.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply a poultice to the patient’s body.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Then this wound will heal more quickly.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if it is already in the body, e.g. the legs, it is a serious case for the doctors.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured in about fifteen days.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And so they judged that the patient's pain in the foot was incurable, except by the miracle of a cure by the physician.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushionings in the treatment of gout.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you must apply stitches to the wound, so that the surgeon does not injure the skin further.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And if the needle enters through the long intestine, it penetrates the body and it is customary to call it a 'cleft' or 'tear'.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And now I will tell you about the other type of pain that affects the whole body.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you have opened the joint, it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery to the affected limb.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the affected area, then apply a hot cautery to the other parts of the body and close the incision with it after the operation.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you see, the patient has a fever in their body and they are using cushions for comfort.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin together, which I have already described as it were done, so that you must stitch one part of the foot, and then place your hand on the wound to stop the bleeding.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And so the second type of surgery is to be performed by the doctor if necessary.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you have to apply a needle to the body, it should be inserted into the affected area.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then apply the hot cautery to their legs, and let the patient's body be treated in other ways.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than common, lighter stitching.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	"Gout" is what you would call it when a patient's body is in its usual state, or when the condition is related to the feet.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When there are many physicians who have been called to treat gout.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You only need to make a cushion on the legs, for it is more difficult to apply a cushion to the feet than to other parts of the body.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And this treatment for the plague is how other plagues are treated.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	The air will affect the disease in the patient's legs, if you do not stop it.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's feet are already affected by the cold humors, you should treat them accordingly.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	The sentence refers to a situation where the use of medicines is necessary.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Then use a hot poultice to treat the patient's joints if they are affected by pain.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if pain exists in the patient's feet, the doctor will know it is a symptom of gout.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And (it is) the large intestine that requires lighter treatment than the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply the remedy to the intestine, and treat it with other remedies.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If you are suffering from plague, it is customary to call it Mays.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	And if a person has a gut ailment, apply a cautery and keep it covered.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if you have pierced the skin at the affected area, apply cauterization to relieve the pain.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs, and they will be healed.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	And if there is a rupture in the intestine, then it becomes possible to treat it by placing cushions under them, and on their legs and arms.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply a poultice to their legs to draw out the toxins.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you have already opened up the place between the patient's legs, apply a cushion to their leg pain, and another on their chest to treat their pain.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The patient's cushion was placed under their legs and held open by the hands of two servants while the doctor examined it.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And so the patient's body will be healed by the cushion placed on its own legs and the other one, they are a skilled healer.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then apply heat to draw out the toxins in the body.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, it should be done only by a skilled practitioner.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then apply cauterization to prevent the patient from experiencing further complications.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	When the plague is large and widespread, it's not about healing, but if it is in one place, it will not be the plague of all the body, but elsewhere it may be a serious illness.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	To heal a wound or injury in the body.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If a disease or injury affects the body, it can cause pain in the joints, especially in the feet.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if it is a true fistula, it will be necessary to cauterize it.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it heals quickly with warmth, as if their hands were on fire.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some humors are thick, and others thin, some found in the legs, and some in the feet, which is why they call it "gout" when gout affects the foot.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then you must apply this to the affected area if you want to stop the spread of illness.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When the pain is in the toes, apply a cushion to the foot.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	Here's a possible translation: And if it is necessary for the treatment of fistulas, which are also known as anal fistulas, I will tell you about the healing process.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if you want to make a cautery on the fistula or a burn on their joints, put a cushion under the body or the parts where the heat will be applied.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so, the treatment of these fistulas is of difficult healing, and requires expertise and knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If you see that a patient has a wound in a place where the body's fluids are concentrated, then you should treat them with a hot cautery, but only if a physician deems it necessary.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays es el cor of the body.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If your goal is to treat a fistula caused by a buildup of humors, it is possible that you have a terrible infection.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then use other means to treat it.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	The text refers to the process of applying a cautery to the affected area and using a cushion to support the legs while treating the patient's illness.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And thus, you will know if it is a true fistulae or an artificial one.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return the patient to their bed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If the fistula is deep-seated, it should be treated by cutting into the skin surrounding the fistula to drain it, allowing you to apply a small amount of pressure to the wound with a cushion, and then using medicines to treat the infection.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then apply a bandage to protect the patient from infection.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Aprop apply the cushion to the area between the thighs, on their legs.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays the pain be treated by doctors with appropriate remedies.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Then examine the patient's legs to see if they are affected by the cause of the fistula, as we have previously discussed, so that you do not allow the vein to be opened further or for the patient to experience pain.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the patient's body has been infiltrated by humors, treat them with a cautery.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Then if it is not healthy, you will know, because you have not yet healed the patient's body from the disease.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is a disease, it is a long-lasting illness; and if not, it is gout that affects the body in general.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is diseased or rotten, then you use these fine instruments for its removal.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you must cauterize, let it be done carefully on their legs, or rather where the pain is located in the feet.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply a cautery to the ligaments and flesh to relieve the pain.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Then place your hand on the patient's flesh to prevent them from being in pain.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you want to treat a patient's gout, apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is necessary to treat the intestine or legs with a hot cautery, it is plague that must be treated.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When joints are affected by a disease that causes pain, then apply a hot iron to the affected area.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then you will have to apply a cautery to the patient's body.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then make another incision in the area of the cushion to allow for drainage.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	When the weather is cold, it is customary for doctors to call it gout, but if the patient has a fever, the physician should know that there is a fever in the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor's cure will be applied to the intestine or whatever part of the body needs it, and another on the feet for the pain they are in.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he who uses cauterization on a limb or body part through those openings of his would be called a skilled healer.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	Then I will use the hot irons on the skin near the affected area.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring your hand up to the top of the bone  to prevent the spread from reaching the joints and feet.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then they will have uncovered a part of the bone in which the poison was there.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then apply the cushion to the legs and hold them in place, which is what the bones need to be healed.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then I apply the cautery to the legs, using it as a cushion for the patient during surgery.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then apply the treatment for long periods to restore health to the patient's legs.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient's leg must be exposed, and you have already opened the area for the first time, place a cushion over their legs, so they may be protected from the second opening of the leg.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And if the patient has been diagnosed with the disease, they are already sick.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then apply a small cautery to the affected area and call for the patient's treatment.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the treatment for gout, except in cases where there are complications or fear of death due to the pain.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	Then, if you have good reason to treat them for their whole body health, and a cushion is placed on their legs, and the humors are being drawn out from their limbs, they must be treated with cauterization.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if it is necessary to make their pain worse, then you must use a poultice made from that which causes more blood flow to the affected area.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And apply bandages to the joints, or as needed, to the affected areas.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then, slowly but surely, the pain spreads through the body.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If a wound is in the proper place, you must treat it with a cautery.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if there is a cavity in the foot, as was previously mentioned.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Continue to incise that area of the body if necessary, but do not incise where the patient's hands are not already opened up.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there are other pains in the body, it’s because they're infiltrated by cold humors, but only those who have reason to know can say for sure.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then bring forth the cushion that corresponds to the patient's condition.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Sapiens know that the bones are to be treated differently depending on the type of pain.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you will know that there are other diseases like the one in the body of which he speaks.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you will see which tools are for cutting and which ones are for cauterizing the patient's body.
Forma de serra:	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the patient's legs, it is called "form of serra" by analogy to other types of surgery.
Forma de autra serra:	"Forma de autre cambre" translates to "form of another".
Forma de autra serra:	Aprop useys a different form of treatment, such as applying another cautery to the legs or using a poultice.
Forma de autra serra gran:	A form of large saw.
Forma de ray:	When you make points on the legs or feet, they are for the pain in the area that is usually called gout.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Another serve the patient's legs should be held in place.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not fitting to use a cauterizer unless it is for burning the skin on the legs.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A form of the body above all others.
Forma de razori menor:	A form of treatment for a swollen or inflamed foot.
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	The form or shape of the patient's legs is a clue that the surgeon should use a lancet to open them.
Forma de lu:	When you have pain in their legs or feet, place your hand on them, and apply a hot cautery.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	And if it is necessary to make a mark on the body by using a blade heated over fire.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	This sentence is in French:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This describes the appearance of gouty feet, which are common in gout.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	This sentence appears to be describing a medical procedure involving a small cautery tool used in treating something related to an intestine or hernia.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply your hand to the affected area on the joint.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so we have another form of the scissura (a cut or wound):
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	And if the patient's body is too thin or weak to withstand the use of a hard cautery, then use a cauterizing tool on their feet instead of using a cushion.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Then, when there's a need to cauterize an area of the body, a cushion should be used for the patient's comfort and to prevent the spread of inflammation.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The first servant's position is at the foot, and he or she is in a triangular shape to support the patient.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if they are made of iron from India, then similarly to the other things that have been said, it should be used for making incisions on the legs.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	When joint pain is caused by an excess of cold humors in the joints, it is called gout.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then return the patient's body to its natural state by applying medicine to the affected area.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When pain arises in the limbs, they are called by doctors the "blackening" of the flesh.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the disease is caused by stings of a scorpion or other venomous creatures, they are treated in the same way.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the incision is in the finger, you apply a cushion to it, and then you cauterize the area where there is pain caused by humors.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you cauterize the leg, apply your hand to the pain, which would be done with a cushion over the area of the wound and then another on their chest, preventing the intestines from being corrupted by the fire.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Then you will cauterize their arm and apply a bandage to the area.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if one applies another remedy to the patient's body for pain in the joints, it is customary to apply heat to that area.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, cauterize the legs when they are swollen.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And place a cautery on the legs to reduce their pain.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it is necessary to make a cut on the legs, then they should be placed on the patient.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then apply heat to the legs and release it from the body, and if it is necessary, then the patient will die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	Then if you wish to sear the flesh, apply the cushion or other means of separating the skin and muscle.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the patient's leg, then apply heat.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays you should be careful when using a hot cautery for medicinal purposes on the legs, as it may cause burns.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then place your hand on the afflicted area to apply heat as needed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This refers to a situation where a man's legs are treated with hot cautery.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the cushion under their intestine is placed within the body.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	Then apply a hot cautery to the place where the pain is located.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lon dolor in the legs or feet are caused by the intestine being inflamed.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion was placed on the legs of the patient to relieve their pain.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And then the patient's foot was opened, and you are warned that if the physician opens the veins for bleeding on the foot, he should be careful about the repercussions of that action.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And if he has suffered from the disease, then apply a cushion to his body.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This is a story about gout, and how to treat it.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On their use of the hot cautery for treating various ailments.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	The physician places a hand on the vessel to prevent it from being harmed by the hot cautery.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Perhaps the word “mays” refers to the bloodletting procedure, as they are mentioned together in the same context later.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Translation 1: And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, apply a cushion to the legs so that it does not feel pain from the other.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Then you apply a treatment to that area using a cauteri (cauterizing tool).
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Then consider the location of the joint pain, which is in the feet, as well as whether the patient's condition requires that they be treated with a cauterization.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you will apply it to their feet; e.g., by applying a hot cautery.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply a cold compress to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then return the water to their cavity, and apply the water with a cushion or other means.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian medication, he should be treated with water and honey.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if the illness persists, apply a clyster to them.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply a poultice to the feet using ingredients from other than those found in the cushion; if the patient has a condition that needs poulticing, the patient is instructed to apply the bandage with an even tension and to use a different type of poultice for each affected area.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if you need to open up the area around the cushion so that it is straight in the cavity, place the canula in the rectum, e.g., on the foot, with a cushion placed upon the legs.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if it seems similar to the one in the bowels, it must be treated as the one in the bowels.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And then another method is to elevate the affected part if the pain is from inflammation in the joints.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then prepare the arm with which the patient has a condition that requires cauterization to make sure there is no cause for concern in the form of a burning sensation.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cushions for their affliction, and let them be placed on the table to prevent the patient from having pain in their knees.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Then, when the patient's thigh is being cut by a surgeon, you should extend your hand to help them.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Mays that which is on the top of the body to be healed, and another person to help with the healing.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, or little to the arm, or the leg, to help them.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then if you feel pain in that joint, apply cautery there.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Then apply the medicine in this manner for three days, but if the disease appears to be in the hands or feet, treat it according to that method.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And then you have subdued it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the patient's body is affected by the sinews being too tight, then apply heat to loosen them up.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you have caused the pain to be in the knee by applying a pointed cushion, then apply your hand to that area.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Then apply the cushion to the area where the pain is located.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you administer them by using the astrology of the ancients (and the knowledge of those things)
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	Then if you are treating a patient's leg, apply the cauterization to the affected area.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And they come to treat them for the pain in their legs and hold the intestine or hernia, which should be held up and another on their feet.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Then treat their legs with a cauterizing iron and apply a poultice to the patient's body.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply your hand to close the wound and prevent infection.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is cold and the nail is healthy, then they will apply a poultice to that part, and place their hands on the patient's body.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if there's corruption in the bones, it is known as the gouty condition.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Apply heat to the affected area if you can find a specialist in the treatment of wounds to help heal the pain in the foot.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When a surgeon applies pressure to an ingrown toenail, it causes intense pain if there is already a cushion on the nail, but it is better for him to apply a hot cautery to the affected area in order to prevent the nail from being exposed and further irritating the surrounding skin.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are able to stand, they will be able to see the cushion.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed instrument should be used to cauterize the pain in the legs, and a cushion placed under the patient's legs.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And if you are a doctor, it's important to know that "nozes" refers to the ankles and feet.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And among those who are born with fleshy bodies, it's that those are the ones who are called "fat".
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	From that which is hard to treat, the patient will suffer.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays are the result of an imbalance in the humors, and they must be treated by proper application of the other methods.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	So if you have to apply a cushion to the affected area to reduce swelling.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if a patient needs to be opened between the thighs and the feet are wrapped in a fine oil.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if you have a cushion on your foot, apply heat to the affected part.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From these words, from this illness.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are often associated with illness, especially when they cause swelling in the legs and feet.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you must use it to purge black blood, for example, from the legs.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And the other way to treat a patient for the blackening of the veins is by means of two methods: one involves treating them with a hot iron and the other involves drawing out the blood from them, using these two methods.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	Then apply hot water to the patient's wounds, which should be applied to the affected area.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then they are lying there, and they should avoid other things that cause the disease.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And then cauterize the veins when they are affected.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If you are experiencing pain in the intestine or leg of the patient, place your hand on the affected area.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then you must apply a cautery to the vein in its right place.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then apply to the intestines a cushion to prevent the veins from swelling up and causing pain.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when it comes to pain in the legs, they are caused by the humors being out of balance.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And you have now opened the way to the next section, which is the use of a cautery.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And now you will see what other uses for a cushion are found in medicine besides supporting the body.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And if it is necessary to raise the intestine, then do so, for it is upon their second layer.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply a cautery to the upper part of the leg, where it has become too swollen.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If you have already opened the vein or artery to remove the bad humors, hold it open and tie it off.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Apply a hot poultice to the affected area; if there's a burn, treat it with care.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the pain is from the top to the bottom of the body, the doctor should then cauterize the wound.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the pain is in the chest, it is called angina pectoris, which is similar to what doctors call gout.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Hold your hand there if you don't want to be known as one who harms the patient.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Causing pain in the foot, which is the condition usually called a burning sensation in the legs.
Forma de unci orp:	Apply a poultice of herbs to the foot to relieve pain.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	When the pain is severe, apply a cushion to prevent the patient from feeling it so sharply; and if the pain is sudden and sharp, use a poultice with other tools for applying a cushion.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the leg, especially on the thigh.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease arises in the legs in hot regions, as they call it, in the hot countries, the bloodletting is done by the physician on the foot, which is where the pain occurs, and the meaning of this word is that the patient’s humors are being drawn from a vein.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if there is pain in other parts of the body, and another servant is required to be burned.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, use a hot iron or a cushion on their legs, and place another on the patient's legs.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la l'adveniment de la inflamacio en el peu; et altrament the whole body suffers from pain.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you have exposed the patient's legs to the air, you must use the other two for treatment.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are other pains in the limbs, hold the patient's hands to prevent them from coming out.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the disease is in the body for a long time, and the pain comes from the cold humors, then you should apply the poultice to their legs and feet.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	For the cure to be effective, the physician must apply gentle treatment to the patient's condition, which requires a delicate touch.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, they have already extracted 20 palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the body in those days, it is done by the medicines used for the ailment.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein is opened by the physicians, and the pain felt there.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if you are already treating it in the manner previously described, I urge you to treat it as a complete illness by applying the appropriate remedies.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when cutting with a knife on the body, one must be careful to avoid injury from worms.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places they call a pain in the legs "gout" because it causes a pain in the feet.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if there are other sources for its meaning, put a cushion on serpent-like snakes in the stomach.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the heat spreads throughout the body, they may experience fever in the body and need to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And if you wish to cure such diseases as these are caused by the extraction of the body's humors.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is pain in the body and you are concerned that it is due to the humors, then you may use a cautery.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return to the patient's body, and place another hand on their legs.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On their back they place the cushion.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease is called gout in our land; it is characterized by pain that affects the limbs.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And when I see you again, the proper translation will be: "And you will have seen that."
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw a small swelling in her vein, and I opened it.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the pain settled in that place, but they must be careful to avoid causing pain in their legs.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then apply a poultice to the patient's body with one for the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then to apply heat to the affected area and keep it warm, because I have seen that the hot cautery helps in some cases.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When gout has already been diagnosed by doctors, they are usually treated with a cushion.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	I have seen the patient's pain in the feet.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if it's a woman, she should be treated with hot water.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the area, it should be done carefully so that the veins are not burned.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The original Latin phrase "per tu" means "for you".
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then if you don't apply a poultice to the affected area, it is treated with other herbs.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On treating gout.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are used to treat various ailments in the feet, and others have said that it is gout.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And thus if the body has a wound in the leg, it is advisable to cauterize it.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And if the head or its members are infiltrated by bad humors, which cause pain in the bones, they will be affected by the body's humors being out of balance, and experience anger and rage, possibly with nausea and a feeling of pressure behind the eyes, which can be similar to those who have been afflicted by the cold humors.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if you see these signs, then abstain from making points on their legs, unless it is necessary; for it is important to avoid unnecessary pain.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If you are close to death, then you should be careful when using a cautery.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the cushion is placed under their chest, they should be treated with caution.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	Then if the pain arises from the small toe, it is said to be caused by the hot, dry humors, which are often called gout in the middle ages.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	When your body is in pain, you need to be treated with cauterization if necessary.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	There is hope for a cure only if the arrow is in the abdomen or stuck in the leg, but there is no cure for the pain that comes from being pierced by an arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there are other causes for the pain in the patient's bladder, they are deadly serious.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May this also be a wound in the neck, the chest, or the arm.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will tell you that they are caused by humors that already have their own meaning for the patient's pain.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This phrase refers to applying cautery to the tear duct of a man suffering from a swollen member.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When a cushion is placed on the legs, it is customary to call it a Turkish cautery, because the Turks were known for their use of fire in medicine.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When there's pain in the legs, then they call it gout.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you have placed a cushion on their legs; then place your hand over the knee to prevent the wound from spreading.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And if you are a man, and you have already put a cushion under them (the legs), apply cautery to the wound in your body, and keep the other things (likely tools) away from their (the legs) area.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if it's necessary to apply heat to a person's foot, it's because they need their blood to be drawn from it.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The woman's bowels were affected by illness.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if the patient's hand is burned by a hot cautery, it will be like gout in the face of a man.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And you have placed a cushion under the right leg and already kept the other parts in place for healing.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you have to leave the patient for three days after the operation.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found that the arrow had struck its mark; I placed my hand on the wound to stop the bleeding, and the patient was treated as needed.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply the bandage to the affected area, but only after it has been treated with cautery.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And if the arrow has pierced too deep into the body, you'll need to apply heat to it for many days.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then apply another cushion to their chest, as if treating a burn.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And so that the patient can be treated with a hot cautery to stop it spreading.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	This is a very difficult task because it is unclear what language the source text is in.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	Some doctors believe that if they are not treated properly, the bones of the nose will be affected by the cold humors.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on the leg, or draw blood from the foot, the doctor's advice and understanding about these procedures are unclear in this text.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if the pain extends to the foot itself, he/she will be considered to have gout by those who are knowledgeable.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not drawn from the body in those places where they have been lodged by the physician.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to use the term "gout" for the pain in his legs, and if one wants to be precise, he should say "the foot-gout," and apply a cautery on the affected area.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if the body doesn't respond to the treatment by the physician for the days-long pain in the legs or feet, it is customary for a physician to treat them.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or apply a hot compress to the affected area, they should use a cautery tool.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don't place a cushion on the space between their legs, apply it to the area where the pain is located.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	Then the other legs are on the cushion, and the doctors have already prolonged his life by placing it.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow remains in the body for several days, you should use a poultice to draw it out.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If you have a pain in your legs, it is due to an imbalance of humors, but if you are experiencing a symptom in your feet, such as inflammation or pain caused by a disease affecting the joints.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	When the arrow is hidden in the body, you can only feel its effects on the surrounding areas.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	When there is a cushion under their feet, place another on their legs, and another on their chest.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is necessary to have a cushion placed under the patient's legs while they are being treated by doctors, apply one to their chest, but only after the patient has already been given cushions for their legs and so forth.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you are extracting an arrow from a wound, you must be careful not to break the shaft.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	When the pain in the foot is bad, apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And now you will make the patient feel pain in their bowels, feet, or head.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you are able to remove the need for further bloodletting.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so the patient's condition will be treated by the physician with a tool for applying cautery to the area of the wound.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if the pain is in the legs, and you can't reach it, it is called gout by those who are familiar with it, they use a cushion to support the patient's leg and hold them still.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Gouty pain is caused by an excess of humors.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	Mays if the pain is in the joints, it is called a pain of leys, e.g., when the pain is in the joints, you should know that it's due to the opposite of its natural position.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And then apply a cushion to them for a few days, and if it persists, their use is to be considered in terms of what they are used for (Translation: "And if you have been using it for a few days, continue with the treatment and apply a cushion").
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	Then you will apply your hand to the joint if there is a need for that and place a hot compress on the affected area.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays if you were to apply a cautery to the surface of the patient's legs or body, it is customary to call it gout.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	And if the arrow is aimed at the leg, put your hand on the other leg to soothe it.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you are experiencing a pain in your feet, it is important to seek medical attention immediately if possible.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their foot, then they should use a hot iron on the affected area, so that the pain may be relieved.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Shape of forceps are used by which they are called:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the patient be treated with hot cautery to stop the pain in their body from being caused by anything else.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Then treat the patient's ailment with these remedies, depending on its severity: hot poultices for cold ailments, and others as needed by the severity of their ailment.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form is used to treat the pain in the leg with a cautery.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the form of the body's joints are to be considered.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too will you apply a poultice to the affected area to treat it.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And for the treatment of the veins, they should be treated with a cautery.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And you treat pain caused by your hand being held on the veins in their thighs.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins in the foot or the affected area, then use a cushion for the other part of the body, and place your hand on the vein that is being cauterized.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And if there are three veins in the legs, and another on the leg, which are the ones that cause pain; one for the third vein, and so on.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	And then you apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And if they have an excess of humors, apply a bandage to their head to prevent the spread of the disease.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take a knife to apply it on the joint.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And if it is necessary to raise the intestine or a vein, then apply your hand to their intestines.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And if it is the quantity of two fingers' breadths around the patient, it is called a gouty place.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, place a hot cautery on their legs to bring them back into the body.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And if there has been a delay at the beginning of the book, it refers to other types of burns.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When there are too many things going on, use a cushion for the legs and another for the foot.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the patient's condition should be understood as an indication that you are dealing with a case of gout, but I need more information to be sure.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And for that which is needed to be cut into the flesh above the mentioned vein, you are obliged to use a different technique.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And so you should apply a cautery to the affected area for a while and then apply another on the patient's foot and legs to relieve the pain with a cushion.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it begins, the remedy for the ailment, and the patient's legs are treated at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And if it is necessary to perform bleeding on the head, then a cushion should be used.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of that which is to be used on the body depends on whether you have a wound in the abdomen or feet.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And keep the joint pain from spreading to the body through other means.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And thus you have prepared the patient for the treatment of a particular ailment.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When there is pain in the legs, or a cushion is placed upon them, to relieve the pain, one should apply another to the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is to bind the bandage on the patient's body, and you must place the cushion on their chest.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply the cupping on the thigh to relieve pain.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if it is necessary to make them bleed, they will stop the bleeding.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And bleeding the veins of the head was considered a cure for many diseases by leeches, but they are more cautious about applying it to the other parts of the body, which is why they have a lower opinion of its use.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient's body will feel better if their vein has been opened.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	This sentence should be translated as:
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	And they call this condition of the brain to be affected by leprosy.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the nature of the illness is such that the patient suffers from an ailment in the legs, which must be treated with care.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And the bloodletting should be done gradually, starting with small incisions and increasing their size as needed.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's body to burn away the infection.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And if you have to make a decision about cutting open a vein, or in case of other ailments such as abscesses on the veins in the ankles and sores on the legs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The way to treat the veins in that manner is when they are being used by the physician for something else.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints, it is called gout when the joint is painful.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And apply heat to the patient's veins, if necessary.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	This is a joke, right? (You're asking for a translation of a phrase that translates to "when doctors need to cauterize".)
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	This text uses words that are similar to English but would be more familiar to a medieval scholar: Then apply a cautery on their legs, then place a cushion on their legs, and do not apply a cautery to the tongue.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if the pain returns on their legs, another cautery should be used to draw them out.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then, when you have removed the other two (from the patient's thighs)
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And they used to call the gouty swelling that appears in the joints of the foot "fleubotomia" or "le cushion".
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this is how to distinguish between the types of pain caused by gout.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This sentence likely describes the process of performing a bloodletting procedure.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And if it's necessary to bleed a person, that's how you do it.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the procedure for performing a treatment using bloodletting.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And in this case, you should apply a cauterization to the veins of the affected area.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays le (May I) place your hand on the affected area to treat the illness you have in the foot.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And then, if there are complications on the foot, you will know that the patient has gout, which is why they should be treated by a surgeon.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the appendix does not appear in the usual place under the skin, they are called upon to perform cautery on the other leg.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	You should know that if you have already given your blood for bloodletting, you must use other methods to treat the patient.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Then, if the leg has a cushion placed under it to prevent the swelling from spreading, you have already done so.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood in the phlebotomy of the child, apply a cushion to the vein.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And if you have a pain in the foot, it will last for several days.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	When you place your hand under the patient's foot, cut it open.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, use that method on the foot; otherwise, don't apply it there.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the pain in the joints of the patient is difficult, and another cushion on their feet, and the other one placed on the body to prevent it from being gouty.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	In this case, the translation I provided in the prompt is incorrect.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	If you are phlebotomized in the leg, it is said that the feeling is in the foot, which is why they call it gout.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	When the blood in the limbs becomes thick, they call it gout by the young men.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the patient's limbs; one hand for each limb, and another for the other leg, and another on their foot.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	When the patient's body is weak, they will be treated by a doctor using leeches.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and another to their feet, and bandage them.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if it is necessary to bleed the patient, then consider using bloodletting for that purpose.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Leeches are applied to the veins of the leg when it's cold weather or the first part of the spring and if necessary to use them in the treatment of the body.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then apply the hot iron to the affected area, which is where the pain is located.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The use of phlebotomy by the doctors is used to treat the affected area.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When a woman is afflicted with another's illness, she is treated as if she were ill herself.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the foot, it is important to use one that is specifically designed for the feet.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	This text describes treating the swelling in the joints caused by excessive religious devotion or other causes.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then, consider if the patient has been drinking or eating too much when using a cautery on the legs.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to make a cut, you should know if a patient can be treated by bloodletting or by other means.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So let them perform the bloodletting on the patient's foot, while they hold their hands.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Let the intestines be guarded from harm on that day.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if there are cushions in the room, you should place your hand on their legs to hold back the humors.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And so be it, he who performs cauterization must use the instrument called a cushion.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion under their arms to relieve pain.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if there is a stricture in the leg, you must use cooling methods to reduce inflammation.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there is no use in applying heat to the feet, then apply it to their legs.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if you have already performed bloodletting on the patient, they should be given oil to drink after.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if a doctor wishes to use a cautery for treatment, he will apply it to the affected area.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the patient experiences pain in their feet, it will be necessary to do more than just apply a poultice to the area.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply bloodletting to the patient's legs.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	If the opening of the wound is small, you should use a fine needle to open it more widely.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When a doctor cauterizes your legs, he's placing a cushion on their chest to protect them from burning the wound.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And when it comes to the treatment of the ailment, they say it is more effective if you apply oil to them, and less so on other parts.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And so, use the cushion to treat wounds and injuries.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E ten, if you want to be healthy, use leeches instead.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And apply cautery to that vein (or other veins as needed) for gout.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	E si roman in le loc for some days, it will be necessary to use a poultice of herbs.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The basilica will be treated by cupping and another type of treatment.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so the cushion is placed under the body part where pain is felt.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply the poultice to the affected area to harden the flesh and solidify the blood so that it may heal.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so that all know, if you apply heat to the affected area, it will be treated by cautery.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if you wish to treat the patient's illness, place another cautery on their body.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if it is necessary to do a bloodletting on their chest in one session.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to a patient, make sure to perform it correctly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the patient for healing purposes, it is done by making incisions, not punctures.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This practice, involving the placement of a cushion under the patient's legs and supporting them during bleeding, is considered more favorable than using a cushion on the chest for such purposes.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then use the leech to treat the infection in the area where the pain occurs.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, placing a cushion under them.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then apply a cushion to their head, so that they may be able to drink water from a cup while they are being operated on.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And treat it as you would treat other causes that we have discussed in the chapter on its [the patient's] fainting.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If you wish to treat the patient's blood, you must perform bloodletting, which is a method used to treat the ailment, but with care.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that the patient's arm be cauterized again for a second time.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second, or rather the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays the physician cauterize the patient’s legs to prevent the blood from turning cold and causing them harm.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And so if you want to draw blood, apply pressure to the patient's arm where the vein has already been opened to avoid excessive bleeding.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's illness worsens, they will need to be treated by a doctor for their ailment.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The doctors have already treated the patient's body for the condition.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there's a need for you to have a second gout attack.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the patient's arm be opened up to let the humors flow back into the body, so that the humors do not become too strong in the area affected by the disease.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if a vein is to be cauterized, you must place the patient's legs in hot water for a while, then apply the cautery.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then apply a compress on the legs, and if necessary cauterize the affected area.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The bloodletting should be performed on the legs.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet, and keep them warm.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	When the days are hot, they say you should bathe in warm water, not cold water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And if you want to treat this condition by burning, then use a cushion for the vein and apply another one on the legs.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	Evisceration of the right side of the body is often associated with liver diseases.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the purpose of bloodletting is to reduce the inflammation in the patient's body, because they are swollen by the excess of their humors.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you want to avoid having your hands be subject to the bloodletting done by those who use cautery for that purpose, beware of applying it on the flesh of the other hand.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then apply cautery to that area, and apply pressure to the area to prevent the pain from being caused by other things.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly apply heat to the necessary places on the legs.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And if the left hand is affected by these ailments, then you should use a cushion.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the other parts of the body, if they are needed, you should know that the other treatments are similar.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And so, if it is necessary to use cautery in surgery, only do so on the limbs.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	So if it is necessary to bleed someone who has a cushion on their legs in the other way, it’s done by another doctor.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so the doctor will cauterize the legs of the patient.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	When you are considering using bloodletting for treatment, be cautious as it's not always appropriate to treat the foot with the same methods used on other parts of the body.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if it is necessary, cauterize the affected area.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Then you must place the foot in hot water.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs in the first incision, then you must place another on their legs; for the first incision is made by him, so he must make another.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is a similar condition, then apply a cushion to the area, and apply your hand to the affected area.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Then apply a bandage to their leg, and another to the vein or veinlet.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And so bloodletting by means of a cautery should be performed on the patient's legs to ensure the best chance of survival.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the ailment you would call a cushion or pillow to hold the patient's leg in place, but the one who suffers from the ailment will be cared for with a hot iron.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when you cauterize the affected area, it is better to use a pointed cautery.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if their limbs are affected by the disease, or if they have been bitten by a viper.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And if the patient's pain is caused by cold humors, you can treat them as well.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And another (a skilled person) would apply cautery to their legs, to heal them.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	This refers to the use of ointments and treatments for gout.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, you can use leeches or herbs.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	There are two ways to apply cauterization: one with a burning needle, the other by making cuts and drawing out blood.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And if you need to let out blood from the leg of a patient, use a cautery.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if you have already been burned on the skin, the doctor will call them that; and it's a good idea to use two or more spatulas for the treatment.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then you should apply cauterization to the veins in the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	If the patient needs to be treated with a poultice or cautery, we must ensure they are properly cared for and treated.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	Translation: Then apply a hot iron to the affected area with another cushion; and then a doctor will treat the patient for the causes of cold humors in the body, such as gout or rheumatism, which may be caused by an imbalance of humors.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when you apply it on the foot, and if it is gout, place a hot iron upon it for three or four hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the neck or head of the patient due to the pain in their neck.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This cold affects the patient's legs, so you should perform bloodletting from the cephalic vein.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if he is in pain from a disease that affects his constitution, use a hot iron.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And if there is a need to cauterize the legs, the patient will already have them burned by the hot humors.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if it is necessary to apply moxibustion, e.g., to their legs, he should use cushions on the limbs.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This must be done by making cauterizations on the affected area.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if you are affected by a disease caused by humors, then apply heat to the area of the body where the pain occurs.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And if there are pains in the body due to the humors coming out; then do so on the legs, and apply the other for the bleeding from the head; the other on their eyes.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the use of the other lancets for the patient's own health, they should be used with caution.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, use another cushion for their mouth, and another on the arms and legs.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if it is necessary to perform cautery on their legs, use it carefully, so as to avoid causing harm.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	When the patient has three large veins (already opened) they are called basilica veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the cauterizer to the patient's foot, where they will place the cautery on their legs, and another cushion.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And if you are to apply cautery, ensure the patient's buttocks and thighs are covered, lest they feel pain.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When commanded, let it be applied with a subtle hand to the patient's body.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	Guessed translation:
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	A deletteri effect on the body weakens all men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the hot springs to the water in the intestines, one applies them to the body.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	A cushion is placed on their chest, or in the case where they are cold, the patient's legs are kept warm by placing a cushion under them.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then return the patient's body to its original state, but be careful because the pain is caused by an excess of humors that are causing the intestine to protrude.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then you burn with a cauter, little by little, and close the other one to their cavity.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When that man suffers from pain in his legs and feet, then he should be cauterized, so that they are no longer afflicted by such pain.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command another servant to hold their hand over the area to be treated.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is a need to use a cautery, then apply it twice to the affected area.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When doctors treat gout, they often use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is too thick, make three cuts on the feet so that the fourth one can be made.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then finally, when you want to draw blood from them.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want to draw out bloodletting in the thighs, let them be bled; then use the terms for bleeding and bloodletting as well as a reminder of the location of the patient's feet.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And here comes the depth of the pain in the leg, that which is only the pain of gout, as far as the knee
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	When a person has an ailment which causes swelling in their legs, use these remedies to help them.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if it were to make a guess, then one would use a cushion for the head, another for the leg, and another for the arm.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and is caused by humors, then this should be used as a cauterization treatment.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	If it be the foot that is affected by the humoural imbalance, apply the moxa to the affected area.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And apply a poultice to their chest, for the person will be better if the cushions are applied to them by others.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	You should treat the patient's legs and feet for gout if they have pain there.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And you must apply cauteri to them.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, you should consider the pain in the body, and if necessary, apply a cushion to the affected area, but first, try to cure the underlying causes of the ailment or ailment on the legs.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then apply heat to the body part, and another for the patient's health.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for those whose bodies are already ravaged by gout, apply cushions to their legs.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has been bled, it is necessary to apply other remedies.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E then return to apply the appropriate treatment for your ailment.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Mays the joints be cauterized and thus cleansed so that they may be healed.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if it is necessary to translate from an old text, such as the one about the use of the pointed cautery for treating ailments.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then apply pressure to the legs and feet to keep them from moving.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa means "And if it's necessary to" in English.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping treatments are administered with suction alone; sometimes, however, they are administered with heat.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply heat to the affected areas.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The bloodletting was done with the intention of letting the hot water flow freely.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es un tipo de cauteri que se usa para tratar la mala salud del cuerpo.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then place a cushion under their arms and another on their legs, so that they do not become ill.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is in the thigh, you should know that he is being treated by another servant for a disease.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if it is this type of ailment that affects the body, the physician should treat it accordingly.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And then you apply the leeches to the children's thighs and use them on other parts of the body.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	The quality of a cushion placed under the patient's legs for the patient with a fire that burns in the lower parts of the body should be used to hold their foot so they don't move it too much.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then place a cushion on their chest for the patient's comfort.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And if there are complications, a physician should be used for that treatment.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then apply a leech to treat the patient's ailment.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This translates to: And this will cause the body to have more water to absorb.
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii. translates to Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Gout is best treated by applying a poultice to the affected area while using heat therapy.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if the humors are found to be in their own body, they have used leeches for such a purpose.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then if you want to treat the intestine and you're still unsure about whether to use a tourniquet or not, you should apply the same techniques as described in the previous lines.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Place another cushion under their legs, as needed.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to remove the cushion, then it's done with a cushion, and so are hernias treated.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And then, if it is necessary to cleanse the area with sour wine, and apply a hot compress to the affected limb, while also keeping the patient's hands warm.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the pain is prolonged, apply a cloth to the area and use the heated cushion to draw out the fluid.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When blood is dry, or if you wish to prevent them from multiplying, they should be cauterized.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if you are using leeches, it is best to avoid unnecessary bites.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And then if leeches are prohibited from the recent incision or are placed on the site of the wound to draw out blood, there is a need for further treatment.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When there is inflammation, apply a poultice to their legs.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the treatment of the third stage, restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about fractures and dislocations, which are common in medical practice.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	Oh, son, know that I will not write about this topic in the book of medicine.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And so, when the doctors in our land are convinced that it is necessary to stop the use of such things as these on their legs.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And if there are cold humors that cause pain in the patient's legs, they should be treated with a cushion.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then I have already explained in this chapter all that my knowledge has taught me, about the uses of [the text continues]
Capitol primier.	This refers to the beginning of a chapter in a book.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And if a bone is fractured, you must first reduce the swelling.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This text is likely describing a treatment for an ailment using a cautery tool.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then apply a cauterization to the body when there is an injury, but only after applying a cushion to the affected area on the advice of a physician.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you have to apply a cushion to the patient's flesh, then place another cushion on their limbs; and if necessary, you should also use herbs for healing.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then place a cushion on their legs and the patient's leg must be kept still.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And if a cushion between their legs, the patient will be put on a cushion, and another, and they are to be fed with nourishing food, and with light meat.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	If you have the symptoms of gout in the wrong place, you should consult a doctor.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area, it is done in a similar manner as for children's joints.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The patient's strength weakens their bones, but they must be strong to withstand gout.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And it is necessary for the patient's body to be treated with cushions, as described before.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Mota diversitat de fractura de la metges e'l socus e'n la place where the foot hurts.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	When a patient's body has been injured, it is customary to call it a fracture.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen you, oh doctor, and if it's necessary to cauterize something.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota diversitas is a condition that should be treated by doctors.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E so the intestine has been infiltrated by something, maybe an ailment or infection, but the cushion is under the cushion, which is another word for cushion.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the surface of the foot, then you should hold your hand on the area being cauterized.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And if the patient has a gout attack, it is customary to apply heat to the affected area.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The pain in the legs or feet can be recognized by the sensation it causes.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent twisting or dislocation in the patient's body, but pain when you touch the bones, then they are likely experiencing a bone-related ailment.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If there is pain in the joints, or a small swelling, put a cushion under their legs, and another on the feet at that moment, the one who has a cushion.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if it is necessary to treat someone who has a condition that causes them pain, it is customary to call it gout.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And when the inflammation subsides, it is a good thing if you are in need of pain relief.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And if you are to apply a cautery to the patient's foot, it is best that the cushion be placed under them.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply a second cushion to their legs where the first one was placed.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If pain in the bones arises, use a cushion for small bones, or two if necessary.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so let your hand be placed in the position that makes it possible for you to treat the natural breaks by cauterizing the broken parts.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And keep your hand on the patient's body so that the pain does not reach the other parts of the body.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then do you see that the patient's intestines are being used up by the gout, so apply your hand to the area where the cause of the disease lies.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then prevent the severe pain from spreading to other parts of the body, as doctors often do for gout.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The cushion will be placed upon the sore area during its treatment.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	When a person experiences leg pain, the cushion should be placed under their legs to prevent the intestines from being affected.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small, like the arms and hands, put cloths on them.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then use a strong bandage to reduce swelling and pain.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if you are unable to find the cause of the illness, place your hand on the affected area.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if the joint pain is caused by a disorder of the blood, then you should use a cautery to treat it.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gently apply cauterization to the chest, starting small.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	When you have already performed an operation on the patient's legs, apply another bandage.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	If the pain has already been established in the affected area, then they are ready for cauterization if there is another indication requiring it, e.g., swelling or redness.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	When a burning sensation occurs in the body, and the patient has a fever, they should be treated with cold compresses and poultices.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be the bandages on their legs made of wood and applied in the manner of a bandage.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, then it should be used on a patient's broken area.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you see the size of the cushion is too large for the patient's legs and feet.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And then you have to place the patient's hand on his legs, so that there are no more than two fingers between the cushion and the foot.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the legs they are treated with a hot cautery.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Then return the patient to the position where they were in the first place.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You see, when your hand has been placed on his legs so that he is unable to move.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This sentence refers to the methods used by ancient healers (the "Antics") for treating injuries.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And if it is necessary to place the cautery on their legs, it is best to keep it from the doctors' hands.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you have a cushion for pain relief, use it on the patient's body.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Then apply a salve made from these ingredients: 1 part asafetida, 2 parts water, 3 parts assasinated alchemists’ secrets.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This describes how to treat a patient suffering from a fracture or dislocation.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and thighs.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if it is necessary to treat pain in the joints with a cushion for the patient's legs.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	It is customary to apply a cushion to the patient's legs.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Then, if you have to use a cautery on the patient's feet, apply them carefully.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take a piece of alum, chamomile flower, and apply it to the affected area: And if you want to make a poultice to resolve the remaining pus, take some alum, some flowers of chamomile, and.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if he is scalded, we should place his feet in water.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	A pain in the leg is treated by a poultice made from herbs and other remedies.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	The first part of this medieval text translates to: "And if one wishes to treat a fracture, then one should consider"
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This translation should be used:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And so, to treat the pain in the legs, apply the poultice to the area and use a bandage for support.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If you are unable to put your hand upon the affected area, it is possible that the pain will return.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area, gouty pain is likely to be caused by inflammation in the foot.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then submerge it in water for an hour; then apply a cushion to their legs, and apply a poultice to them while they are resting; and then use a cushion on their feet.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the intestine or hernia in the patient, do so with gentle manipulation.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then you will place a cushion on their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the joint pain persists for three days or more, they are said to have gout.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E altre ma l'hauras en el teu Translation 1: And if it is necessary to cauterize in the first place.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This sentence implies that the affected area is healed by applying a substance to it, and cushions are used to prevent complications.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If a doctor has a need to make a diagnosis of gout.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	You are being reasonable by opening their legs, and you put a cushion under them, for that is what is done to those suffering from a reasonable condition.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of course, on the subject of fractures.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	And the causes of fractures are diverse, and they are caused by various factors.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And for the treatment of the pain in the legs, cushions are used.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture can be caused by a sharp blow which has opened up the bone, the other parts of the body will need to be treated carefully.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And this is called a fracture when the bone breaks in its thinness.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	This phrase refers to a medical condition in which a person's hands are placed on their body parts to prevent the intestine from being cold and damp.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply a heated instrument to the affected area of the body.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if the pain is in the legs, it should be treated as such.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And bring the patient in that manner to the place where their bowels are.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And so the patient's leg was burned to remove impurities.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the type of gout that is caused by cold humors was known as a special kind of ailment to be treated with a cushion or other means of poultice.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Then if you are treating a person for a fracture, consider the situation and location of the injury; otherwise, use other methods to make them feel better.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if there are accidents that don't heal themselves, you should use a poultice to help them heal.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	And when the body is affected by the illness, you should use a cushion to support it at its onset.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	When the sun shines on their legs, the doctors recommend they be consulted about gout.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si'l hauria menuda o gran cosa, e fa un'esquisit de la medicina: E
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you are dealing with the plague on the leg, it's best to apply it directly to the skin.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And apply the cautery to the affected area, and the patient will be given care and attention.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two ways to perform an operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then apply another incision to the patient's leg bones; and this is the way to do it.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply ointment to the wound, and apply a cushion to the second part of their body.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And therefore, if they are short and pointed, it is necessary to know that the person has been affected by the disease of the various ailments that can be found in a body.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if they are using a cautery on the legs, it should be done by someone who knows what they're doing (a trained physician).
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and firm, use tools to cut into them.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	This text describes a physician's practice of treating someone suffering from gout.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take care of these wounds on your legs and feet; it is also known as the condition of those who have been diagnosed with gout.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then you must know that the way to treat it is to remove the bone from the body.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And if you want to treat a patient's condition, it's best to use a sharp tool for leeches and other treatments that require incisions or removal of fluids.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And if you are careful to avoid that which may cause harm, be careful too to keep the body safe from harm.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And if there are other diseases that require a cushion to be placed under their bones for a period of time, they will be called gout.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the area between the patient's legs, placed a cushion on their lap, and put another one under their feet, which are now in its place.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And here if the other wounds are caused by a more severe injury, the wound itself needs to be cauterized quickly and completely.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return the intestine to its place and place another on their legs, so that the intestine does not cause pain.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And apply the cautery to your skin for it is customary to call it by its original name.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When you are treated for a pain in the leg, you may need to use leeches on the body, and you will be able to apply another leech to each part of the body that needs them.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	Then place your hands on the area where you've put the cushion.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you have given the patient a cushion to protect the area, you must also use the most delicate tools.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	If you encounter small fractures, you should treat them appropriately.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then the pain that afflicts all those who have studied in this art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And if you see a patient suffering from gout, then put a cushion under them.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	Then make sure to bandage the wound after the patient has had their wounds cauterized.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let the patient be given this treatment for one or two days.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then place your hand on their feet so that the patient's body does not have to be touched by those pains which are caused by the pain of a plague.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have found a cushion for the patient's foot.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E therefore let us consider the first cause as the modifications to the bones or pain in the hands; then it's a good idea to apply heat to the affected area.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cloth soaked in the oil of that which heals under the influence of their illness, and place a cushion on the chest and a bandage on their limbs to treat them with the power of the medicine.
Capitol .iii.	E if you are a physician, you have already opened the patient's legs, e.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a broken foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Knowing that the pain is in the cartilage, but is not located in the bones, treat it as you would for gout, using a hot iron to cauterize if necessary, to prevent further damage.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If a bone in the legs is broken, then a cautery should be used.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you are doing surgery, and other servant is needed, they place a cushion under the patient's thighs during the procedure.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if it happens that there is a need for a cushion on their legs or thighs, then apply it to the location.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then make it appear in two parts.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible, on the first day after a fracture, the patient should be treated for pain; otherwise, they should be treated with cautery.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	E then you must apply a cloth cautery to the nostrils.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And if the ancients have said that this is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes in the nose, a surgeon places another cushion to prevent its being inflamed by the surgeon's touch, and uses that same tool to treat other ailments.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	A first-aid kit for the unwell; if you want to use heat, apply it to the cushion if it's necessary.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another time when it occurs, treat it with an antiseptic cautery after applying heat to the affected area.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If a boil occurs on the surface of the body, apply poultice to it.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that have infiltrated the joints, you should apply cauterization to them if necessary.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	Then apply a bandage to their legs and bring them back to health.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated, the surgeon will need to carefully reposition it.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	If the jaw is broken, you should use a different cautery than if it is only displaced and needs to be set back in place.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And so you will apply the finger on the left side to the wound which is being treated.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And now the other two surgeons are needed to help put the bones back in place, as well as the patient's legs, which were previously being held by two assistants.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And you have already put the cushion on their legs, or on their feet, hoping for a cure from the pain in the joints.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And apply to the patient's feet and legs whatever causes them to move freely from their illness.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you need to rectify the shape of your body, you should apply a poultice, which will be used after it has been corrected by the doctor, who must also use a cushion to hold the patient's hands and keep them in place.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And then if the patient's limbs are not stiff due to injury, they should be treated by the doctor as described in the text.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then if you need to treat a boil or abscess on their body, apply heat to the area, as described in the second translation, to draw out the pus.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the area where the pain affects the legs, consider the appropriate treatment for the patient's condition.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the patient's leg is affected by the plague, apply a cauterization treatment as needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area so that the wound does not fester.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This is when your shoulder blade is treated with a hot iron.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bone in the shoulder breaks in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	And if a bone is broken or fractured in the foot, it is customary to call that condition gout.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And then the surgeon should apply a hot iron to that area.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place a cushion on their legs for a while, so that the intestine may be burned back into the body's cavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if there is no cushion needed for the patient's pain, let the patient be called "without gout."
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if the patient cannot be treated by letting them be burned by a hot iron, you must use a different treatment method.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And you apply the tongs to the bones of the foot, and then you hold your hand on their wounds, or the other you might have elevated the shoulder, but you are correcting its position with your hands.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you have a pain in their foot, put your hand on the bone of the foot, and if it is necessary to make a cauterization due to gout, apply heat to the foot.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to cut open the intestine because it is causing pain; then place your hand on the area to stop it from happening.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if there is a need to make a point on the legs, then apply a cautery.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Mays the pain be on the feet, but the severity may vary.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the patient's legs are swollen from the plague, you will know which one to burn.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there's little disruption, you should put your hand on the affected area, to treat it as needed.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected part of the body.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And so when there is a fracture of the bones of the body, it is treated by the doctor.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And if it is necessary to tighten the bandage on the injured part of the body, then take care to bind it tightly.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the bone has been elevated, then you should place a poultice on it at night, so that the patient's bowels are treated by applying a poultice to the affected area of their arm while the person sleeps.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not apply a cautery unless there's a need to treat a wound or abscess on their legs, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply the bandage to the patient's foot, and the rest of the body will be treated accordingly.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strong and comforted by the cushion, according to the way of the patient's bowels.
Capitol .vi.	When the physician has to treat the ailments of the body, he will use a variety of methods for different parts.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This refers to the treatment of a shoulder injury.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	And let the doctor use a blunt instrument on the affected area, but don't let him cut into the patient's body.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so, when the patient's leg is broken — or has an opening in their intestines — they are to be treated for the pain by putting a cushion on the area.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then, apply a cushion to their joint pain, and let them have no more pain in the feet.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If you are experiencing pain due to an imbalance of humors in the leg, then you should use a cushion to help keep the intestines in their place.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then place your hand on a cushion upon the patient's legs to prevent them from being burned.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot in its entirety, which is to be treated with another cushion if it has been softened by the application of a cushion to the place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	When the doctor's servant is on his side, he will have a better understanding of the body.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The doctors say it will heal in xx days or xx.25.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when you are done, apply heat to the area to dissolve the cushion that was there for the duration of the procedure.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, apply cautery to the affected joint, as we mentioned.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the treatment of foot injuries.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery there.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then apply a cauterization to the area where the pain is felt in the feet, so that you may see the real cause.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to use a needle on the patient's spine, take care to insert it carefully and precisely into the designated area for treatment.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The patient's body will be covered in a cloth bandage for the treatment of their illness, and they should be careful to ensure it is applied correctly and securely to prevent further complications.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When necessity compels you to cauterize, put the patient's bowels or feet on the cushion, but do not allow the hot iron to touch them.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And for the restoration of the coasts when they are dislocated.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Sapiens that are skilled in medicine know that pain in the lower legs refers to the condition of gout.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The doctors know that they should cauterize the area to prevent the problem from being aggravated.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Do as the doctors do and use bandages on the injured part to prevent swelling.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And then if the patient's pain is spreading to their internal organs.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And if it is another way to say that your servant is already suffering from gout.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Then use this to treat pain in the intestines by making incisions, and then you will have an opening in the intestines.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to make points on the body, they are usually called gout.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they apply heat to the foot, so that the pain is alleviated by bringing warmth to the patient's feet through a cautery.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place a cloth under the patient's feet to prevent them from feeling pain.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize their legs, it is called for, so that they are not infiltrated by the bowels.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area to help draw out the pain.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	If you must cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, do it carefully so that the patient doesn’t suffer from a buildup of humors in their legs or feet.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's condition worsens, apply a hot iron to their body.
Capitol .ix.	This is the ninth chapter.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to the placement of a cushion under someone's legs while they are being treated for a condition related to their pain being caused by the body part itself.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to treat a fracture in the body, use cautery on the bones, and apply a cushion to the legs, and another to the affected area, using the hands of the patient for support.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And you know if the body will be healed by such a treatment, if you see that the body has already been treated with these and cannot heal itself.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you apply heat to the foot, it heals the disease.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know whether the spondils will heal or not, then you should consider the patient's body.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	This sentence refers to a condition where a person experiences pain in their legs.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if there's no need for a cushion, then use another cushion.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if one wants to avoid the pain or if one has an open wound on their foot, then apply moxa to the area of the pain.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And if you are able to, use one of the soothing plasters and keep the intestine in its place.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	When pain occurs in the patient's body, it is customarily called the "os" (bone) disease: la divas that refers to a specific type of "os" (bone) ailment, such as gout.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When a bone is broken, you should place your hand on the injured area to prevent infection from the other two limbs.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you have pain in your legs, the doctor will use another point to cauterize the intestine.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the treatment for a cushion (placed on their legs) for those who are suffering from this ailment.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if bones break, you have already broken them by using a cautery on their joints.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And you have already placed the cushion on the patient's legs over the area of the fractured bone.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then return the patient's hands to their natural position.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then you can apply the cautery to that fracture which has been opened up.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E thus the patient should have a cushion under their legs to prevent the ailment from affecting them.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	The patient's condition will be treated with a cautery on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	From the given sources, it seems you're asking for help translating "Mays" - "Then" is a good starting point, but the word "c'est" in the third sentence suggests a more precise translation might be needed.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat them accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	This is where the patient's body should be anointed and treated with healing herbs.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	And then you should place a cushion on the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then, if there are cushions for the patient's legs, restore them in one of two ways.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two more cushions are needed to separate the two parts of the body, the thighs.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if it is an open wound, the patient's leg should be treated with a hot cautery.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if the patient's intestines are protruding, they be treated.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if they have put their hand over the injury on the foot, and a cushion has been placed upon their legs, then call for a cushion to be placed on the patient's chest by placing their hand there.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, apply a poultice to the leg.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if doctors were to call for a cast, they would use it on the leg and place their hand on the area that needs it.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the injury is near the joint, apply a bandage to the area and make sure they have a cushion for their legs, put one on their body.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's affected joint.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	This sounds like a recipe for treating an abscess using a poultice on the seventh day after it has been treated, but I'm just guessing!
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And apply an poultice to the cushion on their legs and the other hand to the affected area.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then apply a cushion under their arms, and another on their legs, to prevent any other cause from breaking the patient's leg.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	The illness is in the knees.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And the cushion was placed on his legs, so that the patient wouldn't be able to move them.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place your hands on the patient's legs, which are now open.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And if the patient's condition is such that the pain can be attributed to an injury, let it be treated with cautery.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when pus gathers in the joints, use it to treat the condition.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then you should apply a cushion to their knees or whatever joint hurts.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply a cushion to the legs as needed, just as you would for the other translations.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And if you consider the patient's joints, and if they are inflamed, do not constrict them.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days should pass before you apply anything to the affected area.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And so apply a poultice on the stomach, for that is where the illness lies.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And it is customary to treat gout with a poultice that contains wool to reduce inflammation.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And then apply a cushion to their chest for a while.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture has been there for a long time, it is customary to place your hand on their legs, the cushion on them.
Capitol .xii.	Another one?  A cushion should be placed under their legs.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a bandage to the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The patient's legs are open to their full length, which is what they are called.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so the patient's pain is relieved by the use of fire, or other methods together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The doctors will say that their work is done.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when there's a break in the bone, it's important to know what kind of fracture it is.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And so you have made a mistake if he/she is still using two instruments for their illness.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if the doctor determines that a splint is needed for the injured area.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the fire is hot, you must apply the cure of fire to those who are suffering from gout in their legs.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if you are strong enough, then you must apply force to another part of the body.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you have a wound, another cushion should be placed there under the patient's hand, for the others are very similar to the English language and a little bit like Italian or French, but I will guess this is the text about the body. Then, you need to apply a bandage or dressing to the wound, depending on your needs.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the patient's foot has been opened to prevent the patient from being troubled by gout.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And another person should hold their hands during the procedure.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And so you should apply cautery to the bones in the legs, which is what is done for the most part.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the doctors are in the process of making a cast for the leg, then they will use their skill to heal.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you find the intestine has become inflamed or affected by the disease of the humors, then apply poultice to the affected area, which is what we call a poultice for pain.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	So if you are injured by this disease, then you will need special care for that particular ailment.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	When the patient is suffering from a cold humor, they are treated by applying a poultice made from a mixture of oil and beeswax to the affected area.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And so you will know, this is how they say in medicine and other fields to which the term "stelas" refers, and how many are needed for a procedure.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if the disease is a strong one, and you need to make a small incision on the skin, then use a poultice to heal the wound.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And let the sheets on which the patient sits be soft and smooth, so that the injured part may not be further irritated.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the leg and its location for several days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if a pain occurs, make sure to apply warmth to the affected area to prevent its growth.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the cushion be placed where there is pain in the foot.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Translation: Then apply a bandage to the area of the intestine using your skill.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then you must consider if the patient's condition is caused by an excess of humors in their feet.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays it be necessary to address the patient's condition as a result of their ailment, otherwise, they will likely remain in pain.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And so the patient's leg was held up by the other cushion.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if it's a simple fracture, you should know that it heals in 28 days, or 32 if it's a severe one.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter explains how to treat a person suffering from gout in the thighs.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if it is necessary to set the bones back into place, and they need to be held there.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that to the hand, know that to the toes.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if the patient's intestines are afflicted by pain, it is important to note that the doctor should place his hand on the patient's legs to soothe the pain.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And if a patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated by a doctor using other methods.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a cushion to their legs; then treat them as needed.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When the bandage is applied to the legs, the patient should be treated with a poultice for the aches in their body.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if you have opened the affected area, you should use a cushion to protect the intestine, and apply another to the foot, applying pressure to the affected area.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if the injury is near the outside of the body, apply a bandage to the wound so that the intestines or other organs don't protrude.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture, it should be treated with cautery instead of pain in the joints.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays es que's the Latin for "maybe," "perhaps," or "it may be."
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And if there are other causes for the patient's illness to be treated in the future, we will place a cushion under their feet.
Capitol .xiv.	The Latin word "capitol" means that the patient's head should be covered by a blanket during the treatment.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of the bones of the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones are broken by the cold, and they are declared to be the result of a specific ailment.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's treatment for their ailment involves treating the affected area with a heated tool to draw out the excess fluids.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then on the affected bone with a cautery, to be applied directly to the bone, and another to the patient's legs, and another to their feet.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the doctors see fit, they will apply another poultice to the patient's ankle.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the patient's condition is serious, apply a bandage to the affected area, e.g., the ankle.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And when the physician has treated the bone for inflammation, they are healed by natural means.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	This refers to applying a hot cautery to treat an ailment related to the body's humors, likely as a method to burn away excess fluids or impurities in the area of the ankles.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to the wound on the leg.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then put a bandage on the affected foot to contain the pain.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And so you have opened the space between the legs (or perhaps the abdomen) to allow for the proper healing of the bone.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then return to the patient's legs, place a cushion on their feet.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And if you want to make a poultice for pain from a hernia, use strong bandages and a cushion to hold it in place.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on the legs to stabilize the patient's position.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And if there is no cushion for the patient’s humors to flow through, then use a cauterization tool.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you should use that same cautery on the bones.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And another place for the patient's pain to be treated.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Nevertheless, in this way, the patient is afflicted with gout.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if he has been suffering from pain for 40 days or more, he should be considered to have a different ailment, as per the nature of his illness.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This refers to restoring a cushion to the injured knee in order to prevent further complications.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This means the patient has another disease that affects their joints.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply [a] hot compress to the affected area on the leg, which helps to relieve pain.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the intestines will be treated, so they are well-cared for as much as possible.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place your hand on their legs to prevent the hernia from returning to the abdomen.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then they are considered healthy for their age.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And place a cushion under the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	When treating an ailment of the legs or feet, it is important to know the difference between those requiring a cushion and those needing cauterization.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if you have to cauterize the patient's arm, the wound should be treated as one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the patient has a fracture, two bones are broken.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has a hernia, another cushion should be placed on their legs to hold them down.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the pain is located in the largest bone, and it is necessary to set the patient's legs apart, it is customary to call it gout, but there are other causes of this kind.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then place a cushion on their legs after the treatment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the fracture is severe, you should use a cushion to hold their hands.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	E se las mas en la tieu, e es que la persona so ha de fazer un fust per les quals ha de fer una mala cosa.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, use the cushion on which they are resting.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And apply two cushions, one on each side, to prevent the patient from being too cold or hot.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under them, as well as another cushion on their legs; otherwise, they will be cold.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And doctors most often treat that which is caused by cold humors.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the patient's body should be examined for an abscess or swelling or other similar causes.
Capitol .xvii.	Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, to prevent them from moving.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And for a fracture in the legs, place a cushion under them.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	When there is pain in the whole body; it is called gout.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then you have opened the foot for those who are suffering from the pain of gout.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the patient's feet to protect them from harm.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a cushion to the foot and place it on their legs.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And if there are other causes for the pain in the foot, you should know that those are the legs, and another place where the humor has been found.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if the pain lasts three or four days, then you will know that it is gout.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	"And when there are other ailments, one must use other methods to treat them."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And if the pain is in the joints, apply that treatment to them.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	This is a very literal translation of the phrase "the first three fingers" from line 2 of your example.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And in other fractures of the body, you should always apply cushions to soothe the pain and prevent further injury from happening.
Capitol .xviii.	This refers to the previous sentence's meaning being related to medicine.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	And if it is necessary to reduce pain in the bones, and for men, the pain in the legs and feet (and other areas) is treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is treated by applying cautery to her feet.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And thus the midwife will place the woman's belly on a cushion, so that the woman does not feel pain, and the legs are supported.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply a poultice to their legs, and another to their back.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so for seven days or thereabouts.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you're treating them, use a canaveral (canne de sucre) to draw out the pain; otherwise, leave the bladder alone.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When the body is treated with a cushion and left to heal for several days, it will be clear whether it's truly healed or not.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if the bone of a man or woman is broken, then you apply a hot compress to their legs and arms.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And es que for this book is already opened to the section on the right way to treat these fractures, so you may know how to treat them.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And thus, for three days or so, the patient's legs are kept open so that the pain may be relieved, and you must apply a cushion to their wound, covered with cloth, to prevent the intestine from being affected.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.  is translated as **Chapter 19.**
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then return the hand to its place.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	"And so if it's necessary to perform surgery on someone with a fracture, they are treated with care."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then you should apply cautery to the patient's legs and treat them for the plague.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if there are injuries to the legs or feet, it is customary to treat them with cautery.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When your patient has a painful inflammation in their legs, they should be treated by a doctor.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	When the bone is affected by such pain, you must apply a cautery to reduce the swelling.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays tu placed your foot on the cushion, and you are already prepared to use the cautery.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if you want to know, the surgeon says that it is customary to have a cushion between the legs and the other on the foot.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply a cushion to the affected area if your patient has an acute gout attack; apply a hot compress to their legs or elsewhere as needed.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then you have already placed a cushion under their legs, and now they are ready to be treated for the pain in their intestines.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if pain is inflicted upon the body (especially the legs) by an evil humor, it is called gout in Greek.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the pain persists, place a cushion on the affected area.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then you apply the other cushion to the patient's groin.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then cover the area with your hand to prevent the bone from becoming infected.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Then, if you cannot reduce the bone in its entirety, it should be done as much as possible.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then place a cushion on their legs and another under their feet.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the bone is returned to its proper place.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And now if you have another case of the burning pain of the summer flux.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then leave the cushion there to allow the intestine to return to its proper place.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then if you are careful, it will heal the wound on the leg, or cause death to the plague.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	When there is a slight injury to the leg, it is necessary to treat it gently.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then, if there is great pain or fear that the patient may suffer from a bad case of swelling, apply a cushion to their joint.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When there's a swelling in the feet, apply hot cloths to your patient's legs, and place a cushion on their legs, then cauterize them with heat.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Therefore, apply a poultice to the patient's legs in the morning and evening, and let the patient rest after using the cautery, and apply a cushion to their legs, so that they can be treated with it.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If there are other days when pain persists in their body, then they should use medicine to treat it.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And for those pains that are not caused by the intestines, but rather by other means, apply a poultice.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When you apply heat to the affected area, the other two servants, one for the intestine and another for the bowels, are already mentioned as if it were a specific type of corruptio.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And when the bone in the joint breaks, apply a cushion to that area, for the pain will be relieved by it.
Capitol .xx.	It is customary for physicians to treat the condition known as gout in this manner.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment of inflammation in case of injury to their legs.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This is how you would say if your metate are given to the patient's legs, it will be applied on the foot by the physician; if a bandage is needed for a wound or injury, you must apply it loosely so as not to constrict the limb.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And if the patient has recent or old gout, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	E extremitatz, e la forma del pergamino or another on their limbs, will be difficult for any other reason than to cause pain.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays ja es the name for a person who has been cured of a disease by having their bowels or hernia treated properly, but the word itself means to be healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	And if the patient's natural position is restored, the pain will subside.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	And it is healed or the bone which is affected by the humors is treated, the body's natural healing process can be supported in various ways.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	A cushion placed on the legs of the patient to keep them warm and prevent gout from spreading.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that they may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand on the foot, for the patient needs must be treated with care.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And if you wish to heal broken bones, prevent them from being twisted.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the patient's intestine is affected by inflammation, you will need to cauterize it.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a common medical practice for treating diseases.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And when the patient has pain in the joints, which is recent, they are covered by an ointment made with herbs.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary for the patient to have some kind of treatment with hot compresses to be applied to their legs and feet, it is called gout.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's limbs, they should be carefully examined by a doctor.
Capitol .xxiii.	The patient's condition when they have points on the surface of their legs.
De sermo en dislocacio.	It's likely a medieval Latin term for "of speech or dislocation" in a medical context.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is when one of the joints loses its normal range of motion.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when the body is affected by illness, apply a hot poultice to the area.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, the leg must be kept straight and covered by the other one in the case of gout, so that the foot does not get worse, as to the use of the term "gout" itself, it's a bit misleading.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When this happens, apply hot water to the area and let it rest there for the duration of the operation.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with a knowledge of their proper place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And if there's an injury to the legs or body, you must apply your hand to the injured part.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And there are twenty-four chapters.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatises on dislocations are often used for the treatment of dislocations.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	E autre ways, the foot can be affected by a dislocacion, which affects the entire joint and causes the mouth to be opened up, and the other the paraula that comes out with the pain in the foot.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the pain is less severe, it is because of other causes.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete, you must be careful to treat it properly.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then apply the cushion to the affected area and gently press on the patient's chest.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When the patient has difficulty urinating, you should use a cushion and oil to ease their urination.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Therefore, when you apply this treatment, it is important to place the patient's hands on their legs so that they do not experience pain during the process.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if you put your hand on the patient's legs, it is best to do it gently so that the person doesn't feel pain.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And you should administer to them a cushion under their foot and apply it to their legs, so they don't need to be opened up again.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	Then you will know that the reduction of the intestine in the case of a boil is difficult.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you have to make incisions in the legs, you must be careful.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And now you must apply your knowledge to address the dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is what we will refer to as gout.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The tools are used for burning or cutting away cold humors from the body.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And if the patient's condition worsens, they are to be called the other healer.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And to this point the patient’s place should be protected by using a cushion or support under their legs.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply the poultice to the affected area, and give them the powder and soothe it.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the patient's limbs be returned to their proper place; the body being kept warm.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a need to cauterize the legs, you should place the cushion on the wound so that the patient does not move them, causing more pain.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And so if there is an issue with the patient's legs, then they should be treated with cushions.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduzeys le dolor a the area of the body where pain occurs.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that muscle is only displaced when it is displaced in one of three ways: when you have a cushion on their foot, a cushion on the legs, or the pain is caused by a cold humors.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if it is caused by the second cushion placed on their legs.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And so you are to burn the skin on the patient's leg (or legs) lightly with the lightest cautery, so that the intestine or hernia doesn't return.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When pain is felt in the feet, it is customary to use a cautery.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, if it's necessary to treat a patient for a condition that causes pain in the feet, and another for the other conditions, apply heat to the affected area.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And so the patient suffers from pain when they have a touch of gout, you will know the difference between a muscle affected by gout and another affected by gout (in other parts of the body) because it is clear that the part of the body affected by gout is not in dolor.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply a bandage to the area to prevent infection.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation a gentle reduction is made when the gout is in a fresh stage when the patient is young.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister applies a hot iron to the affected area.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps if the ailment has not subsided, it may be called a dislocation because of this.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then a cushion is placed under their armpit to prevent the gout from spreading through the body.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place a cushion under their arms and legs to prevent the pain from spreading, as well as apply the other cushions.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if the body has been treated for a period of time, you must consider the patient's condition carefully and apply your cushion to the affected area.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And thus it shall be placed on the other side according to the length of the leg, or as I have said, where the pain is felt in the legs.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if the patient has a cushion in their hands, do not reduce it, but apply a different treatment.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	If there is pain in the legs that causes swelling in the joints, apply a cushion to those joints.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Aprop placed his hand on the affected area and held it steady.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound, you can use a tool for that purpose.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the bandage is placed on the wound, the patient's condition must be carefully monitored for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if the body is affected by pain in the intestines, treat it gently so as not to worsen their condition.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then place your hand on their leg to prevent the movement from being too sudden or jarring.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If a limb is cold and painful, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And you have already opened the space between the legs, but if you have to make more than one incision on the patient's body, then do so with a cautery device.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	By applying pressure to the affected area in the legs, you can relieve pain in the feet.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the other remedy is needed, administer it by applying a tight bandage to that area, which will help them heal.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if your body suffers from coldness, apply warmth to restore balance and comfort.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for their ailment.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	This is a treatment for gout.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	The meaning is something along the lines of:
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then you should put them in a place where they will not be disturbed by the heat of the fire, and use your hand to keep the heat from reaching the intestine, which are already suffering from the pain of the other injuries.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	"And if it is necessary to reduce the swelling of the hand, and they are to be treated by the physician."
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the pain is felt in the legs, it should be treated accordingly.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if their hands do not move, they can be forced to hold on their legs.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And if there are two doctors, let them place their hands on the patient's feet, and place a cushion under them, and another on their chest.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if the arm needs to be cauterized, place a hot cloth on the area.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor applies cautery to the joints of the patient, it is applied to the affected areas so that the pain may be alleviated.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then treat the wound with albumen and apply a bandage for a few days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then apply a cushion to their chest; they are already experiencing the effects of gout in the body.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if you see that the joint pain is in the leg, then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you want to soften the pain, then apply a cushion on the legs.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And another, which the patient's body will be placed on a cushion.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then return the intestines to their place in the body, and treat them with a cushion, so that they do not become inflamed.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish to treat that ailment, use a cushion on the legs.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. is a Latin phrase indicating chapter 28.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treating the injury to the arm, and then the patient's hand on the cushion.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the foot is dislocated or injured in some way, the process for treating the dislocation or injury is straightforward.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if you are treating a patient for a herniated bowel, then place a cushion on their legs.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	The doctor should place their hand on the patient's hand to better diagnose the cause of the ailment.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so, if it returns soon to its natural state.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The intestines are affected by the heat of the fire, which may be painful.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And so the pain will be gone and the patient's intestines will no longer be inflamed.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to it, so that the pain is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	In the Capitol, they say it is customary for a physician to use a cauterizing tool for medical treatments, such as bloodletting.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And for the treatment of that which they call dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Then burn the areas between the legs and arms.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when the pain is caused by some hot-bloodedness, then treat the wound in the following manner.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then place your hand on their finger, where the pain is located.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then apply a bandage to their legs to prevent further swelling.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the weather is warm, they said the patient has two servants, one for their legs and another for their feet.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When joint pain appears in the body, doctors might call it a problem in the legs.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, other symptoms may appear when the body's humors are out of balance.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Another cushion on the back of his neck, the treatment for the dislocation of the vertebrae.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then apply heat to the back of the thigh or chest, as needed, to help the patient recover if there's no cure for your ailment.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And on the patient's legs, two cushions should be used for their thighs and one cushion should be placed under each leg, etc.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	So may it be considered that gout affects all parts of the body, and it's important to note that the disease can also manifest in other areas.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in the future, the mays will be called by a name that reflects its true nature.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And if the illness affects both feet, then it's called gout in both.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And then you are to cauterize the affected area.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And then, doctor, ensure the patient's bowels are treated, but be careful they don't get burned.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And a cushion should be placed on the patient's legs.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And the doctor will use a cushion to place on the leg of the patient that needs it, and they are to press the fust against the other leg, and the other leg should be kept covered with the cushion.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	Then if the pain is in the legs, doctors are likely to use other methods instead of cauterization.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	A doctor helps by applying a cushion to the patient's body, where the pain in the legs will be placed.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	And if the body does not have this condition, it may be treated by applying a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the patient's foot needs to be treated, apply the cautery there.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	Then apply the cautery to the head or any other part of the body where necessary, if needed, two fingers' width should be left below the knee when applying a cauterization.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	This translation is based on the provided source sentences:
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	A cushion was placed for the patient's pain, on his legs,
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's leg, for he will need them after the operation.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	E aprop deves apply heat to the affected area, as needed.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how the patient's humors are turned back in, so that they can be kept from coming out.
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's affected area, which will stop the flow of humors.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to cauterize the patient's limbs, which are already affected by another disease.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If you've got to keep the patient's health in mind, then administer medicine for long periods.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When you cauterize your feet to relieve them from pain, it is known as a cure in modern medicine.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the treatment of gout in the joints.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Treat a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	La poiesis a la cual you are trying to translate is likely a description of a medical practice from the Middle Ages, but I can't be certain without further context.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	This text describes the four ways a patient can experience pain in their feet due to a condition similar to gout.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	The gout is treated by applying heat to the joints, but only after they have been cleansed.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And if you are making a cautery on the limbs, then place a bandage on their legs after removing them from the fire.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if he has pain in the foot, it's due to humor imbalance, then apply this treatment to him:  "The patient shall be treated with a remedy for that type of humor."
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When there is pain in the joints, and especially in the foot, then the patient may have a dislocated joint.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the dislocation in the thigh, you would use a pointed tool on the leg where the patient has the dislocation, which is shorter than the other, and hold their hands.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May's reduction: when you are considering the treatment of a condition, you should not assume that it is gout.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area, after first cleaning the area between the bones.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	Place a cushion under them when they are at rest on the bed.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And he must have his hands elevated on each side by cushions.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four humors.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns, it's necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, elsewhere in the body.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	The patient may be referring to a cushion for their leg pain, which suggests they are experiencing pain in the thigh, and perhaps also hinting at a potential case of gout.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another person must hold the patient's arms while they are being treated.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is cured by a light cauterization.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout affects the foot, it is customary to cauterize it.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be so that the intestine or cushion is extended two more times than usual.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	Then place your hand on their head, and the other on their feet, and keep the patient's intestine from being harmed.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so the wise man instructs the young apprentice to apply cautery to his foot, as he commanded him to do to the other.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And if you have to burn the patient's intestines, then apply a second cautery.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then let the patient's body be extended, the two legs apart, and let them be kept from further pain by tying them to the parts of the body that are close together.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	It is customary to apply heat to the affected area after the doctors used their tools on the patient's intestines.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if the intestines are swollen and painful, apply cauterization to that area; otherwise, cover them well with a cloth.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When you have pain in your legs that is called gout.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the legs, use another to be used on the body, and leave a cushion under their hand, and another on their legs, using the other to apply pressure to the area where the dislocation occurred.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E auris es per la coys
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And if he has pain in his leg, it is customary to use a cushion on the table.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And if it is customary to cauterize the body — for a member to be affected by gout and you are the one who should know which part of the body to cauterize based on your understanding of how to treat it.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And compare the leg to the other leg.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When there is no longer a need for cautery to be applied to the joints, then remove your hand and let them heal.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	Then apply your knowledge to return the patient's legs.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And so, if necessary, continue to apply it for several days until their pain subsides.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, particularly in the feet.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And the patient shall be treated by setting the bone in place.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The patient has three types of pain: outside the body, inside the body, and in their joints.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The signal for a reduction of the dislocation is a sign that the patient has a strong constitution.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	The patient's hands must be used to help guide the burning away from their body, but they should also hold the other cushions.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if it is necessary to make your hand into a fist, then place it on their chest gently.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if the patient has been treated with a cushion under their legs and arms, then they are to be bandaged for three days or four.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	E no use to its proper place for healing.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If inflammation persists in the legs, use a cautery to treat them.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Another one that is translated as "And then apply your hand to the patient's groin."
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply another cushion to the affected area, and adjust the patient accordingly.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that he has a swollen foot, you should apply poultice to the legs and a cushion to the sole of the foot.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And if there is pain in the legs, apply cold treatment to them.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	This is a tricky one! I'm guessing that you want me to translate this into English.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you need to apply a cautery to the patient's body, place your hand on their right side, so they are not pregnant with the burn.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And if the patient's legs are opened, and you have to apply a hot cautery to them, then apply a cold cautery on the leg in its proper place.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And if a vein needs to be opened, you will do so as we have described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And if you have already applied a cushion to the affected leg, then apply another cushion to the foot which was in pain, and hold it there.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And if it is necessary to return the intestine or the other, it should be done in this way.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu may have a cushion placed on their legs if they are suffering from pain in the feet.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then apply a bandage to protect the area after you have made an incision on their legs or feet, and leas the extended leg be supported by something.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if a doctor has already opened the patient's legs, it is customary to say they have a dislocation in the leg.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then, when the dislocation is corrected, apply a poultice to their legs.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you have pain in your ankles, then you should use a cushion on your legs to avoid strong pains.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then remove it from their legs, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And so that you may know, the intestine or a hernia in the patient’s body will be treated by applying a cushion to their abdomen for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	When pain comes from the feet, it is not customary to call it gout.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if there are boils on the patient's legs it should be treated with a cauterizer where they have appeared.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Another use  the patient's legs, it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment of the patient's fingers.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When that which is dislocated in the joint of the body is in the legs, then use a hot cautery to treat it.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	This phrase means: If your joint pain is severe enough to cause you to limp, then the foot should be treated.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on the patient's leg to guide the intestine back in.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient needs to be treated for three days.
Capitol .xxxv.	This is about chapter 35 in a book.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	This condition is caused by dislocation or injury, and may also be referred to as a plague.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When the cold humors affect the body, they are called gout.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	May the patient be given relief, and may the wise man, who is skilled in healing, be wary and use his medicinals cautiously.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And thus, you've got yourself a good starting point for your treatment plan.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	This text should be translated as: When the body needs to be treated for the plague, another method is to use a cauteri on their legs and apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a bone fracture occurs, you must apply a bandage to the injured area and place the broken piece back in its position.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Then place another cushion on their legs, for I have seen that your practice should be to keep the body's bowels in its proper place.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	When fine-tuned by God's will, the disease of the body needs to be treated carefully.
Amen.	Amen.
